Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Penalty; Repealer; When Effective
[Adopted 2-18-1946 ATM, Art. 40, as Bylaws 7, 8 and 9]
§ 1-1. Penalties. [Amended 2-24-1958 ATM, Art. 20]
Any person who violates any provision of the town bylaws shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $20 for each offense unless otherwise provided in a
particular bylaw.
§ 1-2. Repeal of existing bylaws.
All bylaws heretofore adopted and now existing shall be and hereby are
repealed and annulled upon acceptance by the town of the foregoing
bylaws1 and approval of the same, by the Attorney General of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and their publication, as so approved, in
a newspaper as required by law.
§ 1-3. When effective. [Amended 1-27-1998 STM, Art. 4]
These bylaws shall go into effect immediately following their posting in
accordance with MGL, c. 40, § 32.
1. Editor's Note: "Foregoing bylaws" refers to Bylaws 1 through 8 adopted 2-18-1946, which
are now included as various chapters of Part I of this Code. The Town Meeting voted on
5-19-1998 (Art. 23) to accept and approve the recodification of the bylaws and regulations
as presented in the 1998 Code of the Town of Williamstown.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3

ARTICLE II
Noncriminal Disposition
[Adopted 5-19-1992 ATM, Art. 24]
§ 1-4. Enforcement.
Criminal complaint. Whoever violates any provision of the town's
bylaws2 may be penalized by indictment or on complaint brought in the
District Court. Except as may be otherwise provided by law and as the
District Court may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for each
violation or offense brought in such manner shall be $300.
A.
Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of these bylaws, the violation of
which is subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by a
noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. The
noncriminal method of disposition may also be used for violations
of any rule or regulation of any municipal officer, board or
department which is subject to a specific penalty.
(1)
Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the
intention of this provision that the following bylaws and sections
of bylaws are to be included within the scope of this subsection,
that the specific penalties as listed here shall apply in such cases
and that in addition to police officers, who shall in all cases be
considered enforcing persons for the purpose of this provision,
the municipal personnel listed for each section, if any, shall also
be enforcing persons for such sections; each day on which any
violations exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
BYLAWS
All animal
control bylaws
and regulations
[Added
5-16-2000
ATM, Art. 21]
First offense
Second offense
Third offense
Fourth and subsequent
offenses
Warning
$25
$50
$100
Sign Bylaw
(Chapter 53)
First offense
Second and
subsequent offense
Warning
$20
(2)
B.
2. Editor's Note: The town's bylaws are included in Part I of this Code.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:5
BYLAWS
Zoning Bylaw
(Chapter 70)
First offense
Second offense
Third and subsequent
offense
Warning
$50
$100
Junk Car Bylaw
(Chapter 64,
Article II)
First and subsequent
offenses
$20
Demolition Delay
Bylaw (Chapter
24) [Added
5-17-1994
ATM, Art. 27]
First and subsequent
offenses
$300
Pushing of snow
or ice onto town
right-of-way
(Chapter 60,
Article IV)
[Added
5-17-1994
ATM, Art. 27]
First offense
Second offense
Third and subsequent
offenses
$25
$35
$50
Traffic
regulations
prohibiting
bicycles, roller
blades and
skateboards
from Spring
Street sidewalks
(Chapter 121,
Article III)
[Added
7-25-1995
ATM, Art. 6]
First offense
Second offense
Third and subsequent
offense
Warning
$10
$20
All Board of
Health rules and
regulations (Part
III of Code)
[Added
5-16-1996
ATM, Art. 31]
First offense
Second offense
Third offense
Fourth and subsequent
offenses
Warning
$50
$100
$200
§ 1-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 1-4
1:6
§ 1-5. Enforcing officers. [Added 1-27-1998 STM, Art. 5]
Enforcing officers for noncriminal disposition bylaws shall be as follows:
Bylaw Enforcing Official
Animal Control
(Chapter 10, Article II)
[Amended 5-16-2000
ATM, Art. 21]
Animal Control Officer
Sign Bylaw (Chapter
53)
Sign Inspector
Junk Car Bylaw
(Chapter 64,) Article III
Police Department
Zoning Bylaw (Chapter
70) [Amended
5-9-2015 ATM, Art.
36]
Director of Community Development
Hazardous Materials
Bylaw (Chapter 29)
Board of Health
regulations (Part III of
Code)
Board of Health and/or Agent Board of Health
and/or Agent
Demolition Delay Bylaw
(Chapter 24)
[Amended 5-9-2015
ATM, Art. 36]
Director of Community Development
Traffic regulation on
Spring Street (Chapter
121, Article III)
Police Department
Pushing of snow or ice
on public way (Chapter
60, Article IV)
Police Department
Handicapped Parking
Bylaw (Chapter 28)
[Added 5-20-2014
ATM, Art. 22]
Police Department
BYLAWS
Handicapped
Parking Bylaw
[Added
5-20-2014
ATM, Art. 22]
First and subsequent
offenses
$100
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:7
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Budget — See Ch. 14.
Capital Planning Committee — See Ch. 20.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 43.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 106.
§ 4-1. Calling of Town Meetings; posting copies of warrant.
[Amended 2-6-1990 STM, Art. 1]
All Town Meetings shall be called by the Selectmen in the manner required
by law, and attested copies of the warrant shall be posted in four public
places at least seven days before the Annual Town Meeting and at least 14
days before any Special Town Meeting, in the Town of Williamstown as well
as the United States Post Office3
§ 4-2. Printing and availability of reports.
The Selectmen shall cause their own report to the Town, together with
the reports of the other officers and committees, to be printed and left at
the office of the Town Clerk where they may be obtained by any voter or
taxpayer seven days at least before the Annual Meeting.
§ 4-3. Insertion of articles in warrant. [Amended 5-17-2005 ATM,
Art. 24; 5-16-2006 ATM, Art. 3]
Any article to be inserted in the warrant for the Annual Town Meeting
must be submitted to the Selectmen on or before the 45th day preceding
said meeting, signed by the required number of petitioners who must be
voters of the Town, and all such petitions shall be placed in the warrant as
presented.
§ 4-4. Finance Committee. [Amended 2-27-1961 ATM, Art. 41;
2-24-1964 ATM, Art. 31]
There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of nine legal voters of
the Town who shall be appointed by the Moderator. No member of the
Board of Selectmen nor of the School Committee nor any other elected
or appointed Town officer or Town employee shall, during the term for
which he was elected or appointed, be eligible to serve on the Finance
Committee.
A.
The Moderator of the Town Meeting when this bylaw is adopted, shall,
within 30 days after such bylaw becomes effective, appoint three
B.
3. Editor's Note: Original Section 2, setting the date of the Annual Town Meeting, was
repealed 8-21-1967 ATM, Art. 2.
§ 1-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 4-4
1:8
members of such Committee for terms of one year, three members
for terms of two years and three members for terms of three years.
At each Annual Meeting thereafter the Moderator shall appoint three
members of said Committee for terms of three years. The terms of
office of the members of the Committee shall commence immediately
upon qualification and shall expire at the close of the final adjournment
of the Annual Town Meeting at which their successors are appointed.
The Committee shall annually elect its own Chairman, Clerk and other
necessary officers. The Committee shall adopt whatever rules and
regulations it deems necessary for the orderly discharge of its duties. It
shall cause to be kept a true record of its proceedings.
Any vacancies that occur among the members of the Committee
appointed by the Moderator shall be filled by the Moderator for the
unexpired terms created by such vacancies. If any member is absent
from six consecutive meetings of said Committee, his position shall be
deemed to be vacant and shall be filled as hereinbefore provided unless
such absences are excused by the Chairman of the Committee. The
Chairman shall cause suitable notations to be made in the records of
the Committee of the absences of any member that he excuses.
C.
All articles in any warrant for a Town Meeting calling for the
expenditure of any Town funds, or the incurring of any financial
obligations by the Town, shall be referred by the Selectmen to the
Finance Committee for its consideration. Said Committee shall report
thereon to the Town Meeting, in writing, such recommendations as it
deems best for the interests of the Town and its citizens.
D.
It shall be the duty of the Finance Committee annually to consider
the estimated budget requirements for the ensuing year of the several
boards, officers and committees of the Town, as prepared by the Town
Manager.4 The Committee shall submit a budget at the Annual Town
Meeting with such recommendations and explanations relating to the
proposed appropriations as it may deem expedient, such budget to be
printed and available to the voters seven days at least before the Annual
Meeting.
E.
It shall also be the duty of the Finance Committee to make an annual
report of its doings, and to make such recommendations as its studies
may indicate to be desirable, relative to long-range financial planning
and the conduct of the Town business. The Committee shall work
closely with the Planning Board in trying to achieve a priority for
needed major capital outlay improvements consistent with the present
and estimated future ability of the Town to pay.
F.
In the discharge of its duties, said Committee shall have free access to
all books of record and accounts, bills and vouchers on which money
has been, or may be, paid from the Town treasury. The Town Manager
shall, upon request, furnish said Committee with such facts, figures and
G.
4. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 14, Budget.
§ 4-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:9
§ 4-5. Auditing of accounts.
All accounts of the Town shall be audited annually under the supervision of
the Director of Accounts of the Department of Corporations and Taxation of
the state, in accordance with the provisions of MGL C. 44, § 35.
§ 4-6. Meetings of Selectmen. [Amended 2-24-1958 STM, Art. 23]
The Selectmen shall meet at least twice a month for the transaction of
business, but may hold such other meetings as may be deemed necessary.
The time and place of the regular meeting shall be determined at the first
meeting of the year and publicly announced, but may be changed when
occasion demands and two weeks notice is given of such change.
§ 4-7. Election of board and committee officers.
All boards and committees shall, immediately after the Annual Meeting,
elect a Chairman and Clerk and without delay shall give notice of such
elections in writing to the Town Clerk. They also shall give written notice
to the Selectmen of the member or members authorized to attest the
statements for audit submitted to the Selectmen for approval and payment.
§ 4-8. Town Counsel.
The Board of Selectmen shall annually appoint an attorney at law or a firm
of attorneys at law to act as Town Counsel. Such Town Counsel shall be paid
such charges for services as the Board shall approve.
§ 4-9. Power of Selectmen in litigation.
The Board of Selectmen shall act as Town agent and shall have authority,
upon recommendation and advice of the Town Counsel, except as otherwise
provided by law, to prosecute, defend and compromise all litigation or
claims to which the Town is a party and to employ special counsel to assist
the Town Counsel whenever in the Board's judgment necessity therefor
arises.5
other information that it may desire pertaining to its studies of Town
financial matters.
The selectmen, or the Town Manager, may refer any other matter, not
specifically set out in this section, to the Committee for its study and
recommendation.
H.
The terms of office of all members of any Finance Committee existing
on the date this section is adopted shall terminate on the appointment
by the Moderator of a Finance Committee under the provisions of this
section.
I.
5. Editor's Note: Original Section 11, which immediately followed this section and dealt with
disposal of various types of Town property, was repealed 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 18.
§ 4-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 4-10
1:10
§ 4-10. Manner of taking votes requiring two-thirds majority.
[Added 5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 32]
The Moderator is authorized to take all votes requiring a 2/3 majority in the
same manner in which he conducts the taking of a vote when a majority vote
is required.
§ 4-11. Moderator's term of office. [Added 5-16-2006 ATM, Art. 4]
The Town voted to change the term of the Moderator from one year to three
years effective with the 2007 election.
Chapter 6
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND
§ 6-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Williamstown Affordable Housing Trust shall be to
provide for the creation and preservation of affordable housing in the Town
of Williamstown for the benefit of low- and moderate-income households.
§ 6-2. Composition and tenure of Trustees.
Establishment. There shall be a Board of Trustees consisting of at least
five and no more than seven members who shall be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 28]
A.
Composition. One of the Trustees shall be a member of the Board
of Selectmen, one a member of the Williamstown Affordable Housing
Committee, and three to five residents who would bring to the Trust
relevant experience and expertise, such as in real estate, housing,
banking, fundraising, or the like. Nothing in this subsection shall
prevent the Board of Selectmen from appointing the Town Manager as
an ex-officio additional member, without the power to vote. [Amended
5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 28]
B.
Terms. Trustees shall be appointed, or reappointed, by the Board of
Selectmen, and shall serve for a term of two years, with the exception
that two initial appointments shall be made for one year only so as to
allow staggered terms.
C.
Residency. Only persons who are residents of the Town of Williamstown
shall be eligible to hold the office of Trustee. Any Trustee who ceases
to be a resident of the Town of Williamstown shall cease to be a Trustee
hereunder and shall promptly provide a written notification of the
change in residence to the Board and to the Town Clerk. Vacancies shall
be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
D.
§ 4-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-2
1:11
§ 6-3. Powers of trust.
Continuity and removal. Upon the appointment of any succeeding
Trustee, title to the Trust estate shall thereupon be vested in such
succeeding Trustee jointly with the remaining Trustees, without the
necessity of any conveyance. Trustees serve at the will of the Board of
Selectmen, and any Trustee may be removed by that body for cause or
no cause.
E.
Powers. The powers of the Board, all of which shall be carried on
in furtherance of the purposes set forth in this act, shall include the
following powers, subject to the limitations set forth in § 6-3B:
To solicit and accept grants, gifts, devices, and bequests, or
otherwise acquire real or personal property;
(1)
To invest any of the Trust property in such manner as they may
deem advisable without being limited as to the kind or amount of
any investment;
(2)
To sell and exchange any real personal property or any interest
therein for such consideration and upon such terms and conditions
as they deem advisable;
(3)
To join with others in the acquisition of real property or any interest
therein;
(4)
To borrow money and mortgage or pledge any part of the Trust
estate assets and issue notes or other indebtedness;
(5)
To join with others in borrowings, mortgages and pledges, and
to guarantee and become surety on obligations of others in
transactions in which the Trust has an interest;
(6)
To execute, as lessor or lessee, leases, including for terms expiring
after the possible expiration of the Trust;
(7)
To restore, construct, repair and maintain buildings and to make
other improvements and establish such reserves as they deem
necessary therefor;
(8)
To pay, compromise or adjust all obligations incurred and rights
acquired in the administration of the Trust;
(9)
(10)To obtain advice of counsel and to rely thereon;
To employ such other persons, agents, staff, brokers, managers,
accountants or advisors as they may deem advisable and to pay
reasonable compensation and expenses, apportioning same
between income and principal as the Board deems advisable; and
(11)
To execute, acknowledge, and deliver all such contracts, deeds,
mortgages, leases, discharges, and partial releases of mortgages or
(12)
A.
§ 6-2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 6-3
1:12
§ 6-4. Meetings of Trustees. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 28]
The Trust shall meet at least quarterly at such time and such place as the
Trustees shall determine. Notice of all meetings of the Trust shall be given
in accordance with the provisions of the Open Meeting Law, MGL, c. 39,
§§ 23A, 23B and 23C. A quorum at any meeting shall be a majority of the
voting members.
§ 6-5. Acts of Trustees. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 28]
A majority may exercise any and all of the powers of the Trustees hereunder
and may execute on behalf of the Trustees any and all instruments with
the same effect as though executed by all of the Trustees, subject to the
limitations set forth in § 6-3B(1). No Trustee shall be required to give
bond. No license of court shall be required to confirm the validity of any
transaction entered into by the Trustees with respect to the Trust property.
other instruments as they may deem advisable in the course of the
administration of the Trust.
Limitations. These powers shall be subject to the following limitations:
Any purchase, sale, lease, exchange, transfer or conveyance of any
interest in real property must be approved by at least 4/5 of the
voting members. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 28]
(1)
The Trustees may incur debt, borrow money, grant mortgages and
pledge Trust assets only in an amount not to exceed 80% of the
total value of the Trust's assets.
(2)
Any debt incurred by the Board shall not constitute a pledge of the
full faith and credit of the Town of Williamstown, and all documents
related to any debt shall contain a statement that the holder of any
such debt shall have no recourse against the Town of Williamstown
with an acknowledgement of said statement by the holder.
(3)
B.
Full powers of MGL c. 44, § 55C. The Trustees shall have these and all
powers set forth in MGL c. 44, § 55C, and shall refrain from exercising
any powers in such manner as to violate the provisions of said statute.
C.
Single appropriation. In accordance with MGL c. 44 § 55C(16)(d), all
monies paid to the Trust shall be paid directly into the Trust and need
not be appropriated or accepted and approved into the Trust. General
revenues appropriated into the Trust become Trust property, and to
be expended, these funds need not be further appropriated. All monies
remaining in the Trust at the end of any fiscal year, whether or not
expended by the Trustees within one year of the date that they were
appropriated into the Trust, remain Trust property.
D.
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:13
§ 6-6. Liability.
The Trust is a public employer, and the members of the board are public
employees for purposes of MGL Chapter 268A. The Trust shall be deemed
a municipal agency and the Trustees special municipal employees, for
purposes of Chapter 268A.
§ 6-7. Taxes.
The Trust is exempt from MGL Chapters 59 and 62, and from any other
provisions concerning payment of taxes based upon or measured by
property or income imposed by the commonwealth or any political
subdivision thereof.
§ 6-8. Custodian of funds/audits.
The Town Treasurer shall be the custodian of the funds of the Trust. The
books and records of the Trust shall be audited annually by an independent
auditor in accordance with accepted accounting practices for
municipalities. Upon receipt of a copy by the Board, a copy shall be provided
forthwith to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 6-9. Governmental body.
The Trust is a governmental body for purposes of MGL c. 39, §§ 23A, 23B
and 23C.
§ 6-10. Board of the Town.
The Trust is a board of the Town for purposes of MGL Chapter 30B and
MGL c. 40, § 15A, but agreements and conveyances between the Trust
and agencies, boards, commissions, authorities, departments and public
instrumentalities of the Town shall be exempt from said MGL Chapter 30B.
§ 6-11. Compensation of Trustees.
Trustees shall not receive a salary, stipend, bonus, or other means of
compensation for their service as a Trustee, nor shall they be eligible for
any benefits from the Town of Williamstown. Trustees may be compensated
for reasonable out-of-pocket expenses for travel and other Trust-related
expenses. All such out-of-pocket expenses shall be fully documented with
receipts for expenses prior to payment by the Trust.
§ 6-12. Conflicts of interest.
The Trust shall be considered a public employer, and the Trustees shall be
subject to the conflict of interest provisions of MGL Chapter 268A.
§ 6-6 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 6-13
1:14
§ 6-13. Amendment. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 28]
This Trust may be amended from time to time by approval by at least 4/
5 of the voting members of the Trustees and approval by the Board of
Selectmen; provided, however, that no such amendment shall violate the
purposes of this Trust, nor of MGL, c. 44, § 55C.
§ 6-14. Declaration of Trust.
The Trustees are hereby authorized to execute a Declaration of Trust and
Certificate of Trust for the Williamstown Affordable Housing Trust to be
recorded with the Berkshire North District Registry of Deeds and filed with
the Berkshire North Registry District of the Land Court.
§ 6-15. Duration of Trust.
The Trust shall be of indefinite duration, until terminated by a vote of the
Williamstown Town Meeting. Upon termination of the Trust, subject to the
payment of or making provisions for the payment of all obligations and
liabilities of the Trust and the Trustees, the net assets of the Trust shall
be transferred to the Town and held for affordable housing purposes. In
making any such distribution, the Trustees may, subject to the approval of
the Board of Selectmen, sell all or any portion of the Trust property and
distribute the net proceeds thereof or they may distribute any of the assets
in kind. The powers of the Trustees shall continue until the affairs of the
Trust are concluded.
Chapter 7
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
One-day wine and malt licenses — See Ch. 78,
Art. I.
Sunday sales — See Ch. 78, Art. II.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 148.
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 103.
§ 6-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-15
1:15

ARTICLE I
Open Containers
[Adopted 11-25-1986 STM, Art. 1]
§ 7-1. Open containers prohibited; exception.
No person shall drink or possess in an open or partially consumed container
any alcoholic beverages as defined in MGL C. 138, § 1, while on, in or upon
any public way, or public place to which the public has a right of access,
excluding premises licensed under said Chapter 138, or in, on or upon
private lands without the consent of the owner or person in control thereof.
§ 7-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
less than $20 nor more than $200.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:17
Chapter 8
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 40.
§ 8-1. Title and purpose.
§ 8-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this bylaw, certain words and phrases shall be construed
as set forth in this article, unless it is clear from the context that a different
meaning is intended.
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — The person designated to administer, control,
and review alarm applications, permits, and alarm dispatch requests. The
Chief of Police shall be the alarm administrator unless otherwise
designated.
ALARM BUSINESS — The business, by an individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm
system in an alarm site.
ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST — A notification to the police that an alarm,
either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site.
ALARM SITE — A single premises or location served by an alarm system
or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multitenant
building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site.
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or series of devices, including, but not limited
to, systems interconnected with radio frequency signals, which are
designed to discourage crime, by emitting or transmitting a remote or local
audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition. "Alarm
system" does not include:
A. This bylaw shall be known as the "Alarm System Bylaw."
The purposes of this bylaw are to reduce and eliminate false alarm
dispatch requests, to encourage alarm users and alarm businesses to
maintain the operational reliability of their alarm systems, to establish
a system of regulations and fees with respect to alarm systems and to
provide for penalties for violation of this bylaw.
B.
An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently
located at site; or
A.
§ 7-2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 8-2
1:18
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity
which uses an alarm system at its alarm site.
CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Town or the Chief's authorized
representative.
CONVERSION — The transaction or process by which one alarm business
begins monitoring of an alarm system previously monitored by another
alarm business.
FALSE ALARM DISPATCH — An alarm dispatch request to the police
department, where responding officers find no evidence of a criminal
offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely
investigation of the alarm site. An alarm dispatch request that is cancelled
by the alarm business or the alarm user prior to the dispatch of the
responding officer shall not be considered a false alarm dispatch.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization or other legal entity.
TAKEOVER — The transaction or process by which an alarm user takes
over control of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled by
another alarm user.
VERIFY — An attempt, by the alarm business, or its representative, to
contact the alarm site by telephone or other electronic means, whether
or not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting a police
dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request.
§ 8-3. Permit requirements.
An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that does
not have a sound device which can be heard on the exterior of the alarm
site.
B.
No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system
without a valid permit issued in accordance with this bylaw. A separate
permit is required for each alarm site.
A.
The annual fee for a permit or permit renewal for an alarm site shall
be set by the Town Manager. An alarm user who applies for a new
permit after July 1st will be required to pay a pro-rated quarterly fee.
The annual fee will be refunded if the application is not approved. The
permit shall be valid for a one-year period commencing each July 1. It
is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit a renewal application
prior to the permit expiration date. All fees and any future fee increases
to this bylaw will be set by the Town Manager after consulting with the
Alarm Administrator.
B.
The annual fee for a permit or permit renewal for an alarm business
shall be set by the Town Manager. The annual fee shall not be refunded
or pro rated. The permit shall be valid for a one-year period
commencing each July 1st. It is the responsibility of the alarm business
to submit a renewal application prior to the permit expiration date.
C.
§ 8-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3
1:19
No alarm business will sell, lease, maintain, service, repair, alter,
replace, move, install or monitor an alarm system in an alarm site or
request a response to an alarm site without a valid permit issued in
accordance with this bylaw.
D.
The application form for issuance or renewal of a permit shall be
prescribed by the Alarm Administrator and shall include the following
information:
The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm user who
will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper
maintenance and operation of the alarm system and the payment of
fees assessed under this bylaw.
(1)
Signed certification from the alarm user and the alarm business
stating:
The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm
system, whichever is applicable;
(a)
The name, address, phone number, Massachusetts Alarm
Installation License Number and the Massachusetts
Department of Public Safety registration number of the alarm
business performing the alarm system installation, conversion
or alarm system takeover and responsible for providing repair
service to the alarm system;
(b)
The name, address, and phone number of the alarm business
monitoring the alarm system if different from the installing
alarm business;
(c)
That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm
system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false
alarms, have been provided to the alarm user by the alarm
business; and
(d)
That the alarm business has trained the alarm user in proper
use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid
false alarms.
(e)
That the application shall contain the name, address and
telephone number of at least two other persons who are
authorized to respond to a signal transmitted by the alarm
system within 20 minutes under normal weather conditions
and who are authorized to open the premises on which the
alarm system is installed.
(f)
That such application contains an agreement from the alarm
user in favor of the Town of Williamstown Police Department to
break into and enter the registered premises forcibly without
liability on the Town or its officers with respect to any such
(g)
(2)
E.
§ 8-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 8-3
1:20
§ 8-4. Alarm system operation and maintenance.
forcible breaking and entering, in order to respond to such an
alarm.
Any other information that enhances the efficiency of
administrating this bylaw.
(h)
That all current alarm users and alarm businesses shall submit
applications and fees by July 1st immediately following the
adoption of this bylaw.
(3)
Any false statements of a material matter made by an applicant for
the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause
for refusal to issue a permit.
(4)
An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. If an
alarmed property is sold or transferred to another, the application
process for a new alarm user must be followed. An alarm user
shall inform the Alarm Administrator of any change that alters any
information listed on the permit application within five business
days of such change.
(5)
An application for an alarm permit, submitted with the permit fee,
shall be processed in a timely manner by the Alarm Administrator. The
application shall be denied and the permit fee returned if the applicant
has failed to pay any fine assessed for violating this bylaw, or if the
applicant has had an alarm permit for the alarm site suspended or
revoked and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has
not been corrected, or if the alarm system does not comply with the
standards required by this bylaw, or if the applicant has knowingly
made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of a material fact
in the application for a permit.
F.
An alarm user shall:
Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches;
(1)
Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm site
within 20 minutes under normal weather conditions who can
provide access to the premises on which the private intrusion alarm
device is installed, who can: allow officers access to the property to
investigate, deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system and provide
security for the alarm site;
(2)
Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to
report.
(3)
Not cause any alarm system to be connected directly to the Police
Department by any means including an automatic dialer.
(4)
A.
§ 8-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4
1:21
§ 8-5. Monitoring procedures.
Alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site
will sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being activated.
B.
An alarm user shall maintain a set of written operating instructions for
each alarm system at each alarm site in proximity to the alarm panel.
C.
If the Alarm Administrator has reason to believe that an alarm system
is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper
operation and suppresses false alarms, the Alarm Administrator may
require a conference with the alarm user and the alarm business
responsible for the repair of the alarm system to review the
circumstances of each false alarm. The Alarm Administrator may also
require the alarm user to attend alarm user's training that includes the
importance of false alarm reduction.
D.
The Town of Williamstown will not act as an alarm business or permit
installation of any alarm system monitoring devices within the police
station. By July 1, 2004, all alarm systems except those owned by the
Town of Williamstown or its subdivisions will be removed from the
police station and monitored privately.
A.
An alarm business performing monitoring services shall:
Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by
the Alarm Administrator;
(1)
Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a hold up alarm
activation, before requesting a police response to an alarm signal;
(2)
Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Town in a manner and
form determined by the Alarm Administrator;
(3)
Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to
the Town in a manner and form determined by the Alarm
Administrator;
(4)
Maintain for a period of at least two years following a request for
dispatch to an alarm site, records relating to the dispatch. Records
must include the name, address and phone number of the alarm
user, the alarm system zone(s) or point(s) activated, the time of
request for police dispatch and evidence that an attempt to verify
was made to the alarm site prior to the request for police dispatch,
and provide the Alarm Administrator with copies of such records
upon request.
(5)
B.
The Alarm Administrator shall:
Designate the manner, form and telephone numbers for the
communication of alarm dispatch requests;
(1)
C.
§ 8-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 8-5
1:22
§ 8-6. Fines and penalties for violations.
Develop a procedure to accept verified cancellation of alarm
dispatch requests;
(2)
Promulgate such regulations as may be necessary or required to
implement and enhance the intent of this bylaw.
(3)
An alarm user shall be subject to fines, warnings, suspensions and/or
revocation of permit depending on the number of false alarm dispatches
emitted from an alarm system within a twelve-month period beginning
July 1st each year, based upon the following schedule:
Number
of False
Alarm
Dispatches
Action
Taken Fine
1 Warning None
2 Warning None
3 Suspension$100
4 Warning
of
revocation
$100
5 and
subsequent
Revocation$300
A.
Any person operating an alarm system or any alarm business operating
without a permit issued in accordance with this bylaw shall be subject
to an additional fine of $300 for each violation.
B.
An alarm dispatch request caused by actual criminal offense, or with
evidence of a criminal attempt, or resulting solely from power outages
or extreme weather conditions shall not be counted as a false alarm
dispatch.
C.
The Alarm Administrator may reinstate a suspended permit upon
receipt of acceptable evidence that the cause has been addressed and
appropriate corrective action has been taken.
D.
A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new
permit if the person:
(1) Submits an updated application and pays the permit fee;
(2) Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding alarm fees and fines;
Submits a certification from an alarm business stating that the
alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the
alarm business.
(3)
E.
§ 8-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-6
1:23
§ 8-7. Revocation, suspension or loss of alarm permit.
§ 8-8. Appeals.
The Alarm Administrator may require an alarm system be equipped
with a battery backup or other device so as to prevent the signaling of
a private intrusion alarm in the event of an AC power failure.
F.
Intentional causing of a false private intrusion alarm shall be
considered a serious issue resulting in a fine of $300.
G.
Any person who has neglected any fee or fine due as the result of this
bylaw may have said fee or fines added to the Town of Williamstown
municipal tax bill for the property where the alarm system involved is
located.
H.
An alarm user can appeal a false alarm determination to the Town
Manager within 10 days of the actual event.
I.
In addition to suspension or revocation pursuant to § 8-6, the Alarm
Administrator may suspend or revoke an alarm permit if it is
determined that:
There is a false statement of a material matter in the application
for a permit;
(1)
The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a fine
previously assessed.
(2)
A.
A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the
period in which his alarm permit is suspended or revoked.
B.
Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in progress,
the Chief of Police or officer-in-charge of the shift may refuse police
response to an alarm dispatch request at an alarm site for which the
alarm permit has been revoked.
C.
If an alarm permit is reinstated pursuant to § 8-6E, the Alarm
Administrator may revoke the alarm permit if it is determined that the
alarm is installed improperly.
D.
If the Alarm Administrator denies the issuance or renewal of a permit,
or suspends, or revokes a permit, he or she shall send written notice of
such action and a statement of the right to an appeal to the alarm user
and the alarm business. The alarm user may appeal the decision of the
Alarm Administrator to the Town Manager by filing a written request
for a review setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 10 days after
receipt of the notice from the Alarm Administrator. An alarm business
may submit the request for review on behalf of an alarm user. Filing a
request for an appeal shall stay the action by the Alarm Administrator
suspending or revoking a permit until the Town Manager has completed
his review. If a request for an appeal is not made within the ten-day
A.
§ 8-6 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 8-8
1:24
§ 8-9. Enforcement.
§ 8-10. No assumption of liability or responsibility for alarm
systems.
§ 8-11. General provisions.
Chapter 10
period, the action of the Alarm Administrator shall be final. The decision
of the Town Manager on appeals shall be final.
The Town Manager shall conduct an appeal and consider the evidence
by any interested person(s). The Town Manager will render a written
decision within 30 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed.
The Town Manager may affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the
Alarm Administrator. The decision of the Town Manager shall be final.
B.
The Treasurer-Tax Collector, upon authorization by the Town Manager,
shall institute civil proceedings to enforce the collection provisions of
this bylaw.
A.
Any police officer of the Town may utilize the noncriminal disposition
procedure set forth in the Code of the Town of Williamstown6 or may
file an application for a criminal complaint with the Trial Court of the
Commonwealth, District Court, Northern Berkshire Division, to enforce
the provisions of this bylaw.
B.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the Town, its
departments, officers, agents and employees, shall be under no
obligation whatsoever concerning the adequacy, operation, or
maintenance of any alarm system or alarm system monitoring facilities
of private contractors or within the police station.
A.
Except as otherwise required by law, the information furnished and
secured pursuant to this bylaw shall be confidential in character, shall
not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents
thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the
administration of this bylaw.
A.
Municipal departments of the Town of Williamstown are exempt from
fees required by this bylaw.
B.
The provisions of this bylaw are separable, and if any article, section or
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this bylaw is for any reason
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this bylaw.
C.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, Noncriminal Disposition.
§ 8-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-11
1:25
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs in cemeteries — See Ch. 86. Leashing of and disturbing animals in
parks — See Ch. 103.
§ 8-11 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 8-11
1:26
ARTICLE I
Poultry
[Adopted 2-28-1949 ATM, Art. 34]
§ 10-1. Confinement required.
All poultry kept within the limits of the Fire District of the Town of
Williamstown must be confined within an adequate enclosure.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1
1:27

ARTICLE II
Animal Control
[Adopted 5-9-2000 ATM, Art. 207]
§ 10-2. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, unless the context otherwise indicates:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any officer appointed by the Town
Manager to enforce the laws relating to animals.
ANIMALS — All animals of any species, both male and female, including but
not limited to dogs and cats.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — A kennel maintained as a business for or to
include the boarding of dogs.
LICENSE PERIOD — The time between April 1 and March 31, both dates
inclusive.
LIVESTOCK OR FOWL — Animals or fowl kept or propagated by the owner,
kept in proper houses or suitably enclosed yards. Such phrase shall not
include dogs, cats or other pets.
MULTIPLE PET LICENSE — Several dogs over the age of six months of age
in a single private residence.
OWNER OR KEEPER — Any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation owning, keeping, or who has in his possession, for 11
consecutive days in any calendar year, a dog or any other animal, licensed
or unlicensed; and cannot show to the satisfaction of the Animal Control
Officer that such animal was sold, had died, or given away or otherwise
disposed of. Further, if the owner or keeper of a dog or other animal be
a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be held liable for any
violation of this bylaw.
RUN-AT-LARGE — Free of restraint or voice control and permitted to
wander on private or public ways at will without permission of property
owner.
VOICE CONTROL — Full response to command by voice and within 15 feet
of owner or person in charge while dog is free of restraint, and to the
satisfaction of the Animal Control Officer if dog is under question.
§ 10-3. License requirements; fees; exceptions.
Any owner or keeper of a dog six months of age or older in the Town of
Williamstown shall cause that dog to be licensed as required by MGL c.
140, §§ 137 and 139, commencing on April 1 of each year.
A.
B. Any owner or keeper of several dogs may acquire a multiple pet license.
7. Editor's Note: This bylaw repealed former Art. II, Dogs at Large, adopted 9-25-1972 STM,
Art. 6.
§ 10-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:29
§ 10-4. Dogs required to be leashed.
§ 10-5. Muzzling dogs.
Commercial kennels must be fully licensed pursuant to the provisions
of MGL c. 140, § 137A, and subject to the Town of Williamstown Zoning
Bylaws.
C.
Any owner or keeper who renews their respective dog license(s) after
June 15th will be charged a ten-dollar late fee charge.
D.
Each multiple pet household and commercial kennel shall be available
to inspection, with just cause, by the Animal Control Officer, a Natural
Resources Officer, Fish and Game Warden, Police Officer, Building
Inspector or the Board of Health.
E.
All dogs and cats six months of age or older must be currently
vaccinated against rabies as per MGL c. 140, § 145B.
F.
The annual fee for every animal license, multiple pet license and
commercial kennel license shall be established by the Board of
Selectmen. No fee shall be charged for a license for a dog specifically
trained as a service dog provided owner provides certificate that such
dog is trained and actually in the service of a disabled person.
G.
The registering, numbering, describing and licensing of animals shall
be performed in the office of the Town Clerk on a form prescribed and
supplied by the town and shall be subject to the condition expressed
herein that the dog so licensed shall be controlled and restrained from
killing, chasing or harassing livestock or fowls.
H.
I. No license shall be refunded, in whole or in part, for any reason.
The owner or keeper of a licensed animal shall cause it to wear around
its neck or body a collar or harness to which shall be securely attached
a tag issued by the Town Clerk at the time of licensing.
J.
Dog owners, keepers and persons otherwise in charge are required to
restrain their dogs physically by leash or by voice control when they are
not on the owner's property.
A.
This section shall not apply to property owned and/or controlled by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts where a separate set of rules and
regulations apply.
B.
Any owner, keeper or person in charge of a dog may be ordered to
muzzle said dog by a duly appointed Animal Control Officer and, in his/
her absence, by a police officer for either of the following reasons:
(1) For having bitten, injured or physically molested any person; or
(2) For having physically injured any domestic animal.
A.
§ 10-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 10-5
1:30
§ 10-6. Removal of animal litter.
§ 10-7. Impounding, release and disposition of dogs.
This order shall remain in effect until removed by the officer after
having been satisfied that the dog is unlikely to repeat its offense.
Such decision by the officer to remove the said order shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
B.
It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a
dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by such person's dog on any
sidewalk, street or any other area to which the public has access.
A.
It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a
dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by such person's dog or
any other animal on private property abutting a public way while such
person's dogs or animal is under restraint, control or command.
B.
The provisions of this bylaw shall not apply to a guide animal, hearing
animal or service animal while actually engaged in the performance of
its trained duties with a disabled person.
C.
Animal Control Officers or, in their absence, police officers may cause a
dog to be impounded for any of the following causes:
(1) If found without a license when a license is required;
(2) If found unrestrained as set forth in § 10-4 of this chapter;
For violation of a muzzling order as provided for in § 10-5 of this
article or as provided under MGL c. 140, § 167, as amended;
(3)
(4) For having bitten, injured or physically molested any person;
(5) For having physically injured any domestic animal;
To restore peace when the owner or keeper of a dog is otherwise
unavailable, unwilling, or physically unable to restrain his/her dog
from causing a nuisance by continuous barking or howling; or
(6)
(7) To ensure the safety and well-being of the particular dog.
A.
No later than two days after the impounding of any dog, the owner
or keeper shall be notified, or if the owner or keeper of the dog is
unknown, or, after reasonable efforts, is not contacted, written notice
shall then be posted for 10 consecutive days in the location for posting
notices in the Town Hall and on the town's web page, which notice shall
describe the dog and the place and time of taking. Dogs impounded and
unclaimed by the owner or keeper after such ten day period shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 140, § 151A.
Prior to the end of said ten=day period, the owner or keeper may obtain
the release of any dog impounded hereunder as follows:
B.
§ 10-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-7
1:31
§ 10-8. Persons convicted of cruelty to animals.
§ 10-9. Enforcement; violations.
§ 10-10. Liability of owner.
In the case of a violation of § 10-7A(1) of this bylaw, upon obtaining
a license as required by law and after paying all pound fees, fines,
and notifications costs, if any; or
(1)
A person who owns or keeps a dog, and who has received such
notice that the dog has been impounded and is eligible for
immediate release, and does not within 10 days claim said dog at
the pound, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50 to cover
the board and disposal of such dog. The owner or keeper shall be
described as a person who has in his possession, for 11 consecutive
days in any calendar year, a dog licensed or unlicensed, and cannot
show to the satisfaction of the animal control officer that such dog
was sold, had died, was given away or otherwise disposed of.
(2)
All dog owners shall be liable for a ten-dollar per day pound fee for
any dog brought to the pound by the Animal Control Officer.
(3)
The owner or keeper of any dog who intentionally allows said dog to
cause a nuisance by barking or howling in excess of 15 minutes shall be
penalized by in accord with § 10-9 of this bylaw.
C.
Any person or persons found guilty of a violation of any provisions
of Sections 77, SOA 94 or 95 of MGL c. 272 will forfeit the right to
own or keep any animal within the Town of Williamstown and must
immediately, upon conviction, surrender all animals in his/her
possession to the Animal Control Officer.
A.
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be penalized by
noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40D, § 21D.
A.
The Board of Selectmen or their agents may, after written notice to the
owner or keeper, enter upon the premises of the owner or keeper of any
dog known to them to have killed livestock or fowls, and then and there
kill such dog, unless such owner or keeper whose premises are thus
entered for the said purposes shall give a bond in the sum of $200, with
sufficient sureties approved by the Board of Selectmen, conditioned
that the dog is continually restrained. If the owner or keeper of the
dog declares his intention to give such a bond, said Selectmen or their
agents shall allow the owner or keeper seven days, exclusive of Sundays
and holidays, in which to procure and prepare the same and to present
it to them.
A.
For the law of the commonwealth as to dogs generally, see MGL, c.
140, §§ 136A to 174A. As to cruelty to animals, see MGL, c. 272, § 77
et seq. As to licensing of stables, see MGL, c. 111, § 155 to 158. As
B.
§ 10-7 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 10-10
1:32
to disposition of old and infirm animals, see MGL, 133. As to keeping
certain animals in tenement houses, etc., see MGL, c. 144, § 73.
§ 10-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-10
1:33
Chapter 12
MOBILE HOME RENT CONTROL
§ 12-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context in
which they are used clearly requires a different meaning.
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit built on a chassis and containing
complete electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities, and designed to be
installed on a temporary or permanent foundation for permanent living
quarters.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A park licensed by the Board of Health pursuant
to MGL c.40, § 32B.
RENT CONTROL AND BOARD — The Mobile Home Park Rent Control
Board as established herein.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Rules and regulations as promulgated by
the Board.
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 12-2. Establishment; terms; membership.
There is hereby established a "Mobile Home Park Rent Control Board"
consisting of five members representing public interest none of whom are to
be a mobile home park tenant or mobile home park land owner, appointed
by the Board of Selectmen. The members of the first instance shall be
appointed for terms of one, two, three, four, and five years. Upon expiration
of a term of office, the subsequent term shall be for a period of five years.
§ 12-3. Duties and powers.
§ 12-4. Standards for adjusting rents.
The Board shall regulate rents, set minimum standards for use or
occupancy of mobile home park accommodations and evictions of
tenants therefrom; and may require information of said owners relating
to their parks under penalties of perjury.
A.
The Board may make rules and regulations, sue and be sued, compel
attendance of persons and the production of papers and information,
and issue appropriate order which shall be binding on both the owner
and tenant of such mobile home park accommodations.
B.
The Board may take individual or general adjustments, either upward
or downward, as may be necessary to assure that rents for mobile home
park accommodations are established on levels which yield to owners a
fair net operating income for such units.
A.
§ 10-10 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 12-4
1:34
§ 12-5. Evictions.
The Board may regulate evictions of tenants at mobile home parks and may
issue orders, which shall be a defense to an action of summary process for
possession.
§ 12-6. Review.
§ 12-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter or any order of the Board shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000 for any one offense.
Chapter 14
BUDGET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consideration of budget by Finance
Committee — See Ch. 4.
Capital improvement budget — See Ch. 20.
Fair net operating income shall be that income which will yield a return,
after all reasonable operating expenses, on the fair market value of
the property, equal to the debt service rate generally available from
institutional first mortgage lenders or such other rates of return as
the Board, on the basis of evidence presented before it, deems more
appropriate to the circumstances of the case.
B.
Fair market value shall be assessed valuation of the property or such
other valuation as the Board, on the basis of evidence presented before
it, deems more appropriate to the circumstances of the case.
C.
No proposed rent increase shall be effective without the prior approval
of the Board.
D.
The Board may establish further standards and rules consistent with
the foregoing.
E.
The Board and its actions shall be the subject to the provisions of MGL
C.30A (Administrative Procedures Act) as if the Board were an agency
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
A.
The District Court of Berkshire County, Northern Division, shall have
original jurisdiction, concurrently with the Superior Court, of all
petitions for review brought pursuant to MGL C.30A, § 14.
B.
The Superior Court and the District Court of Berkshire County,
Northern Division, shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of this article, and any bylaw adopted thereunder, and may
restrain violations thereof. [Amended 5-18-2004 ATM, Art. 26]
C.
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7
1:35
§ 14-1. Submission of annual budget.
On or before the 15th day of February in each year, the Town Manager shall
prepare and submit to the Finance Committee a budget for the ensuing
fiscal year and all supplementary information in such form and detail as the
Finance Committee may deem necessary or the town may require by bylaw.
Chapter 17
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision rules and regulations — See Ch.
170.
§ 17-1. Uniform numbering system.
A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings, as
shown on maps prepared by Gordon E. Ainsworth & Associates, Inc. on
file in the Assessor's Office, Municipal Building, One North Street,
Williamstown, Massachusetts, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein
by reference and made a part of this chapter
§ 17-2. Assignment of numbers.
All properties or parcels of land within the corporate limits of
Williamstown shall hereafter be identified by reference to the uniform
numbering system adopted herein, and such conversion to the
numbering system must be completed within 30 days from the effective
date of this chapter.
A.
B. A separate number shall be assigned for each 10 feet of frontage.
Each principal building shall bear the number assigned to the frontage
on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building
is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each
separate front entrance of such principal building shall bear a separate
number.
C.
Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or
each front entrance to such building shall be placed immediately above,
on or at the side of the main entrance of each building so that the
number can be seen plainly from the street line. Whenever any building
is situated more than 50 feet from the street line, the number should be
placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building,
or upon a gate post, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place so as to
be clearly discernible from the sidewalk or street line. Such numerals
D.
§ 12-7 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 17-2
1:36
§ 17-3. Responsibilities of Town Assessor.
§ 17-4. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and may be punished by a
fine not exceeding $200. Each separate day such violation is continued shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 20
CAPITAL PLANNING COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Budget — See Ch. 14.
§ 20-1. Composition.
The Finance Committee shall also serve as the Capital Planning Committee
(the "Committee").
§ 20-2. Consideration of anticipated and proposed projects.
shall be not less than three inches in height and made of a durable and
clearly visible material.
The Town Assessor shall be responsible for maintaining the numbering
system. In the performance of this responsibility, he shall be guided by
the provisions of § 17-2 of this chapter.
A.
The Town Assessor shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under
this chapter and shall enforce the provisions of such chapter.
B.
The Town Assessor shall at the request of a property owner assign
numbers for any new buildings constructed in the town.
C.
The capital expenditure budget shall include all proposed
appropriations for which sealed bids or proposals are required under
Massachusetts General Law and for which borrowing is permissible
under MGL c. 44, § 7 or § 8, whether or not such borrowing is
anticipated, except those expenditures whose only Town funding is
from the Massachusetts Community Preservation Act (MGL c. 44B).
A.
On or before the 15th of February in each year, the Town Manager shall
prepare and submit to the Committee a capital expenditure budget for
the ensuing fiscal year, and projections for not less than the following
five fiscal years, and all supplementary information in such form and
detail as the Committee may deem necessary or the Town may require
by bylaw.
B.
§ 17-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2
1:37
§ 20-3. Preparation and submission of annual report.
The Committee shall submit its approved capital expenditure budget to the
Annual Town Meeting for adoption by the Town.
§ 20-4. Use of budgeted funds.
Such capital expenditure budget, after its adoption, shall permit the
expenditure on projects included therein of sums from departmental
budgets for surveys, architectural or engineering advice, options or
appraisals, but no such expenditure shall be incurred on projects which
have not been so approved by the Town through the appropriation of sums
in the current year or in prior years, or for preliminary planning for projects
intended to be undertaken more than five years in the future.
§ 20-5. Publishing of capital expenditure budget.
The Committee's recommended capital expenditure budget shall be
published and made available in a manner consistent with the distribution
of the Finance Committee's report.
Chapter 22
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 4. Budget — See Ch. 14.
§ 22-1. Establishment.
The Committee shall consider the relative need, impact, timing, and
cost of these expenditures and the effect each will have on the financial
position of the Town.
C.
No appropriation shall be voted for a capital expenditure unless the
proposed capital expenditure is considered in the Committee's report,
or the Committee shall first have submitted a report to the Board of
Selectmen explaining the omission.
D.
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee,
consisting of eight voting members pursuant to the provisions of MGL,
c. 44B, § 5. The composition of the Committee, the appointing authority
and the term of office for the Committee members shall be as follows:
[Amended 5-19-2009 ATM, Art. 25]
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the
Commission;
(1)
A.
§ 20-2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 22-1
1:38
§ 22-2. Duties.
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by the
Commission;
(2)
(3) One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board;
One member of the Parks Commissioners as designated by the
Commissioners;
(4)
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by the
Authority;
(5)
One member of the Finance Committee as designated by the
Committee;
(6)
(7) The Town Manager, or the Town Manager's designee; and
(8) One resident of the Town as designated by the Board of Selectmen.
Each member of the Committee shall serve for a term of three years
or until the person no longer serves in the position or on the board or
committee as set forth above, whichever is earlier.
B.
Should any of the officers and commissions, boards, or committees who
have appointing authority under this chapter be no longer in existence
for whatever reason, the Town Manager shall appoint a suitable person
to serve in their place.
C.
Any member of the Committee may be removed for cause by their
respective appointing authority after hearing.
D.
The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs,
possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community
preservation. The Committee shall consult with existing municipal
boards, including the Conservation Commission, the Historical
Commission, the Planning Board, the Department of Public Works,
and the Housing Authority, or persons acting in those capacities or
performing like duties, in conducting such studies. As part of its study,
the Committee shall hold one annual public informational hearing, or
more at its discretion, on the needs, possibilities and resources of the
Town regarding community preservation possibilities and resources,
notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for each of two
weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town.
A.
The Community Preservation Committee shall make recommendations
to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation and preservation of
open space, for the acquisition and preservation of historic resources,
for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational
use, for the creation, preservation and support of community housing
and for rehabilitation or restoration of such open space, historic
resources, land for recreational use and community housing that is
B.
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:39
§ 22-3. Requirement for quorum and cost estimates.
The Community Preservation Committee shall comply with the provisions of
the Open Meeting Law, MGL, c. 39, § 23B. The Committee shall not meet
or conduct business without the presence of a majority of the members
of the Community Preservation Committee. The Community Preservation
Committee shall approve its actions by majority vote. Recommendations to
the Town Meeting shall include the Committee's anticipated costs.
§ 22-4. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the
Town Meeting, consistent with the provisions of MGL, c. 44B.
§ 22-5. Severability.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this chapter be for any reason
declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other section,
paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 22-6. Effective date.
Provided that this chapter is accepted at the 2002 Annual Town Meeting,
this chapter shall take effect upon approval by the Attorney General of the
Commonwealth, and after all requirements of MGL, c. 40, § 32 have been
met. Each appointing authority shall have 30 days after approval by the
Attorney General to make their initial appointments.
acquired or created as provided in this section. With respect to
community housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall
recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or
construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
The Community Preservation Committee may include in its
recommendation to the Town Meeting a recommendation to set aside
for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with
community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then
available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that
specific purpose or to set aside for later spending funds for general
purposes that are consistent with community preservation.
C.
In every fiscal year, the Community Preservation Committee must
recommend either that the legislative body spend, or set aside for later
spending, not less than 10% of the annual revenues in the Community
Preservation Fund for:
(1) Open space (not including land for recreational use);
(2) Historic resources; and
(3) Community housing.
D.
§ 22-2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 22-6
1:40
Chapter 24
DEMOLITION DELAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic and archaeological sites — See Ch.
70, § 70-5.4H.
§ 24-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Article 89 of the
amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution (the Home Rule
Amendment).
§ 24-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of preserving and protecting
significant buildings within Williamstown which reflect distinctive features
of the architectural, historical and cultural heritage of the Town and to
encourage owners of such buildings to seek ways to preserve, rehabilitate
or restore them rather than demolish them. To achieve those purposes, the
Williamstown Historical Commission is empowered to advise the Inspector
of Buildings with respect to the issuance of permits for the demolition
of significant buildings. The issuance of demolition permits for significant
buildings is regulated as provided in this chapter.
§ 24-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
COMMISSION — The Williamstown Historical Commission.
DEMOLITION — The removal of a full street-facing facade or other act of
pulling down, destroying, removing, dismantling or razing a structure, or
commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of
completing the same. "Substantial" herein shall mean either half the volume
of the structure or half its assessed value, as determined by the Building
Commissioner.[Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 37]
HISTORIC RESOURCES LIST — A list of Williamstown buildings which are
on the National Register of Historic Places, or the State Register of Historic
Places, or recorded by the Commission in the Local Inventory of Historic
Resources, or 100 years or older.[Amended 5-15-2001 ATM, Art. 23]
INSPECTOR OF BUILDINGS — The person occupying the office of
Inspector of Buildings or otherwise authorized to issue demolition permits.
PREFERABLY PRESERVED — Any significant building deemed by the
Commission to have an important association with the economic, political
or cultural development of the Town or with important state or national
§ 22-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:41
figures or to be an outstanding or last-remaining example of a recognized
architectural style that contributes substantially to the historic or
architectural character of the neighborhood.[Amended 5-15-2001 ATM,
Art. 23]
SIGNIFICANT BUILDING — All buildings on the Williamstown historic
resources list, to be provided to the Inspector of Buildings by the
Commission.
§ 24-4. Procedure.
Determination by Inspector of Buildings. Upon receipt of a completed
application for a demolition permit, the Inspector of Buildings shall
establish whether the building is a significant building as defined
above. If it is, the demolition permit shall be withheld, and the Inspector
of Buildings shall forward a copy of the application to the Commission
within seven days of filing. The applicant may appeal the Inspector of
Building's decision by filing an appeal with the Zoning Board of Appeals
within 21 days, which Board shall hear such appeal in the same manner
and following the same procedures it follows for zoning applications
appealing the decision of the Inspector of Buildings. The time periods
defined in succeeding sections of this chapter shall, if necessary, begin
to run after the Zoning Board of Appeals has filed its decision with the
Town Clerk.
A.
Public hearing; notice. After receipt of the permit application, the
Commission shall fix a public hearing within 45 days to determine if the
building is preferably preserved. Public notice shall be published in a
local newspaper of the time, place and purpose of the hearing once in
each of two successive weeks, the first publication not less than 14 days
before the day of said hearing. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant,
to owners of all property within 300 feet of the property as they appear
on the most recent tax list and to the Williamstown Planning Board.
B.
Determination.
If after such hearing the Commission determines the demolition
of the significant building will not be detrimental to the historical
or cultural heritage of the Town as described under § 24-3 above,
the Commission shall so notify the Inspector of Buildings within 10
days. Upon receipt of such notification or upon the failure of the
Commission to act on the application within 45 days from the date
it received the application, the Inspector of Buildings may issue the
demolition permit.
(1)
If the Commission determines the demolition of the significant
building has important associations with the economic, political
or cultural development of the Town or with important state or
national figures or is an outstanding or last-remaining example
of a recognized architectural style, and is therefore preferably
preserved, it shall so notify the Inspector of Buildings in writing
(2)
C.
§ 24-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 24-4
1:42
§ 24-5. Enforcement.
that no demolition permit may be issued until expiration of a delay
period to be determined by the Commission. Said delay period
shall not exceed 12 months from the date of the public hearing.
[Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 37]
Alternatively, the owner of a building determined to be significant
may seek a predetermination by the Commission as to whether
the building is preferably preserved by filing an application for a
hearing before the Commission with the Inspector of Buildings.
The Commission shall schedule a public hearing under the notice
provisions of Subsection B above. If, after a public hearing, the
building is determined to be preferably preserved, no demolition
permit shall be issued until expiration of a delay period to be
determined by the Commission. Said delay period shall not exceed
12 months from the date of the public hearing. [Amended
5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 37]
(3)
Any determination made by the Commission shall lapse one year
from the date of the determination.
(4)
Notwithstanding the preceding subsections, the Inspector of
Buildings may issue a demolition permit for a preferably preserved
building at any time after written receipt of notice from the
Commission to the effect that the Commission is satisfied there is
no reasonable likelihood that the owner or some other group is
willing to preserve, rehabilitate or restore such building.
(5)
Emergency measures. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the
Inspector of Buildings from immediately ordering the demolition of
unsafe structures in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 143 of
the Massachusetts General Laws.
D.
The Commission and Inspector of Buildings are each authorized to
institute any and all proceedings in law and equity as they deem
necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with requirements of
this chapter, or to prevent violation thereof.
A.
Violations shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300. Each day
of violation following written notice of such violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
B.
Upon determination by the Commission that the building is preferably
preserved, the owner shall be responsible for properly securing the
building, if vacant, to the satisfaction of the Inspector of Buildings.
Should the owner fail to secure the building, the loss of such building
through fire or other cause shall be considered voluntary demolition for
the purposes of this chapter.
C.
§ 24-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-6
1:43
§ 24-6. Severability.
If any section of this chapter be for any reason declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph or part shall
continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 26
STRETCH ENERGY CODE
§ 26-1. Adoption.
The Town of Williamstown has adopted the provisions of 780 CMR 120.AA
(i.e., Appendix 120.AA of the State Building Code or the "Stretch Energy
Code"), as may be amended from time to time, in place of the provisions set
forth under 780 CMR 13.00, 34.00, 61.00 and 93.00.
§ 26-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code shall be to provide the Town with
a more energy-efficient alternative to the base energy code otherwise set
forth under the State Building Code.
Chapter 27
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 29. Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 56 and
Ch. 153.
§ 24-6 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 26-2
1:44
ARTICLE I
Reduction of Polystyrene
[Adopted 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 42]
§ 27-1. Findings and intent.
WHEREAS, the Town has a duty to protect the natural environment, the
economy, and the health of its citizens; and
WHEREAS, styrene, a component of polystyrene, is a known hazardous
substance, classified by the National Toxicology Program (NTP) as
"reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen" and also recognized by
the NTP as a potential food and beverage contaminant that may "leach from
polystyrene containers used for food products"; and
WHEREAS, polystyrene is made from fossil fuels, a nonrenewable resource;
and
WHEREAS, polystyrene manufacture, use, and disposal requires substantial
energy consumption and contributes to greenhouse gases and other
adverse environmental effects; and
WHEREAS, polystyrene is not biodegradable or compostable, and is
generally not recyclable; and
WHEREAS, polystyrene is a common environmental pollutant that
fragments into smaller pieces that harm or kill marine life and wildlife when
they ingest them; and
WHEREAS, the EPA states "that such materials can also have serious
impacts on human health, wildlife, the aquatic environment and the
economy"; and
WHEREAS, polystyrene is used as food service ware by food establishments
and packing material by retail establishments operating in the Town; and
WHEREAS, disposable food service ware constitutes a portion of the litter
in Williamstown's streets, parks and public places, which increases Town
costs; and
WHEREAS, affordable and effective ways to reduce the negative
environmental impacts of polystyrene products through the use of reusable,
recyclable, biodegradable and/or compostable materials are available for
most retail applications; and
WHEREAS, over 100 municipalities throughout the United States, Canada,
Europe, and Asia have banned polystyrene food service ware, including
Amherst, Brookline, Great Barrington, Somerville, and South Hadley in
Massachusetts, as well as: Los Angeles, CA; Chicago, IL; Miami Beach, FL;
Albany, NY; New York, NY; Portland, OR; and Seattle, WA;
NOW THEREFORE, the Town of Williamstown hereby enacts this bylaw
to prohibit the use and distribution of foam and rigid polystyrene in food
§ 27-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-1
1:45
service ware and packaging material and require the use and distribution of
biodegradable, compostable, reusable, or recyclable products or materials
in their place.
§ 27-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, have the following meanings:
ASTM STANDARD — Refers to materials meeting the standards of the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) International Standards
D6400 or D6868 for biodegradable and compostable plastics, as those
standards may be amended. D6400 is the specification for plastics designed
for compostability in municipal or industrial aerobic composting facilities.
D6868 is the specification for aerobic compostability of plastics used as
coatings on a compostable substrate.
BIODEGRADABLE — Materials that will completely degrade and return to
nature, i.e., decompose into elements found in nature within a reasonably
short period of time after customary disposal.
COMPOSTABLE — Materials that will completely degrade into, or otherwise
become part of, usable compost (e.g., soil-conditioning material, mulch) in
a safe and timely manner. Compostable disposable food service ware must
meet ASTM standards for compostability, and any bio-plastic or plasticlike
product must be clearly labeled, preferably with a color symbol, such
that any customer or processor can easily distinguish the ASTM standard
compostable plastic from non-ASTM specification compostable plastic.
DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE — All containers, bowls, plates, trays,
cartons, cups, lids, straws, forks, spoons, knives, and other items designed
for one-time or nondurable uses on or in which any food vendor directly
places or packages prepared foods or which are used to consume foods.
This includes, but is not limited to, service ware for takeout foods and/or
leftovers from partially consumed meals prepared at food establishments.
FLOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An operation that stores, prepares, packages,
serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption, as
further defined in 105 CMR 590.002. Any establishment requiring a permit
to operate in accordance with the State Food Code, 105 CMR 590.000 et
seq., shall be considered a "food establishment" for purposes of this chapter.
POLYSTYRENE —
The term means and includes blown polystyrene and expanded and
extruded foams (sometimes called "Styrofoam," a Dow Chemical Co.
trademarked form of EPS insulation), also referred to as "expanded
polystyrene (EPS)," which are thermoplastic petrochemical materials
utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of
techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres
(expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, form molding, and
extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene); and in this
chapter is referenced as "foam polystyrene." Foam polystyrene is
A.
§ 27-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 27-2
1:46
POLYSTYRENE LOOSE FILL PACKAGING — A void-filled packaging product
made of expanded polystyrene that is used as a packaging fill, commonly
known as "packing peanuts."
PREPARED FOOD — Food or beverages, which are served, packaged,
cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise
prepared on the food establishment's premises within the Town of
Williamstown. Prepared food may be eaten either on or off the premises,
also known as "takeout food."
RECYCLABLE — Material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted
using available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using
the altered form in the manufacture of a new product. "Recycling" does
not include burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally
destroying solid waste.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial business facility that sells
goods directly to the consumer, including but not limited to grocery stores,
pharmacies, liquor stores, convenience stores, restaurants, retail stores
and vendors selling clothing, food, and personal items, and dry cleaning
services.
REUSABLE — Material that will be used more than once in its same form by
a business establishment. Reusable food service ware includes: tableware,
flatware, food or beverage containers, packages or trays, such as, but
not limited to, soft drink bottles and milk containers that are designed
to be returned to the distributor and customer that is provided takeout
containers. "Reusable" also includes durable containers, packages, or trays
used on premises or returnable containers brought back to the food
establishment.
§ 27-3. Prohibited use and distribution of disposable food service
ware and polystyrene loose fill packaging.
generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers,
meat trays and egg cartons.
The term also means and includes clear or solid polystyrene which
is also known as "oriented" and referenced in this chapter as "rigid
polystyrene." Rigid polystyrene is generally used to make clear
clamshell containers and clear or colored straws, lids and utensils.
B.
Food establishments are prohibited from providing prepared food to
customers in foam polystyrene or rigid polystyrene food service ware.
A.
All food establishments using any disposable food service ware will use
biodegradable, compostable, reusable or recyclable food service ware.
All food establishments are strongly encouraged to use reusable food
service ware in place of using disposable food service ware for all food
served on premises.
B.
Retail establishments are prohibited from selling or distributing foam
polystyrene or rigid polystyrene food service ware to customers.
C.
§ 27-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:47
§ 27-4. Exemptions.
§ 27-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
No manufacturer may dispense, sell, or offer for sale polystyrene loose
fill packaging in the Town of Williamstown.
D.
Foods prepared or packaged outside the Town of Williamstown are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Purveyors of food prepared
or packaged outside the Town of Williamstown are encouraged to follow
the provisions of this chapter.
A.
Food establishments and retail establishments will be exempted from
the provisions of this chapter for specific items or types of disposable
food service ware if the Board of Health or its designee finds that
a suitable biodegradable, compostable, reusable, or recyclable
alternative does not exist for a specific application and/or that imposing
the requirements of this chapter on that item or type of disposable food
service ware would cause undue hardship.
B.
Any person may seek an exemption from the requirements of this
chapter by filing a request in writing with the Board of Health. The
Board of Health may waive any specific requirement of this chapter for
a period of not more than one year if the person seeking the exemption
has demonstrated that strict application of the specific requirement
would cause undue hardship. For purposes of this chapter, an "undue
hardship" is a situation unique to the food establishment where there
are no reasonable alternatives to the use of expanded polystyrene
disposable food service containers and compliance with this provision
would cause significant economic hardship to that food establishment.
A person granted an exemption must reapply prior to the end of the
one-year exemption period and demonstrate continued undue hardship
if the person wishes to have the exemption extended. The Board of
Health's decision to grant or deny an exemption or to grant or deny an
extension of a previously issued exemption shall be in writing and shall
be final.
C.
Coolers and ice chests that are intended for reuse are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
D.
The Board of Health shall have the authority to enforce this chapter by:
(1) Inspection and investigation;
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders; and/or
(3) Civil court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of these regulations may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition
B.
§ 27-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 27-5
1:48
§ 27-6. Severability; effective date.
process as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day of violation, after
written notice, is a separate violation.
The following penalties shall apply:
(1) First offense: warning.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third offense: $100.
(4) Fourth and subsequent offenses: $200.
C.
The Board of Health may suspend, revoke or deny any license or permit
for violations of this chapter.
D.
Each section of this chapter shall be construed as separate to the
end that if any section, sentence, clause or phrase thereof shall be
held invalid for any reason, the remainder of the chapter and all other
chapters shall continue in full force.
A.
B. This chapter8 shall take effect six months after its adoption.
8. Editor’s Note: “This chapter” refers to Ch. 27, Art. I.
§ 27-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-6
1:49

ARTICLE II
Reduction of Single-Use Bags
[Adopted 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 41]
§ 27-7. Purpose and intent.
WHEREAS, the Town has a duty to protect the natural environment, the
economy, and the health of its citizens; and
WHEREAS, the production and use of single-use bags have significant
impacts on the environment, including, but not limited to:
• contributing to pollution of the land environment and waterways;
• contributing to the potential death of marine and other wildlife;
• clogging storm drainage systems;
• littering Williamstown's streets, parks, public places, and local waterways,
including reservoirs, lakes, the Hoosac River, and the Green River; and
WHEREAS, plastic bags are made from fossil fuels, a nonrenewable
resource; and
WHEREAS, the manufacture, use, and disposal of plastic bags and paper
bags requires substantial energy consumption and contributes to
greenhouse gases and other adverse environmental effects; and
WHEREAS, plastic bags are not biodegradable or compostable, and are
commonly not recycled; and
WHEREAS, single-use paper and plastic bags create a burden to solid waste
collection and recycling facilities; and
WHEREAS, the costs associated with the use and distribution of single-use
paper and plastic bags are borne by retail establishments and passed on to
the customer; and
WHEREAS, affordable, ecologically responsible alternatives, including
reusable bags, are readily available from numerous sources and vendors;
and
WHEREAS, over 100 municipalities throughout the United States, Canada,
Europe, Africa, Latin America, and Asia have placed restrictions on and/or
fees for carryout bags, including Brookline, Great Barrington, Manchester,
Newton, and Provincetown in Massachusetts, as well as Los Angeles, CA;
Boulder, CO; Washington, DC; Dallas, TX; and Seattle, WA;
NOW THEREFORE, the Town of Williamstown hereby enacts the following
bylaw to regulate the use of plastic carryout bags and paper carryout bags
within the Town and to promote the use of reusable bags.
§ 27-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-8
1:51
§ 27-8. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall, unless context clearly indicates
otherwise, have the following meanings:
ASTM D6400 — The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
International "Standard Specification for Compostable Plastics" which
includes those plastics and products made from plastics that are designed
to be composted under aerobic conditions in municipal and industrial
aerobic composting facilities.
ASTM D7081 — ASTM International "Standard Specification for
Biodegradable Plastics in the Marine Environment" which includes those
plastics and products that are designed to be biodegradable under the
marine environmental conditions of aerobic marine waters or anaerobic
marine sediments, or both.
BIODEGRADABLE — Materials that will completely degrade and return to
nature, i.e., decompose into elements found in nature within a reasonably
short period of time after customary disposal.
CARRYOUT BAG — A bag provided by a retail establishment to a customer
at the point of sale for the purpose of removing products purchased therein.
COMPOSTABLE PLASTIC BAG — A plastic bag that (1) conforms to the
current ASTM D6400 specifications for compostability; and (2) is certified
and labeled as meeting the ASTM D6400 standard specifications by a
recognized verification entity. A plastic bag that is made of polyethylene,
polyethylene terephthalate, polyvinyl chloride, polypropylene, or nylon is
not deemed "compostable."
CUSTOMER — Any person purchasing goods from a retail establishment.
MARINE DEGRADABLE PLASTIC BAG — A plastic bag that conforms to
the current ASTM D7081 standard specification for marine degradability.
A plastic bag that is made of polyethylene, polyethylene terephthalate,
polyvinyl chloride, polypropylene, or nylon is not deemed "marine
degradable."
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other
organization or group however organized.
POSTCONSUMER RECYCLED MATERIAL — A material that would
otherwise be destined for solid waste disposal, having completed its
intended end use and product life cycle.
PRODUCE BAG or PRODUCT BAG — A bag used by a consumer inside
a retail establishment to: (A) contain bulk items, such as produce, nuts,
grains, candy, or small hardware items; (B) contain or wrap meat, fish,
or frozen foods whether or not prepackaged; (C) contain or wrap flowers,
potted plants, or other items to prevent moisture damage to other
purchases; or (D) contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.
RECYCLABLE — Material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted
using available recycling collection programs in the Town of Williamstown
for the purpose of using the altered form in the manufacture of a new
§ 27-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 27-8
1:52
product. "Recycling" does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or
otherwise thermally destroying solid waste.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag that meets all of the following
requirements: (1) contains no old growth fiber, (2) is 100% recyclable
overall and contains a minimum of 40% postconsumer recycled material; (3)
is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of
the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard D6400.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial business facility that sells
goods and/or services directly to the consumer, including but not limited to
grocery stores, pharmacies, liquor stores, convenience stores, restaurants,
retail stores and vendors selling clothing, food, and personal items, and dry
cleaning services.
REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG — A carryout bag that is specifically designed
and manufactured for multiple reuse and meets the requirements of § 27-10
of this chapter.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAGS — Those bags, with or without handles,
constructed of a film of high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density
polyethylene (LDPE), linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE), polyvinyl
chloride (PVC), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polypropylene (other than
woven and nonwoven polypropylene fabric) if said film is less than 4.0 mils
(0.1016 mm) in thickness and which do not meet the ASTM D6400 and
ASTM D7081 standard specifications.
§ 27-9. Regulations and prohibitions.
§ 27-10. Reusable bag standards.
No retail establishment in the Town of Williamstown shall provide
single-use plastic bags to customers.
A.
If a retail establishment provides carryout bags, produce bags, or
product bags to customers, the bags must be one of the following:
(1) Recyclable paper bag, or
(2) Reusable carryout bag, or
Compostable plastic bag (meeting the specifications of ASTM
D6400, as defined herein), or
(3)
Marine degradable plastic bag (meeting the specifications of ASTM
7081, as defined herein).
(4)
B.
Nothing in this chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any type
that they bring to the store themselves or from carrying away goods
that are not placed in a bag, in lieu of using bags provided by the store.
C.
A retail establishment may provide or sell reusable carryout bags to its
customers or to any person.
A.
§ 27-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-10
1:53
§ 27-11. Exemptions.
§ 27-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 27-13. Severability; effective date.
B. A reusable carryout bag must have a handle.
A reusable carryout bag must be constructed out of:
Cloth, other washable fabric, or other durable materials whether
woven or nonwoven; or
(1)
(2) Recyclable plastic, with a minimum thickness of 4.0 mils.
C.
A reusable carryout bag must meet the minimum reuse testing standard
of 175 reuses carrying 16 pounds.
D.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to bags used by a nonprofit
corporation or other charity as defined by MGL c. 12 to distribute food,
grocery products, clothing, or other household items to clients.
A.
The Town shall have the authority to enforce this chapter by:
(1) Inspection and investigation;
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders; and/or
(3) Civil court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of these regulations may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition
process as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day of violation, after
written notice, is a separate violation.
B.
The following penalties shall apply:
(1) First offense: warning.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third offense: $100.
(4) Fourth and subsequent offenses: $200.
C.
The Town may suspend, revoke or deny any license or permit for
violations of this chapter.
D.
Each section of this chapter shall be construed as separate to the end
that if any section, sentence, clause or phrase thereof shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of that chapter and all other
chapters shall continue in full force.
A.
B. This chapter9 shall take effect six months after its adoption.
§ 27-10 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 27-13
1:54
9. Editor's Note: "This chapter" refers to Ch. 27, Art. II.
§ 27-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-13
1:55
Chapter 28
HANDICAPPED PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles — See Ch. 64.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 125.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 103.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 130.
§ 28-1. Parking prohibited.
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer to
stand or park, whether on public or private property, within parking spaces
designated as reserved for vehicles issued handicapped or disabled veteran
number plates or for vehicles transporting handicapped persons and
displaying special parking identification issued through the Chief of Police
or as reflected in MGL c. 40, § 21(23), or in such a manner as to obstruct a
curb ramp designated for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress
to a street or public way.
§ 28-2. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be $100; provided, however.
that nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the removal, in
accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 266, § 120D, of any vehicle which
is in violation of this chapter.
§ 28-3. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by Town of Williamstown Police Department.
This chapter may be enforced through the noncriminal disposition method
provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. For purposes of noncriminal disposition, the
enforcing persons shall be those Town officials set forth in this section of
the chapter, and the specific penalty shall be as provided in § 28-2 of this
chapter.
§ 28-4. Liability of owner.
If any unauthorized vehicle is found in violation of the provisions of this
Handicapped Parking Bylaw and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
§ 27-13 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 28-4
1:56
Chapter 29
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fuel storage tanks — See Ch. 92. Environmental protection — See Ch. 70,
§ 70-5.3G.
§ 29-1. Purpose and authority.
This chapter is intended to protect the ground- and surface waters of the
town from contamination, and to protect the public health and welfare
relative to toxic and hazardous materials. It is adopted under the authority
of MGL C. 43B, § 13, the Home Rule Procedures Act and MGL C. 40, § 21.
§ 29-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all nonagricultural activities required to obtain
an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) identification number under 310
CMR 30.061, or involving storage of substances exceeding the Threshold
Planning Quantities of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act
of 1986 (SARA) Title III Regulations, other than substances, such as those
held for sale by retailers, excluded from control thereunder.
§ 29-3. Registration.
§ 29-4. Notification.
All persons storing substances subject to this chapter shall, using a
form to be provided by the Municipal Hazardous Materials Coordinator,
annually register such storage with the Municipal Coordinator, initially
upon storage initiation or, in the case of storage in existence upon
adoption of this chapter, within 90 days of bylaw adoption.
A.
Submitted registration materials shall annually be provided by the
Municipal Coordinator to the Board of Health and the Fire Chief, and
shall be maintained in a computer file to facilitate cross referencing
against outstanding permits and licenses for assisting in administration
and enforcement.
B.
All persons applying for a permit or permit renewal under 527 CMR
9.0,0 Board of Fire Prevention Regulations for Tanks and Containers,
shall furnish a duplicate copy of the application and plot plan to the
Board of Health, and the head of the Fire Department shall furnish
to the Board of Health copies of all permits granted under those
regulations.
A.
Persons proposing to install tanks or containers subject to this chapter
but not subject to either 527 CMR 9.00 (Board of Fire Prevention
B.
§ 28-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-4
1:57
§ 29-5. Storage requirements.
§ 29-6. Hazard prevention and response plan.
Persons storing substances subject to this chapter shall file with the Health
Department a hazard prevention and contingency response plan outlining
measures to be taken in the event of release or threat of release, and
personnel training procedures in emergency response. Such plan may be
that submitted to Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) under 310 CMR 30.520.
§ 29-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $100, with each day during which a violation
Regulations) or 310 CMR 30.690 (DEP Hazardous Waste Regulations)
shall make written application to the Board of Health prior to doing so.
Such application shall be approved, provided that the requirements of
this chapter are met, but not otherwise.
Storage subject to this chapter shall be product-tight, weatherproof
and vandal-resistant, with redundant security, such as enclosure of
containers within an impervious dike.
A.
Storage containers with capacity of 55 gallons or more shall:
Meet the requirements of 527 CMR 9.00, Board of Fire Prevention
Regulations, if applicable, or
(1)
Meet the requirements of 310 CMR 30.690, Storage and Treatment
in Tanks, if applicable, or
(2)
Meet the more appropriate of the above, as determined by the
Board of Health, if neither is otherwise applicable, except that in
such case, specific departure may be authorized by the Board of
Health (or its designated agent) upon its written determination,
following consultation with the Conservation Commission and
Selectmen, that the nature of the materials being stored makes
such departure appropriate, and will result in no compromise in the
prevention of hazard.
(3)
B.
Where storage is not subject to control under 527 CMR 9.00, Board of
Fire Prevention Regulations for Tanks and Containers, responsibilities
assigned in that regulation to the head of the Fire Department shall be
assumed by the Board of Health (or its designated agent).
C.
Underground storage proposed within 100 feet of a wetland protected
under the Wetlands Act10 is also subject to review by the Conservation
Commission under that Act.
D.
10.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 131, § 40 et seq.
§ 29-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 29-7
1:58
continues being a separate offense. Upon request by the Board of Health (or
its designated agent) or on its own initiative, the Board of Selectmen shall
take such legal action as is necessary to enforce this chapter.
Chapter 34
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Betterments assessment — See Ch. 49, Art. II.
Guidelines for issuance of licenses and
permits — See Ch. 97.
Food establishments — See Ch. 143.
§ 34-1. Furnishing of list.
The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges
(hereinafter referred to as the Tax Collector) shall annually furnish to
each department, board, commission or division (hereinafter referred to as
the licensing authority) that issues licenses or permits, including renewals
and transfers a list of any person, corporation or business enterprise
(hereinafter referred to as the party) that has neglected or refused to pay
any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges
for not less than a twelve-month period, and that such party has not filed in
good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending
petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
§ 34-2. Denial, suspension or revocation of licenses or permits of
parties appearing on list. [Amended 1-27-1998 STM, Art. 7]
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on
said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; or
with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject
of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried
out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real
estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished
to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; provided, however, that
written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by
applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held
not earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie
evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to
any party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing
conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension.
Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license
denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of
such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other
§ 29-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-2
1:59
proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial,
revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or
revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license
authority receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party is
in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the
date of issuance of said certificate.
§ 34-3. Payment agreement.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 34-4. Waivers by Board of Selectmen. [Amended 1-27-1998 STM,
Art. 7]
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if
it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner,
its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as
defined in MGL C. 268A, § 1, in the business or activity conducted in or on
said property.
§ 34-5. Nonapplicability.
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits:
Chapter 37
LOITERING
A. Open burning: MGL C. 48, § 13.
B. Bicycle permits: MGL C. 85, § 11A.
C. Sales of articles for charitable purposes: MGL C. 101, § 33.
D. Children work permits: MGL C. 149, § 69.
Clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses: MGL C. 140,
§ 21E.
E.
F. Dog licenses: MGL C. 140, § 137.
G. Fishing, hunting, trapping license: MGL C. 131, § 12.
H. Marriage licenses: MGL C. 207, § 28.
I. Theatrical events, public exhibition permits: MGL C. 140, § 181.
§ 34-2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 37-1
1:60
§ 37-1. Loitering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or number of persons to stand, loiter or
walk upon any street or sidewalk in the town as to obstruct free passage
over, on or along said street or sidewalk, or free access to any walkway,
stairway, door, store, business or building abutting any such street or
sidewalk, after being requested by any member of the Police Department to
permit unobstructed passage over or along said street or sidewalk, or to or
from any such walkway, stairway, door, store, business or building abutting
such street or sidewalk.
§ 37-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $20 for each offense.
Chapter 40
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise standards — See Ch. 70, § 70-5.4E
§ 40-1. License required.
No person shall operate in any public way or public place within the town a
radio, Victrola, broadcasting or sound-amplifying device or machine without
first obtaining a license for such operation from the Selectmen.
§ 40-2. Exception.
This chapter shall not prohibit the operation of a radio in a private
passenger automobile.
§ 40-3. License fee. [Amended 12-26-1989]
The fee for such license shall be $10.
Chapter 43
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 37-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-3
1:61

ARTICLE I
Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances
[Adopted 2-24-1964 ATM, Art. 30]
§ 43-1. Duties. [Amended 1-27-1998 STM, Art. 8]
There shall be an Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances in Buildings
whose duty shall be the enforcement of the rules and regulations adopted
by the board established under MGL C. 142, § 13, as amended, and any
amendments to such rules and regulations that may be adopted from time
to time by said board.11
§ 43-2. Permit required for gas fitting work; fees.
No person shall engage in gas fitting in buildings in the town without
obtaining a permit authorizing such work from the Inspector of Gas Piping
and Gas Appliances in Buildings. The said Inspector shall require applicants
for permits hereunder to furnish such description and information as he
deems necessary concerning the proposed work, and he shall require said
applicants to pay such fees as the Board of Selectmen from time to time may
establish.
§ 43-3. Term defined.
As used in this article, the words "gas fitting" shall be construed to include
the installation, alteration and replacement of a system beyond the gas
meter outlet or regulator through which is conveyed or intended to be
conveyed fuel gas of any kind, except undiluted liquefied petroleum gas,
for power, refrigeration, heating or illuminating purposes, including the
connection therewith and testing of gas fixtures, ranges, refrigerators,
stoves, water heaters, house heating boilers and any other gas-using
appliances, and all attachments and appurtenances, and the maintenance
in good and safe condition of said systems, and the making of necessary
repairs and changes.
§ 43-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine not exceeding $20 for each offense.
11.Editor's Note: The board referred to is the Board of Health. See Part III of this Code for
Board of Health regulations.
§ 43-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-4
1:63
Chapter 45
REVOLVING FUNDS
§ 45-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by Town
departments, boards, committees, agencies or officers in connection with
the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other
receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or
activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
§ 45-2. Expenditure limitations.
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur
liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and
authorized by this chapter without appropriation subject to the following
limitations:
§ 45-3. Interest.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
chapter shall be credited to the general fund.
§ 45-4. Procedures and reports.
Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, and this chapter, the laws,
bylaws, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern the receipt
and custody of the Town monies and the expenditure and payment of Town
funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and authorized
by this chapter. The Town Accountant shall include a statement on the
collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures
charged to the fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular
report the Town Accountant provides the department, board, committee,
agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are
paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund, except for those
employed as school bus drivers.
A.
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the
fund.
B.
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by Town Meeting on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or
any increased amount of the authorization that is later approved during
that fiscal year by the Selectboard and the Finance Committee.
C.
§ 43-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 45-5
1:64
§ 45-5. Authorized revolving funds.
The following Table of Authorized Revolving Funds establishes:
Each revolving fund authorized for use by a Town department, board,
committee, agency or office;
A.
The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized
to spend from each fund;
B.
The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the
department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with
the program or activity for which the fund is established that shall be
credited to each fund by the Town Accountant;
C.
The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be
used;
D.
E. Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
F. Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund; and
The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this chapter.
A
Revolving
Fund
B
Department,
Board,
Committee,
Agency or
Officer
Authorized
to Spend
C
Fees,
Charges or
Other
Receipts
Credited
to Fund
D
Program or
Activity
Expenses
Payable
from Fund
E
Restrictions
or
Conditions
on
Expenses
Payable
from Fund
F
Other
Requirements/
Reports
G
Fiscal Years
Gas and
Plumbing
Inspection
Building
Commissioner
Inspection
Fees
Salaries and
expenses
None, other
than as set
forth in this
chapter and
by Town
Meeting
vote
None, other
than as set
forth in this
chapter and
by Town
Meeting
vote
Fiscal Year
2018 and
subsequent
years
Public
Library
Library
Trustees
Fees and
fines
Supplies,
services and
equipment
None, other
than as set
forth in this
chapter and
by Town
Meeting
vote
None, other
than as set
forth in this
chapter and
by Town
Meeting
vote
Fiscal Year
2018 and
subsequent
years
Expenditures from each revolving fund set forth herein shall be subject to the limitation
established annually by Town Meeting or any increase therein as may be authorized in
accordance with MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
G.
§ 45-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-5
1:65
Chapter 46
RIGHT TO FARM
§ 46-1. Legislative purpose and intent.
§ 46-2. Definitions.
The purpose and intent of this bylaw is to state with emphasis the right
to farm accorded to all citizens of the commonwealth under Article 97,
of the Constitution, and all state statutes and regulations thereunder,
including but not limited to MGL c.40A, § 3, Paragraph 1; c.90, § 9,
c.111, § 125A; and c.128 § 1A. We the citizens of Williamstown restate
and republish these rights pursuant to the Town's authority conferred
by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts
Constitution ("Home Rule Amendment").
A.
This general bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes
agriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmlands
within the Town of Williamstown by allowing agricultural uses and
related activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and
Town agencies. This bylaw shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within
the Town.
B.
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of
land, or water bodies used for the primary purpose of commercial
agriculture, or accessory thereto.
A.
The words "farming" or "agriculture" or their derivatives shall include,
but not be limited to the following:
Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the
soil;
(1)
(2) Dairying;
Production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any
agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural, or
horticultural commodities;
(3)
Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and
any other forestry or lumbering operations;
(4)
(5) Raising of livestock, including horses;
Keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and keeping and
raising of poultry, swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus, ostriches
and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and camels), and other
domesticated animals for food and other agricultural purposes,
including bees and fur-bearing animals.
(6)
B.
§ 45-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 46-2
1:66
§ 46-3. Right to farm declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of
Williamstown. The above-described agricultural activities may occur on
holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall include the
attendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally
accepted agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever
impact may be caused to others through the normal practice of agriculture
is more than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood,
community, and society in general. The benefits and protections of this
bylaw are intended to apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural
and farming operations and activities conducted in accordance with
generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover, nothing in this Right
to Farm Bylaw shall be deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as
imposing any land use regulation, which is properly the subject of state
statute, regulation, or local zoning law.
§ 46-4. Disclosure notification.
"Farming" shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the
following:
Operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over
roads within the Town;
(1)
Control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds,
predators and disease organisms of plants and animals;
(2)
(3) Application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides;
Conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, including agri-tourism, provided that the
activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or
services of the farm;
(4)
Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm
and the operation of a farmers' market or farm stand, including
signage thereto;
(5)
Maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment, or
apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or manager used
expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management,
or sale of the agricultural products; and
(6)
Non-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming
operations.
(7)
C.
In order to allow prospective purchasers to make informed decisions
prior to a real estate transaction and to promote harmony between
farmers and their new neighbors after a transaction, the Town of
Williamstown requests selling landholders and/or their agents (and
A.
§ 46-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-4
1:67
§ 46-5. Severability clause.
If any part of this bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this bylaw. The
Town of Williamstown hereby declares the provisions of this bylaw to be
severable.
Chapter 49
SEWERS AND WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water supply emergencies — See Ch. 67, Art.
I.
Zoning — See Ch. 70.
Sewers — See Ch. 117.
Subdivision rules and regulations — See Ch.
170.
assigns) provide written notice to prospective purchasers substantially
as follows:
"It is the policy of the Town of Williamstown to conserve, protect and
encourage the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for
the production of food, and other agricultural products, and for the
keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise and keeping of other
animals for food and other agricultural purposes, including bees and
fur-bearing animals, and also for its natural and ecological value. This
disclosure notification is to inform buyers that the property they are
about to acquire lies within a Town where farming activities occur.
Such farming activities may include, but are not limited to, activities
that cause noise, dust and odors. Purchasing, and henceforth
occupying, land within Williamstown means that one should expect
and accept such conditions as a norm and necessary aspect of living in
Williamstown."
Written notification may occur in one of several ways, including but
not limited to a disclosure form or addendum to a purchase and sale
agreement and should include an acknowledgment by the buyer that
they have received notification.
B.
Within 30 days after this bylaw becomes effective the Board of
Selectmen shall make available for use by selling landowners or their
agents (and assigns) copies of example written notifications.
C.
Within 30 days after this bylaw becomes effective the Board of
Selectmen shall prominently place in the Town Hall and on the Town
Web site the above disclosure.
D.
§ 46-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 46-5
1:68
ARTICLE I
Installation of Sewer and Water Lines
[Adopted 2-28-1955 ATM, Art. 34]
§ 49-1. Inspection and approval.
Sewer and water lines being installed in a private way shall be inspected
and approved by the Sewer and Water Departments (respectively) as to
adequacy of plans and installation before these facilities may be connected
to the town system.
§ 49-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-1
1:69

ARTICLE II
Betterments Assessment
[Adopted 5-16-1978 ATM, Art. 24]
§ 49-2. Payment for waterline extensions. [Amended 1-27-1981
STM, Art. 1]
Any extension of waterlines in the town which results in a special benefit
to a limited or determinable area shall be paid for by betterments assessed
under the provisions of Chapter 80 of the General Laws. In the case of
waterline extensions, the cost shall be borne by those receiving a property
benefit or advantage, with the proportionate share of any owner not to
exceed the value of the benefit to his property; any excess of cost over
benefits, is to be paid by the town out of water revenues. Two thirds of the
cost of any extension of sewer lines in the town which is not reimbursable
from federal or state grants shall be assessed upon the owners of estates
within the territory served thereby by the uniform unit method provided in
MGL C. 83, § 15.
§ 49-3. Nonapplicability.
This betterment assessment policy shall not apply to any new building
construction begun after May 16, 1978. The cost of sewage waste disposal
or water supply for that property is to be borne by the property owner.
§ 49-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-3
1:71
Chapter 53
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning - See Ch. 70.
Traffic signs and signals — See Ch. 130.
No-smoking signs — See Ch. 158.
§ 49-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 49-3
1:72
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 53-1.1. Authority.
§ 53-1.2. Introduction.
This chapter is adopted under the authority of Article 89 of the
Massachusetts Constitution (the "Home Rule Amendment"), MGL c.
93, § 29, and all other authority conferred by the General Laws, as
amended.
A.
The authority for control of all signs is delegated to the Sign
Commission, subject to the General Laws. No signs are allowed on or
above any public way, or on private property within public view of a
public way, public park or reservation, in the Town, except lawful traffic
regulation devices, or except as hereinafter provided.
B.
The Williamstown envisioned under this chapter is one with major
patterns of use and general appearance little changed from today, but
with greater opportunities within the community for a broader range
of diversity of citizens and businesses; a town not only undamaged by
change but made better through it.
A.
Economic growth appropriate to Williamstown's character is actively
sought, not as an end to itself, but as a means of broadening the
diversity of opportunity in Williamstown, in turn supporting a rich and
diverse community life and population. There is room enough for all
the development which realistically the Town can expect to experience
without the defacing of its special assets and places, including both
natural and man-made features, rural vistas and historic monuments.
B.
The basic form of Williamstown is that of a classic New England town,
with a strong central village sharply contrasting with and benefiting
from the openness of the surrounding lands. The present arrangement
works well for almost everyone. It provides wonderful living
possibilities within easy walk of both central services and open lands.
It organizes development in an easily serviced way. It creates a visually
rich and satisfying community character.
C.
There is little doubt Williamstown residents intend the policies of the
Sign Commission to enhance these qualities. Such conflicts within the
community as the Sign Commission may encounter should be
reconciled with this public vision in mind. It is instructed to use
incentives and rewards wherever possible, as a way of implementing
sign policy. However, the following guidelines are intended to be as
clear and unambiguous as possible:
The primary function of on-premise signs is to index the
environment to tell people where they can find what. Selling is a
subordinate purpose.
(1)
D.
§ 53-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-1.2
1:73
§ 53-1.3. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are:
(2) Signs should be expressive of the individual proprietors identity.
Signs should be appropriate to the type of activity to which they
pertain.
(3)
Signs should be compatible with the visual character of the area
surrounding them. Carved signs are compatible in all areas, and
this chapter encourages their use.
(4)
Signs should be legible in the circumstances in which they are
seen.
(5)
A. To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication.
To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the Town's
ability to attract tourism and other sources of economic development
and growth.
B.
C. To improve pedestrian and traffic safety.
To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and
private property.
D.
To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of sign policy and
regulations.
E.
§ 53-1.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 53-1.3
1:74
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 53-2.1. Terms defined.
Words and phrases used in this chapter have the meanings set forth in
this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in
Chapter 70, Zoning, shall be given the meanings set forth in Chapter 70.
Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in § 53-2.2.
All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions
are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation
of this chapter.
ALTERATION — Any change in size, shape, location, color, lighting, style of
lettering, name of business, location or height of a sign from the terms of its
permit.
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or create a special effect or scene.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted to a pole or building by a frame at one or more edges. National
flags or state or municipal flags shall not be considered to be banners.
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed onto the atmosphere
directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the source; also,
any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building or date
and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other similar permanent material.
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached directly to any building wall, as
contrasted to a freestanding sign.
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of an attached awning, canopy
of fabric or plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
CHANGEABLE SIGN COPY — A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more
than one time per three days shall be considered an animated sign and not
a changeable copy sign for the purposes of this chapter. A sign on which the
only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or
temperature, or "Vacancy" and "No Vacancy" signs used in conjunction with
approved motel signs shall not be considered a changeable copy sign for the
purposes of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any wording, logo or other representation
that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business,
product, service or other commercial activity.
§ 53-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-2.1
1:75
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign designed solely for the purpose of traffic
and pedestrian direction, and may be located on the property to which the
public is directed.
DIRECTORY SIGN — Any sign which lists the tenants or occupants of a
building and that may indicate their respective professions.
DISTRICT — The district underlying the property, as defined by the Zoning
District Map of the Town of Williamstown, as amended. If the property is
divided by two zoning districts, the district underlying the building shall be
considered the district for the purposes of this chapter.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government or political
subdivision.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed upon, or anchored upon the ground and that are independent
from any building or other structure.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking,"
"entrance," "loading only," "telephone" and other similar directives. No sign
with a commercial message legible from a position off the zone lot on which
the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
INTEGRALLY LIT SIGN — A sign which is externally lit, but its lighting is
integral to the sign, such as bulbs that spell out the sign message.
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made part of
the marquee.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that would be permitted under this
chapter with a sign permit, but which was in existence on May 17, 1994, and
which was constructed in accordance with the applicable Bylaw provisions
in effect on the date of its construction, but which is not in conformance
with the standards or requirements of this chapter.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any freestanding sign relating to a business,
service, activity or product not related to the premises upon which the sign
is located.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported by wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used as advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said
vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
§ 53-2.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 53-2.1
1:76
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located. Lots with multiple principal uses
may have multiple principal buildings. Storage buildings, garages and other
clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more the six inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign located in a residentially zoned district that
contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or services
legally offered on the premises where the sign is located.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected or constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the eave line or parapet of the building, except that a sign placed
entirely within the gable end of a building with a pitched roof shall not be
considered a roof sign.
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL — Any sign erected as an integral part of a normal
roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically
above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is
separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches.
SETBACK — The distance from the property line to the nearest part of
the applicable building, structure or sign, measured perpendicularly to the
property line.
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses color, form,
graphics, illumination, symbols or writing to advertise, announce the
purpose of or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public and is on private property, within
public view of a public way, public park or reservation.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a street and a lot, and in the
case of a public way, the street line established by the authority laying out
the way upon which the lot abuts.
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted.
TUBE ILLUMINATION — Illumination provided by a tube filled with neon or
other gas in which the tube is bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall,
painted on the wall surface of or erected and confined within the limits of
an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall
or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, pictures or symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale or service that is placed inside a window or upon the
windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
§ 53-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-2.1
1:77
ZONE LOT — A parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size
to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage and use, and that
can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by Chapter 70,
Zoning.
§ 53-2.2. Computations.
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and
height:
Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which
is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face)
shall be computed by means of the smallest square, rectangle, triangle,
circle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits
of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with
any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the
display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework,
bracing or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise
meets the dimensional requirements of Chapter 70, Zoning, and is
clearly incidental to the display itself.
A.
Computation of the area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign
with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area
of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign
faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from
any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the
same sign structure and not more than 12 inches apart, the sign area
shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
B.
Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign, or grade from the nearest roadway,
to the top of the highest attached component of the sign, whichever is
lower.
C.
§ 53-2.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 53-2.2
1:78
ARTICLE III
Exterior Sign Regulations
§ 53-3.1. All districts.
Restrictions for exterior signs in all districts shall be as follows:
§ 53-3.2. Residential districts.
In addition to the regulations contained in § 53-3.1, no sign shall be erected
or maintained in the residential districts except as provided below. No
permit is required for the signs set forth in Subsections A through F.
All signs must be constructed of opaque material and, if lighted, must
be lighted externally, either directly or indirectly, by white light of
constant intensity. Such light shall be directed to light only the sign,
preventing overspill of light onto adjoining properties and glare onto
the street. Signs shall be lit only during normal business hours.
A.
B. All signs shall be kept in good repair.
A nonconforming sign may continue under the terms of its approved
permit. Alterations to a nonconforming sign shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter for new signs.
C.
Protection of First Amendment rights. Any sign allowed under this
chapter may, in lieu of any other copy specified herein, contain any
otherwise lawful, noncommercial message that does not direct
attention to a business or to a service or commodity for sale.
D.
One sign displaying the street number and/or name of the occupant of
the premises, provided that the sign's area does not exceed 1.5 square
feet.
A.
One "for sale," "for rent" or "open house" sign not exceeding six square
feet in area, and advertising only the premises on which it is erected;
and directional "open house" signs placed at the two road intersections,
one of which is nearest to a house for sale, not more than one sign
per intersection, erected not more than 24 hours prior to the "open
house" event, and removed within two hours after the event [Amended
5-19-2009 ATM, Art. 30]
B.
One sign, denoting the architect, engineer and/or contractor, and
information as may be required by any federal or state regulations,
on projects funded by them, not exceeding six square feet in area,
or such minimum area required by law, maintained on the site while
construction is in progress. Such sign shall be removed promptly after
the completion of the construction, and prior to occupancy.
C.
Regulatory, warning and incidental signs not exceeding one square foot
in area.
D.
§ 53-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3.2
1:79
§ 53-3.3. Nonresidential districts.
In addition to the regulations contained in § 53-3.1 above, no sign shall
be erected or maintained in the nonresidential districts except as provided
below:
One sign advertising the sale of produce, the major portion of which is
raised on the premises, not exceeding six square feet in area.
E.
One on-premise sign advertising garage, yard or tag sales, not
exceeding four square feet in area, is permitted for the duration of sale.
F.
Signs for nonconforming uses, as defined by Chapter 70, Zoning, shall
be permitted in accordance with the requirements of § 53-3.3B through
D.
G.
Signs for uses permitted by special permit, under Chapter 70, Zoning,
subject to the following restrictions:
Home occupations/accessory professional offices: no signs, other
than those permitted by Subsections A through F, inclusive.
(1)
Tourist homes/bed-and-breakfast: no signs, other than those
permitted by Subsections A through F, inclusive.
(2)
Nursing homes: one wall sign, conforming to the requirements of
§ 53-3.3D.
(3)
Funeral homes: one wall sign, conforming to the requirements of
§ 53-3.3D.
(4)
Municipal uses/nonprofit museums: one wall sign, conforming to
the requirements of § 53-3.3D.
(5)
Other uses permitted by special permit, but not listed: special
permit, in accordance with Article VI.
(6)
H.
I. Signs authorized by special permit, as provided in Article VI.
J. Temporary signs authorized by permit as provided in Article VII.
Those signs described in § 53-3.2B through F are permitted and do not
require a permit.
A.
There shall be not more than one exterior wall sign per business
establishment, except that if there is more than one public entrance
to any such business establishment, there may be one additional
secondary wall sign for each such secondary entrance; provided,
however, that the aggregate area of all secondary signs shall not exceed
50% of the maximum permissible size authorized by Subsection D.
B.
In addition to the foregoing sign or signs, one directory sign of the
business establishments occupying the building and accessible through
that entrance may be placed on the exterior wall of the building at each
C.
§ 53-3.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 53-3.3
1:80
public entrance of the building. Such directory sign shall not exceed an
area of one square foot for each establishment listed on the directory.
Wall sign size and location shall comply with the following:
Area shall not exceed 16 square feet, with an additional 0.4 square
foot per foot of building frontage of the portion of the building
occupied by the subject business in excess of 40 feet to a maximum
of 32 square feet.
(1)
Signs shall not project more than six inches from the wall to which
they are attached.
(2)
D.
One freestanding sign is permitted, in lieu of the wall signs permitted
by Subsections B through D, in all areas except Spring Street as
follows:
Sign area shall not exceed 50% of the maximum area permitted for
a wall sign when computed in accordance with Subsection D(1).
(1)
(2) Sign height shall not exceed 15 feet.
(3) Sign shall be setback from the street line a minimum of five feet.
E.
No combination signs that advertise a local business and a regionally
or nationally advertised product are permitted, except that a franchised
dealer may display the trademark of his product on his sign, and a
gasoline station may display the trademark of that particular gasoline
company on said sign.
F.
One flag-type banner, pole-mounted along a single edge of fabric,
stating "Open," "Sale," or "Welcome." Said excepted banner shall not
exceed 18 square feet and shall not obstruct a public way, vehicular
site lines, or other means of egress. The banner is permitted by right to
be displayed during business hours only. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM,
Art. 3512]
G.
H. Signs authorized by special permit, as provided in Article VI.
I. Temporary signs authorized by permit as provided in Article VII.
12.Editor's Note: This amendment also provided for the renumbering of the remaining
subsections of this section.
§ 53-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3.3
1:81

ARTICLE IV
Prohibited Signs
§ 53-4.1. Enumeration.
The following signs are hereby expressly prohibited for erection,
construction, repair, alteration or relocation within the Town, except as
otherwise permitted in this chapter:
A-frame or sandwich-board signs. A-frame or sandwich-board and
sidewalk or curb signs, except as a temporary sign, as provided for in
Article VII of this chapter.
A.
Banners. Banners, except as provided for in Articles III and VII of this
chapter. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 35]
B.
Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs, except as temporary signs, as
provided for in Article VII of this chapter.
C.
Animated signs, beacons, integrally lit, tube illuminated graphics,
changeable graphics.
D.
Portable and wheeled signs. except as temporary signs, as provided for
in Article VII of this chapter. [Amended 5-20-2014 ATM, Art. 34]
E.
Signs on parked vehicles. Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/
or trailers which are parked on a public right-of-way, public property
or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way where
the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a
business or activity located on the same or nearby property. However,
this is not in any way intended to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to
vehicles and trailers, such as lettering on a motor vehicle, where the
sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer.
F.
Signs on trees. Signs which are attached or otherwise affixed to Townowned
trees.
G.
Signs on telephone poles. Signs which are attached or otherwise affixed
to telephone or light poles.
H.
Signs which imitate traffic control devices. Signs which imitate,
interfere with, obstruct the view of or can be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal or other device.
I.
Signs advertising individual or group businesses located outside of
Williamstown.
J.
K. Billboards.
L. Pennants, streamers, balloons and other gas-filled figures.
M. Signs painted with luminescent or reflective paint.
§ 53-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-4.1
1:83
Any illuminated window sign, with the exception of one "open" sign of
constant illumination. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 33]
N.
Any sign that is harmful to minors, has a lascivious intent, is obscene
or depicts or relates to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined
in MGL c. 272, § 31, and is visible from the outside of the building.
[Added 5-20-1997 ATM, Art. 24]
O.
§ 53-4.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 53-4.1
1:84
ARTICLE V
Permits
§ 53-5.1. When required.
§ 53-5.2. Procedure.
§ 53-5.3. Abandonment/termination of permit.
Permits shall terminate with respect to:
No sign shall be altered or erected on the exterior of any building, or on
any land, until a sign permit has been granted for the sign by the Sign
Inspector.
A.
Exceptions shall be as follows: the signs permitted by § 53-3.2B, C, D, E
and F and, in the case of residential districts, § 53-3.2A.
B.
Application. Any person proposing to erect or display a sign shall file
an application for a permit with the Sign Inspector in the office of the
Inspector of Buildings. The application shall contain:
Information concerning the height, size, colors, lettering, location
of the sign and the date on which it is to be erected or displayed.
(1)
A drawing or photograph of the building facade and a plot plan
indicating the location of the proposed sign and all existing signs
displayed on the zone lot.
(2)
Specifications for the construction of the sign and for its
illumination, if any is to be provided.
(3)
A.
Action. The Sign Inspector shall issue a sign permit if:
A building permit for the sign has been issued by the Inspector of
Buildings, and
(1)
(2) The sign complies with the requirements of this chapter, or
A special permit has been granted for the sign, in accordance with
Article VI.
(3)
B.
Signs which advertise or call attention to any products or services
which are no longer sold on the premises or to any business or activity
which is no longer operated on said premises for at least 60 days,
except if such business is seasonal in operation, 180 days shall apply.
A.
Signs which have not been erected within six months from the date the
permit was issued.
B.
C. Existing signs, upon their alteration.
§ 53-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-5.3
1:85

ARTICLE VI
Special Permits
§ 53-6.1. Authorized.
§ 53-6.2. Required findings.
The Sign Commission may grant a special permit for the following types
of signs:
Freestanding signs in residential districts, according to the
dimensional requirements of § 53-3.3E.
(1)
Canopy signs, provided that sign area is not more than 2/3 the
maximum area permitted by § 53-3.3D.
(2)
Roof signs, provided that sign area is not more than the maximum
area permitted by § 53-3.3D.
(3)
Directional signs. Directional signs are subject to Sign Commission
approval, in accordance with this Article VI. Directional signs shall
not be larger than 36 inches long and 18 inches wide. A directional
arrow may be permitted as part of the sign and within its perimeter.
The lettering shall be limited to the name of the premises to which
the public is being directed.
(4)
Internally lit signs, provided that they are lit by white light of
constant intensity, with white letters against a dark, earth-toned
background.
(5)
(6) Temporary signs not permitted in Article VII.
(7) Such signs as are compatible with the required findings of § 53-6.2.
A.
Exceptions:
(1) Signs prohibited by § 53-4.1A through O, inclusive.
(2) Lighting of signs other than during normal business hours.
B.
The Sign Commission may grant a special permit only upon a finding
that:
The primary function of the sign is to express ideas or to index the
environment, as opposed to advertising a service or product, and
(1)
The design of the sign, if commercial, is expressive of the individual
proprietors identity, and
(2)
The design of the sign, if commercial, is appropriate to the type of
activity to which it pertains, and
(3)
The sign is compatible with the visual character of the area
surrounding it, and
(4)
A.
§ 53-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-6.2
1:87
(5) The sign is legible in the circumstances in which it is seen.
In granting the special permit, the Sign Commission may specify the
size, type, colors and location of the sign and impose such other terms,
restrictions and conditions as it may deem to be in the public interest.
B.
§ 53-6.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 53-6.2
1:88
ARTICLE VII
Temporary Permits
§ 53-7.1. General conditions.
Temporary signs may be erected and maintained only in accordance with
the following provisions:
§ 53-7.2. Temporary business signs.
Temporary business signs identifying a special, unique, or limited activity,
service, product, or sale of limited duration shall be subject to the following:
Permit conditions. No person shall erect, construct, repair, alter or
relocate within the Town any temporary sign, except temporary real
estate, and other so identified signs (§ 53-3.2A through F), without first
obtaining a permit from the Sign Inspector as provided for in Article V
and the guidelines below.
A.
Materials. The Sign Inspector shall impose as a condition of the
Temporary Permit such requirements as to the material, manner of
construction, location, and method of erection of a sign as are
reasonably necessary to assure the health, safety and convenience of
the public.
B.
C. Illumination. Illumination of temporary signs is not permitted.
Sign types. Temporary signs shall be limited to flush attached wall
signs, freestanding signs or banners.
D.
Number. There shall not be more than one permit for a temporary
business sign issued for the same premises within one calendar year.
A.
Area.
Residential districts. In residential districts, temporary business
signs shall not exceed three square feet in gross surface area for
each exposed face nor exceed an aggregate gross surface area of
six square feet.
(1)
Nonresidential district. In nonresidential districts, temporary
business signs shall not exceed six square feet.
(2)
B.
Location. Temporary business signs shall be located only upon the zone
lot upon which the special, unique or limited activity, service product
or sale is to occur. Such signs may be located in any required yard,
but shall not extend over any lot line or within 15 feet of any point of
vehicular access from a zoning lot to a public roadway.
C.
D. Height.
§ 53-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-7.2
1:89
§ 53-7.3. Temporary event signs.
Temporary event signs announcing a campaign, drive, activity or event
of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization for
noncommercial purposes shall be subject to the following:
§ 53-7.4. Temporary political signs.
Residential areas. In residential areas, temporary business signs
shall not project higher than five feet, as measured from base of
sign or grade of the nearest adjacent roadway, whichever is higher.
(1)
Nonresidential areas. In nonresidential areas, temporary business
signs shall not project higher than seven feet.
(2)
Special conditions.
Timing. Temporary business signs shall be erected and maintained
for a period not to exceed 14 days and shall be removed within two
days of the termination of the activity, service, project or sale.
(1)
E.
Number, area, height and location.
The permitted number, area, height, location and construction of
temporary event signs shall be determined by the Sign Inspector
with consideration given to the public safety and the minimum
signage reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended
purpose.
(1)
Prior to application, written permission must be obtained from
property owner for placement on private property.
(2)
A.
Special conditions.
Timing. Temporary event signs authorized by the Sign Inspector
may be erected and maintained through the duration of the
campaign, drive, activity or event advertised plus one day before,
and shall be removed within 24 hours of the termination of such
campaign, drive, activity or event.
(1)
Limit on number of permits. No more than two permits for
temporary event signs shall be issued for the same premises within
one calendar year.
(2)
B.
Temporary political signs announcing political candidates seeking
public office, political parties and/or political and public issues
contained on a ballot shall be permitted. They may be erected or
maintained for a period not to exceed 60 days prior to the date of the
election to which such signs are applicable is scheduled to occur and
shall be removed within seven days following the election.
A.
B. Temporary political signs shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 53-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 53-7.4
1:90
§ 53-7.5. Portable business signs. [Added 5-20-2014 ATM, Art. 34;
amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 34]
Temporary portable A-frame or sandwich-board-type signage is permitted
upon receipt of a special permit from the Sign Commission, subject to the
following:
Not more than one temporary political sign shall be erected on any
zone lot.
(1)
Maximum sign area shall be six square feet in nonresidential
districts and four square feet in residential districts.
(2)
Maximum sign height shall be seven feet in nonresidential districts
and five feet in residential districts.
(3)
(4) The sign shall be placed so as not to create a public safety hazard.
Number and timing.
There shall be one permit for this signage type issued per
establishment per year.
(1)
(2) These permits shall be renewed on an annual basis.
Signs may be placed at the commencement of business hours and
shall be removed at close of business, each day, for the duration of
the permit.
(3)
A.
Location.
(1) All signs must be placed completely within private property.
No sign may obstruct a public sidewalk, way, or other means of
egress.
(2)
B.
Design
Signs face may not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches, total size may
not exceed 27 inches by 48 inches.
(1)
(2) Signs must be a dark background.
(3) Signs must be framed by wood or a similar material.
C.
§ 53-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-7.5
1:91

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 53-8.1. Sign Inspector.
This chapter shall be enforced and administered by the Sign Inspector.
The Sign Inspector shall make such inspections as are necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter and shall investigate any complaints of
violations of this chapter.
§ 53-8.2. Notice of violation.
If the Sign Inspector determines that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, he shall serve written notice of the violation on the violator. The
notice shall state the nature of the violation, the remedy required to remove
the violation, the time by which the violation must be remedied and a
statement advising that legal action may be taken to remedy the violation if
it is not remedied within the time specified.
§ 53-8.3. Illegal signs on public property.
Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with
the requirements of this chapter, shall be forfeited to the public and subject
to confiscation. In addition to the other remedies hereunder, the Town shall
have the right to recover from the person placing such a sign the full cost
of removal and disposal of such sign.
§ 53-8.4. Fees.
The fees for permanent and temporary signs shall be set by the Board of
Selectmen from time to time.
§ 53-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-8.4
1:93

ARTICLE IX
Penalty
§ 53-9.1. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $50. Each day of the violation of such offense shall be a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 53-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-9.1
1:95

ARTICLE X
Exemption
§ 53-10.1. Certain signs exempted.
Signs described in MGL c. 93, § 32, as amended, are exempt from this
chapter.
§ 53-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-10.1
1:97

ARTICLE XI
Miscellaneous
§ 53-11.1. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 53-11.2. Pertinence to other laws.
All signs shall be subject to Chapter 70, Zoning, and any regulations the
Board of Selectmen shall adopt regulating signs projecting into on or
over public streets or ways under MGL c. 85, §§ 8 and 9, as amended.
A.
This chapter shall not be construed as to be inconsistent with or in
contravention to MGL c. 93, §§ 29 through 33, inclusive, as amended.
B.
Attention is called to the Rules and Regulations of the Outdoor
Advertising Board for signs which may also be subject to the
jurisdiction of that Board.
C.
Whenever this chapter imposes greater restrictions on signs that in any
way that conflict with any other bylaw, this chapter shall prevail.
D.
§ 53-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-11.2
1:99
Chapter 56
SOLID WASTE
§ 53-11.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 53-11.2
1:100
ARTICLE I
Littering
[Adopted 2-18-1946 ATM, Art. 40, as Bylaw 6]
§ 56-1. Litter by vehicles transporting garbage and rubbish.
No person shall transport papers, garbage or rubbish of any kind whatever
in an automobile or any other vehicle on any street, road or highway of
the town unless the contents of said vehicle have been and are so covered
and protected that they cannot fall or be blown out by wind or in any other
manner upon said street, road or highway.
§ 56-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:101

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 5-9-1989 ATM, Art. 36]
§ 56-2. Separation of waste material required.
In order to implement a program of recycling in conjunction with ordinary
waste disposal, residents and businesses in town shall separate waste
material into the following categories before depositing same for disposal:
§ 56-3. Violations and penalties.
If no separation takes place, waste material shall not be accepted at the
disposal location. Violators shall be subject to fines not exceeding $300 per
violation.
§ 56-4. Powers of Board of Health.
The Board of Health will be responsible for the promulgation of regulations
consistent herewith and enforcement of these provisions and shall have
the authority to add, alter or delete items to be separated (as markets for
recycled goods change).
§ 56-5. Severability.
This article and the various parts, sentences and clauses hereof are hereby
declared to be severable. If any part, sentence or clause is adjudged invalid,
it is hereby provided that the remainder of this article shall not be affected
thereby.
§ 56-6. When effective.
This article shall be in effect after the Board of Health has published a
public notice detailing the procedures and the starting dates.
A. Glass and cans.
B. Paper.
C. Other waste.
§ 56-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-6
1:103
Chapter 60
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles obstructing snow removal — See Ch.
64, Art. I.
Road construction standards — See Ch. 113.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 121, Art. I.
Acceptance of public ways — See Ch. 121, Art.
II.
§ 56-6 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 56-6
1:104
ARTICLE I
Coasting
[Adopted 2-18-1946 ATM, Art. 40, as Bylaw 5]
§ 60-1. Coasting restricted.
Coasting on sleds or bobsleds on or across any public street, road or
highway, or sidewalk thereon, is prohibited within the boundary limits of the
Fire District, except as may be permitted by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-1
1:105

ARTICLE II
Openings and Obstructions
[Adopted 2-26-1962 ATM, Art. 29]
§ 60-2. Permit required.
No person, other than an employee of the town acting in the discharge
of his duties, shall break or dig up the pavement or ground in any street
or way for which the town is legally responsible, or erect any staging or
building thereon, or place thereon any rubbish or materials, without first
obtaining from the Town Manager a written permit describing the space
in the street that may be so disturbed or occupied, and the length of time
such disturbance or occupancy may continue and such other provisions and
restrictions as the Town Manager may deem advisable, nor without filing
with the Town Manager a written agreement to comply strictly with the
terms of the permit and to indemnify the town against all loss, cost or
expense that it may suffer by reason thereof during such disturbance or
occupancy and for a period of two years after its termination.
§ 60-3. Fencing and lighting around street obstruction.
Whenever any street shall, by reason of any work done under any permit
granted as provided in the preceding section, be dug up, obstructed,
encumbered or otherwise rendered unsafe or inconvenient for travel, the
person receiving such permit shall put, and at all times keep up, a suitable
railing or fence around the section of the street so obstructed so long as the
same shall remain unsafe or inconvenient, and shall also keep an adequate
number of lighted lanterns, flares or flashing lights, fixed to such fence or
placed in some other suitable position to warn the public, during every night
from sunset to sunrise so long as such railing or fence is kept standing
or the obstruction remains. He shall also, within such reasonable time as
the Town Manager shall direct, clear or repair such street, in a manner
satisfactory to the Town Manager.
§ 60-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine not exceeding $20 for each offense, and each day that
the violation continues shall be considered as a separate violation and be
punishable as such.
§ 60-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-4
1:107

ARTICLE III
Road Acceptances
[Adopted 5-18-1993 ATM, Art. 26]
§ 60-5. Authority.
This article is adopted under the authority granted by Article 89 of the
amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution (the "Home Rule
Amendment").
§ 60-6. Applicability.
No roadway shall be voted upon for acceptance by the town unless such
roadway has been first determined by the Board of Selectmen and Planning
Board to be in compliance with the following minimum design and
construction requirements:
Design requirements. Compliance with the minimum design
requirements for streets, according to street type, as defined by
Chapter 70, Zoning, and specified in Ch. 170, Subdivision Rules and
Regulations, in effect at the time the roadway is proposed for
acceptance, except insofar as such requirements have been expressly
waived by the Planning Board, and where the Board of Selectmen
concur with such waivers, in writing, at the time the roadway is
proposed for acceptance.
A.
Construction standards. Compliance with the applicable Williamstown
Department of Public Works Road Construction Standards,13 in effect
at the time the roadway is proposed for acceptance, except insofar as
such standards may have been expressly waived by the Planning Board,
and where the DPW Director and Board of Selectmen concur with such
waivers, in writing, at the time the roadway is proposed for acceptance.
B.
Minor lanes. A roadway approved and constructed as a minor lane
under the minor lane residential development provisions of Chapter
70, Zoning, and Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, shall
be deemed not to comply with the minimum design and construction
standards described above and shall not be voted upon for acceptance
by the town until such time as the roadway has been brought into
compliance with the applicable Subdivision Rules and Regulations for
lanes and the Department of Public Works Road Construction
Standards in effect at the time the roadway is proposed for acceptance,
except as expressly waived under Subsections A and B above.
C.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 113, Road Construction Standards.
§ 60-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-6
1:109

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice on Right-of-Way
[Adopted 5-17-1994 ATM, Art. 25]
§ 60-7. Placement on town right-of-way prohibited.
No person other than an employee of the Town of Williamstown, or an
employee in the service of an independent contractor acting for the Town of
Williamstown, shall pile, push, blow or plow snow or ice onto a Town rightof-
way so as to impede the flow of traffic on such right-of-way.
§ 60-8. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates this article shall be subject to a fine of $25 for the first
offense, $35 for the second offense and $50 for the third and subsequent
offenses.
§ 60-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-8
1:111
Chapter 64
VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Snow and ice on rights-of-way — See Ch. 60,
Art. IV.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 130.
§ 60-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 60-8
1:112
ARTICLE I
Abandoned Vehicles
[Adopted 11-2-1958 STM, Art. 1]
§ 64-1. Removal of obstructing vehicles.
Any vehicle which is left on any street or highway so that it obstructs
traffic or interferes with the maintenance of that street or highway or the
removal or plowing of snow and ice from said street or highway may be
removed from said street or highway by direction of the Chief of Police or
the Highway Surveyor to some convenient place or a public garage
§ 64-2. Costs of removal.
The cost of said removal and of the storage charges, if any, shall be paid by
the owner or driver of such vehicle before such vehicle is turned over to the
owner or driver.
§ 64-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:113

ARTICLE II
Junk Vehicles
[Adopted 3-10-1969 ATM, Art. 12]
§ 64-3. License required.
No person or entity, corporate or otherwise, as owner or as one in control
of premises, shall keep in the open in any area of the Town of Williamstown
any junk automobile as defined in the following section, without being
licensed to do so under this article.
§ 64-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK AUTOMOBILE — One which is worn out, cast off or discarded and
which is ready for dismantling or destruction, or which has been collected
or stored for salvage, or for stripping in order to make use of parts thereof.
Any parts from such a vehicle shall be considered a junk automobile under
this article.
§ 64-5. Request for license for no more than one vehicle; appeal.
§ 64-6. Request for license to keep more than one vehicle.
A license to keep more than one junk automobile may be requested by filing
with the Town Clerk an application in writing to the Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing upon such request,
notice of which shall be given by publishing in a newspaper published or
circulated in Williamstown five days at least before the date of the hearing.
The cost of publishing shall be paid by the applicant for the license.
§ 64-7. Period of license; renewals.
The Board of Selectmen may grant a license for not over one year, upon
such conditions as the Board deems proper, to keep such junk automobiles
in the open, after the public hearing has been held and the Board
determines that the keeping of the same will not depreciate property values
in the area, or will not create a hazard to the public safety, or will not
become a public nuisance. Renewals of said licenses may be granted only
after the procedure set forth above is followed.
A license to keep no more than one junk automobile shall be requested
from the Chief of Police, who may issue said license under the terms
and standards set forth in § 64-7 of this article.
A.
The refusal to issue said license may be appealed by the Board of
Selectmen by filing an appeal with the Town Clerk within 20 days of the
refusal, and thereafter following the procedure for notice and hearing
set forth in § 64-6 of this article.
B.
§ 64-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-8
1:115
§ 64-8. Petition requesting license revocation.
Upon the filing with the Board of Selectmen of a petition signed by at
least 10 legal residents of Williamstown asking for revocation of any license
issued under this article, the Board shall call a public hearing to review
the conduct of the licensee under said license. If the Board determines that
the operation of the licensee under said license is such as to depreciate
property values in the area, or create a hazard to public safety, or constitute
a public nuisance, the Board may, by majority vote, revoke said license, such
revocation to be effective 30 days after the date of said vote.
§ 64-9. Exemptions.
The holder of a Class I, Class 2 or Class 3 license as defined in MGL C.140,
§ 58, is exempt from the provisions of this article in respect to the premises
specified in the license granted to him under § 59 of said chapter.
§ 64-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who violates this article shall be liable to a fine of $20,
and each day of violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 64-11. When effective.
This article shall become effective months after date of approval by the
Attorney General.
§ 64-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 64-11
1:116
Chapter 67
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and water — See Ch. 49.
Distribution of drinking water — See Ch. 137,
Art. I
Wells — Ch. 164.
§ 64-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-11
1:117

ARTICLE I
Water Supply Emergencies
[Adopted 5-22-1990 ATM, Art. 30]
§ 67-1. Authority.
This article is adopted by the Town of Williamstown under its home rule
posers, its police powers to protect health and welfare and its specific
authorization under MGL C. 40, §§ 21 and 21D.
§ 67-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect, preserve and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare whenever there is in force a state of water supply
emergency by providing for enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions,
requirements, provisions or conditions imposed by the town or by the
Department of Environmental Protection and included in the town's plan
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection to abate the
emergency.
§ 67-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The town's Board of Water Commissioners
or other department or board having responsibility for the operation and
maintenance of the water supply, the Health Department, the Town Police,
special police and any other locally designated body having police powers.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — A state of water supply
emergency declared by the Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to MGL C. 21G, § 15, or MGL C. 111, § 160, or by the
Governor.[Amended 3-23-1998 STM, Art. 2]
§ 67-4. Notification of emergency.
The following shall apply to all users of water supplies supplied by the town:
Following notification by the town of the existence of a state of water
supply emergency, no person shall violate any provisions, condition,
requirement or restriction included in a plan approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection which has as its purpose the
abatement of a water supply emergency.
A.
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition with
which users of water supplied by the town are required to comply to
abate a situation of water emergency shall be sufficient for purposes of
this article if it is published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the town or by such other notice as is reasonably calculated to reach
and inform all users of the town supply.
B.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-5
1:119
§ 67-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who violates this article shall be liable to the town
in the amount of $50 for the first violation and $100 for each subsequent
violation which shall inure to the town for such uses as the Board of
Water Commissioners may direct. Fines shall be recovered by indictment
or on complaint before the District Court or by noncriminal disposition
in accordance with MGL C. 40, § 21D. Each separate instance of
noncompliance following the issuance of any warning or citation pursuant
to this section shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 67-6. Right of entry.
Agents of the enforcement authority may enter any property for the purpose
of inspecting or investigating any violation of this article or enforcing
against the same.
§ 67-7. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provisions of this article shall not invalidate
any other portion, provision or section hereof.
§ 67-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 67-7
1:120
Chapter 70
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 29.
Noise — See Ch. 40.
Signs — See Ch. 53.
Sewers — See Ch. 117.
Food establishments — See Ch. 143.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 148.
Wells — See Ch. 164.
§ 67-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-7
1:121

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 70-1.1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by the provisions of the
Zoning Act, MGL C. 40A, as amended, and by Article 89 of the amendments
to the Massachusetts Constitution (the "Home Rule Amendment").
§ 70-1.2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to promote the health, safety, convenience
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Williamstown; to
protect and conserve the value of property within the Town; to preserve
and increase the beauty and amenities of the Town; to conserve, insofar
as possible, natural conditions and to secure safety from fire, congestion
or confusion, by encouraging the most appropriate uses of land within the
Town in accord with the objectives expressed in Section 2A of Chapter 808
of the Acts of 1975 and the provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 70-1.3. Applicability.
§ 70-1.4. Nonconformance.
Basic requirement. Any building or structure or use of a building,
structure or land or part thereof may be constructed, altered, enlarged,
repaired or moved, occupied and used only in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and MGL C. 40A.
A.
Reconciling conflicting bylaws. Where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use, height and the area of structures or the use of
premises than is imposed by other bylaws, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
B.
Applicability. Except as herein provided, provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to the following:
Lawfully preexisting structures and uses. Structures and uses
lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of the provision in
question.
(1)
Prior building permit or special permit. Structures and uses
lawfully begun under a building or special permit issued prior to
the first publication of notice of the required public hearing by
the Planning Board on the applicable zoning bylaw or amendment,
provided that such construction or use is commenced within six
months after the issuance of the permit, and in the case of
construction, completed within two years thereafter.
(2)
(3) Dwelling change.
A.
§ 70-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-1.4
1:123
The alteration, extension or structural change to a lawfully
preexisting nonconforming one-family dwelling, provided that
such alteration, extension or structural change does not
increase the nonconforming nature of such dwelling.
(a)
For the purpose of this section, the following activities are
deemed not to increase the nonconforming nature of the
dwelling. Such changes are permitted by right, subject to the
issuance of a building permit:
[1] Interior alterations, structural and nonstructural.
Extensions which do not violate the dimensional
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
[2]
(b)
Nonconforming lots.
Preexisting lots. Nonconforming lots recorded in the Registry
of Deeds and lots shown on a plan endorsed by the Planning
Board under the Subdivision Control Law14 are not subject to
later adopted provisions, to the extent and as provided by MGL
C. 40A, § 6.
(a)
Reestablishment of nonconforming lot (infill housing).
A legally created nonconforming lot not qualifying for the
above Section 6 exemptions may be separated in
ownership from adjacent lots and then developed for a
single-family residence, if authorized on special permit
granted by the Board of Appeals.
[1]
Decision on a special permit for such separation and
building shall be based upon the following, rather than
the more general criteria of § 70-8.4D. Such special permit
shall be granted if the Board determines that each lot will
have access and utility service comparable to that serving
nearby developed premises, and no congestion or health
or safety limitations would be created by development,
subject to such conditions as the Board may impose, which
conditions shall include that any subsequent construction
shall provide yards of dimensions no smaller than those
prevailing in the vicinity.
[2]
(b)
(4)
Alteration of nonconforming structures. Any nonconforming structure
may be altered, provided that the Board of Appeals grants a special
permit, following its determination that the alteration is not
substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood, applying the
criteria of § 70-8.4D. A special permit is not required for any
nonconforming structure whose only nonconformity is height and
B.
14.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81-A through 81-GG.
§ 70-1.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-1.4
1:124
whose use is exempt, within the meaning of MGL c. 40A, § 3.
[Amended 5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 29]
Extension of nonconforming structures and uses.
Structures. A nonconforming structure may be extended, provided
that:
The extension complies with the dimensional requirements of
the chapter of the underlying zoning district, and
(a)
The Board of Appeals grants a special permit following its
determination that the extension is not substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood, applying the criteria of
§ 70-8.4D.
(b)
A special permit is not required for any nonconforming
structure whose only nonconformity is height, and whose use
is exempt, within the meaning of MGL c. 40A, § 3. [Added
5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 29]
(c)
(1)
Single-family dwelling. A nonconforming single-family dwelling
which does not comply with (a) yard requirements, or (b) building
requirements, may be extended provided that (i) with respect to
yard requirements, such extension does not increase the degree
of the nonconformity, and (ii) with respect to either proposed
extension, the Board of Appeals grants a special permit following
its determination that such extension would not be substantially
more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing dwelling,
applying the criteria of § 70-8.4D. [Added 5-15-2001 ATM, Art.
2215]
(2)
Use. A nonconforming use may be extended, provided that the
Board of Appeals grants a special permit following its
determination that the extension is not substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood, applying the criteria of § 70-8.4D.
(3)
C.
Change of use.
A nonconforming use may be changed to a different nonconforming
use, provided that the Board of Appeals grants a special permit,
following its determination that the new use is not substantially
more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing use,
applying the criteria of § 70-8.4D.
(1)
The newly changed use shall be considered to be the
nonconforming use, and the previous nonconforming use shall not
be reestablished.
(2)
D.
E. Restoration.
15.Editor's Note: This article also renumbered former Subsection C(2) as C(3).
§ 70-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-1.4
1:125
Limitation. A structure which has been damaged or destroyed by
fire or other accidental or natural causes may be restored to its
original condition, regardless of any nonconformity of the structure
or its use, but only provided that either such work is started within
12 months of the damage and completed within two years of the
date of the damage.
(1)
Original condition. For these purposes, "original condition" means
conforming to the original footprint, no more than a 10% increase
above the cubage of the original building, and no increase in
nonconformance with yard requirements.
(2)
Other nonconformancies.
Noncompliance with current site development requirements, such
as parking, landscaping and lighting standards, does not make the
premises nonconforming in use or structure. Therefore, changes,
extensions or alterations to existing uses and structures do not
require a special permit simply because of such site development
noncompliance.
(1)
Any increase in the extent of noncompliance in site development
may be allowed only on special permit. Such special permit shall
be granted, provided that the Board of Appeals determines that
the proposed increase is not substantially more detrimental to the
neighborhood than the existing condition.
(2)
In the Village Business Districts, for properties whose buildings
abut Spring Street, no special permit shall be granted to increase
parking nonconformities that exist due to insufficient number of
parking spaces, except when the Board of Appeals finds that, in
addition to the criteria of § 70-8.4D virtually all of the use's parking
needs would be created after 6:00 p.m.
(3)
F.
Abandonment of nonconforming use.
Abandonment. A nonconforming use shall be considered
discontinued or abandoned whenever:
(a) It is not used for a period of 24 consecutive months, or
There is evidence of discontinuance or abandonment and it is
apparent that the owner does not intend to resume the use,
whichever occurs first.
(b)
(1)
Evidence of abandonment. In the administration of Subsection
G(1)(b) above, evidence of discontinuance or abandonment shall
be:
Bringing the use or other nonconformity into compliance with
this chapter.
(a)
(2)
G.
§ 70-1.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-1.4
1:126
Ceasing to be open for the conduct of business for a period of
six continuous months, and one or more of the following:
Removal of customary equipment, fixtures or supplies for
the operation of the use.
[1]
[2] Disconnecting electrical, gas or other utility service.
Failure to provide for operation in cold weather, such as
ceasing to heat the building at normal levels required by
health regulations or failing to provide snow removal.
[3]
Issuance of a notice of an unsafe structure by the Building
Commissioner. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38]
[4]
(b)
Action by Planning Administrator. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM,
Art. 38]
In the event that the Planning Administrator has evidence of
discontinuance or abandonment, he shall:
[1] Notify the owner of record, of the evidence, and
[2] Inquire about the owner's intent, and
[3] Inform him of the potential loss in nonconforming status.
(a)
Such owner shall be allowed a period of 30 days from the
receipt of such communication in which to respond and to take
action.
(b)
(3)
Change of ownership. The rights of a nonconforming use, structure, lot
development or parking area are not affected by a change in ownership,
tenancy or management unless such ownership, tenancy or
management is specifically a condition of the issuance of a permit.
H.
§ 70-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-1.4
1:127

ARTICLE II
Districts
§ 70-2.1. Establishment of districts.
§ 70-2.2. District purposes.
District purposes are as follows for the basic districts. Purpose or intent
for each of the overlay districts is stated in § 70-7.4, Overlay District
Requirements.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Town of Williamstown is divided
into the following types of basic districts:
Residential districts: [Amended 5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 35]
Rural Residence District 1 (RR1)
Rural Residence District 2 (RR2)
Rural Residence District 3 (RR3)
General Residence District (GR)
(1)
Nonresidential districts: [Amended 5-18-2010 ATM, Art. 27]
Limited Business District (LB)
Limited Industrial District (LI)
Tourist Business District (TB)
Village Business District (VB)
Planned Business District (PB)
(2)
Mixed use districts: [Added 5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 33]
Southern Gateway District
(3)
A.
In addition, there are the following overlay districts which are
superimposed over portions of the above districts: [Amended
5-18-2004 ATM, Art. 28; 5-15-2007 ATM, Art. 32; 5-17-2016 ATM,
Art. 35]
Floodplain District (FP)
Upland Conservation District (UC)
Mobile Home Park District (MHP)
Water Resource District 1 (WRD1)
Water Resource District 2 (WRD2)
Confined Aquifer District (CA)
Wellhead Protection District (WPD)
Cable Mills Redevelopment District (CMRD)
Waubeeka Overlay District (WOD)
B.
§ 70-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2.2
1:129
§ 70-2.3. Location of districts.
Rural Residence District 1 is intended to provide for residential
standards compatible with the rural and upland character of sensitive
environmental areas at the higher elevations of the Town.
A.
Rural Residence District 2 is intended as a district for typical rural uses
with which single-family homes are compatible.
B.
Rural Residence District 3 is intended to provide for the protection and
preservation of special community service districts from the dangers of
development in those districts exceeding the reasonable capacity of the
services, thereby rendering their benefits unavailable to the Town and
the rest of its inhabitants.
C.
General Residence District is intended to provide an area in the Town
where people can live who prefer not to live in a rural or semirural
atmosphere, or who prefer not to live in a sparsely populated area, and
to provide this area in such a manner and location that the character
of the Town will not be destroyed, and that the soil conditions can
accommodate the permitted density. [Amended 5-21-2013 ATM, Art.
3516]
D.
Limited Business District is intended to provide goods and services
at retail, in contradistinction to goods and services for businesses or
commercial enterprises.
E.
Limited Industrial District is intended for use by research laboratories,
office buildings and selected light industries which are compatible with
a low-density, rural residential community.
F.
Tourist Business District is intended to provide goods and services
primarily for transients and tourists.
G.
Village Business District is intended to accommodate a broad mixture
of uses in a compact pedestrian-oriented environment.
H.
Planned Business District is intended to accommodate a broad range of
uses in an environment allowing integrated planning of relatively large
parcels.17
I.
Southern Gateway District is intended to protect the scenic southern
entrance to Williamstown from overdevelopment while also ensuring
the viability of existing businesses and residences. [Added 5-21-2013
ATM, Art. 33]
J.
Basic districts. The basic zoning districts are hereby established as
shown, located, defined and bounded in the Williamstown Geographic
A.
16.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsections F through J as
Subsections E through I, respectively.
17.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection K, regarding the Business Campus District, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-18-2010 ATM, Art. 27.
§ 70-2.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-2.3
1:130
Information System (GIS) on a map entitled "Town of Williamstown –
Zoning Districts" and as subsequently amended in accordance with §
70-8.6, which is available for public view on the Town website and a
paper copy of which is on file with the Town Clerk. The Zoning Map,
together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby incorporated in
and made a part of this chapter. [Amended 5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 30]
Floodplain District. [Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 26]
The location of the Floodplain District is that area within the onehundred-
year flood level as shown on the maps entitled "Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map," including Panels 1 through 3; Town
of Williamstown Flood Insurance Rate Maps, including Zones A and
A1-30, dated April 3, 1984, as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, on file in the office of the Town Clerk. That
study shall be used in interpreting the location of and regulations
for the Floodplain District. [Amended 5-16-2006 ATM, Art. 39]
(1)
In Zones A, A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that have not had
a regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state,
local or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase
in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2)
B.
Water Resource and Confined Aquifer Districts. Water Resource
Districts 1 and 2 and the Confined Aquifer District are established
as shown in the Williamstown Geographic Information System (GIS)
on a map entitled "Town of Williamstown – Water Resources – Zoning
Overlay Districts," a paper copy of which is available for public view on
the Town website and within the office of the Town Clerk. [Amended
5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 30]
C.
Wellhead Protection District. The Wellhead Protection District is
established as shown in the Williamstown Geographic Information
System (GIS) on a map entitled "Town of Williamstown – Wellhead
Protection District," apaper copy of which is available for public view
on the Town website and within the office of the Town Clerk. Said map
is hereby incorporated into this chapter. [Amended 5-21-2013 ATM,
Art. 30]
D.
18The Cable Mills Redevelopment District is composed of land shown
on Lot 91, Map 121, Williamstown Assessors Atlas, as updated to 2007,
and to include Assessor's Parcels 131 - 901 through 906 in the Cable
Mills Redevelopment District, and on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
[Added 5-15-2007 ATM, Art. 32; amended 11-14-2017 STM, Art.
7]
E.
18.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding boundaries of the Station Mill
Redevelopment District, added 5-18-2004 ATM, Art. 28, was repealed 5-15-2007 ATM, Art.
29.
§ 70-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2.3
1:131
§ 70-2.4. District boundaries.
Waubeeka Overlay District is composed of land shown on the
Williamstown Assessor's Maps, as of the date of the passage of this
chapter, Map 303, Lot 51 and 17, and Map 304, Lot 30. [Added
5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 35]
F.
Layout center lines. Where the boundary lines are shown upon said map
within the street lines of public and private ways, or utility transmission
lines, the center lines of such ways or lines shall be the boundary lines,
unless otherwise indicated.
A.
Offset boundary lines. Boundary lines located outside such street lines
or transmission lines, and shown approximately parallel thereto, shall
be regarded as parallel to such lines, and dimensions shown in figures
placed upon said map between such boundary lines and such
transmission lines are the distance in feet of such boundary lines from
the center line of such streets, private ways or transmission lines, such
distances being measured at right angles to such lines unless otherwise
indicated.
B.
Property lines. Where the boundary lines are shown approximately on
the location of property or lot lines, and the exact location of property,
lot or boundary lines is not indicated by means of dimensions shown in
figures, then the property or lot lines shall be the boundary lines.
C.
Contour lines. Contour lines used as boundary lines are the elevation
above the datum sea level as indicated by the United States Geological
Survey map of the Williamstown Quadrant, dated 1960, on file in the
office of the Planning Board.
D.
Soil association lines. Soil association lines used as boundary lines are
the soil association boundary lines shown on the Soil Conservation
Service Map, dated August 1962, which is an overlay on the United
States Geological Survey map of the Williamstown Quadrant, dated
1960, on file in the office of the Planning Board.
E.
Other boundary lines. In all cases which are not covered by other
provisions in this section, the location of boundary lines shall be
determined by the distance in feet, if given, from other lines upon said
map, by the use of identification as shown on the map or by the scale of
said map.
F.
Wellhead Protection District boundary disputes.
If the location of the Wellhead Protection District boundary in
relation to a particular parcel is in doubt, resolution of boundary
disputes shall be through a special permit application to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Any such application for a special permit shall be
accompanied by adequate documentation.
(1)
G.
§ 70-2.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-2.4
1:132
§ 70-2.5. Divided lots.
The burden of proof shall be carried by the owner(s) of the parcel
in question to demonstrate where the Wellhead Protection District
boundary should be properly located.
(2)
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall retain qualified experts at the
reasonable expense of the owner(s) to evaluate the application
and submittals, except in those cases where such assistance is
determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals to be unnecessary due
to the simplicity of the case.
(3)
District boundary lines. Where a district boundary line divides any lot of
record existing at the time such boundary line is adopted, any building
or use permitted in either district shall be permitted for said lot within
a distance not exceeding 30 feet beyond the district boundary line.
All requirements of the district in which the use is located (including
lot area, frontage and yards) must be met without making use of land
beyond that thirty-foot distance. However, the lot shall be considered
as a whole in the case of a use allowed in both districts, in which event
the dimensional regulations of the district in which the majority of the
lot frontage lies shall apply to the entire lot.
A.
Town boundary line. When a lot is situated in part in the Town of
Williamstown and in part in an adjacent municipality or state, the
provisions of this chapter shall be applied to that portion of the lot lying
in the Town of Williamstown in the same manner as if the entire lot
were situated therein.
B.
§ 70-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2.5
1:133

ARTICLE III
Use Regulations
§ 70-3.1. General requirements.
Basic requirement.
Buildings or structures shall be constructed, and buildings,
structures or land shall be used, in whole or in part, only as
permitted under § 70-3.3, Use Regulation Schedule, except as may
be provided in § 70-1.4 for certain cases of nonconformity. Uses
permitted and uses allowed on special permit must also be in
conformity with all the density and dimensional regulations and
other pertinent requirements of this chapter.
(1)
Additional regulation of uses is found in various places in this
chapter. Attention is particularly drawn to:
(a) For the Rural Residence District 1: § 70-3.4A.
19For the Village Business District: § 70-3.4C. [Amended
5-19-2009 ATM, Art. 3220]
(b)
For locations in the Floodplain, Upland Conservation, Mobile
Home Park, Water Resource, Confined Aquifer Overlay, Cable
Mills Redevelopment Districts: § 70-7.4. [Amended
5-18-2004 ATM, Art. 28; 5-15-2007 ATM, Art. 29;
5-15-2007 ATM, Art. 32]
(c)
(2)
A.
Schedule notation. Notations in the Use Regulation Schedule shall
mean the following: [Amended 5-19-2009 ATM, Art. 32; 5-18-2010
ATM, Arts. 27, 32; 11-14-2017 STM, Art. 9]
Yes: A use permitted as a matter of right.
BA: A use allowable on special permit from the Board of Appeals.
SPS: A use permitted as a matter of right, except requiring a special
permit from the Board of Appeals if involving drive-in or drivethrough
facilities, or if the area created on the premises
subsequent to May 23, 1989, would exceed the following:
— PB District: 20,000 square feet of cumulative gross floor area
— LI District:
1) Research and development or manufacturing for
renewable energy: 50,000 square feet of cumulative gross
floor area.
B.
19.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(2)(b), regarding the Business Campus District, was
repealed 5-18-2010 ATM, Art. 27. This article also redesignated former Subsection A(2)(c)
and (d) as Subsection A(2)(b) and (c), respectively.
20.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsection A(2)(c) as Subsection
A(2)(d).
§ 70-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3.1
1:135
§ 70-3.2. Interpretation.
§ 70-3.3. Use Regulation Schedule. [Amended 5-18-1993 ATM, Art.
27; 5-20-1997 ATM, Art. 23; 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25; 5-21-2002
ATM, Art. 21; 5-20-2003 ATM, Art. 24; 5-20-2008 ATM, Art. 28;
5-18-2010 ATM, Arts. 27, 29, 31, 32; 5-17-2011 ATM, Arts. 31, 32,
33; 5-15-2012 ATM, Arts. 30, 31, 32, 33; 5-21-2013 ATM, Arts. 33,
34, 35; 5-20-2014 ATM, Arts. 35, 36; 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 39;
5-17-2016 ATM, Arts. 31, 32, 33; 5-16-2017 ATM, Art. 36;
11-14-2017 STM, Arts. 6, 9]
Use Regulation Schedule
Town of Williamstown
§ 70-3.3. USE REGULATION
SCHEDULE Districts
RR1
RR2
RR3 GR LB SG VB PB LI
Items which include defined terms are
printed in italics.
USES NOT LISTED No No No No No No No No
§ 70-3.3A Principal uses
(See § 70-3.3B for accessory uses.)
2) Other uses: 20,000 square feet of cumulative gross floor
area.
— VB District: 5,000 square feet of building area
— LI or PB District: 20,000 square feet of cumulative gross floor
area.
— VB District: 5,000 square feet of building area.
— SG District: 20,000 square feet of gross square floor area.
PB: A use allowable on special permit from the Planning Board.
No: A prohibited use.
Uses not listed. Uses which cannot be classified under any category in
§ 70-3.3, Use Regulation Schedule, are prohibited. Such determination
is made by the Planning Administrator, subject to appeal to the Board
of Appeals, as provided at § 70-8.3B(1).21 [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM,
Art. 38]
A.
21.Editor's Note: Original Section 3.2.2, Uses classified in more than one category, was
repealed 5-17-1994 ATM, Art. 29.
§ 70-3.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-3.3
1:136
Use Regulation Schedule
Town of Williamstown
§ 70-3.3. USE REGULATION
SCHEDULE Districts
RR1
RR2
RR3 GR LB SG VB PB LI
(1) RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family dwelling Yes Yes Yes No Yes No No No
New two-family dwelling No BA2 Yes No BA No No No
Conversion of existing single-family
dwelling into two-family dwelling [See
§ 70-7.1D(2)]
No Yes Yes No Yes Yes No No
Creation of a detached second
dwelling unit by conversion of existing
buildings [See § 70-7.1D(3)]
No BA2 BA2 No BA BA2 No No
Multifamily dwelling:
Within major residential
development guidelines (See
§ 70-7.1C)
BA BA BA No BA No No No
Elderly housing(See § 70-7.1E.) No No BA No No No No No
Other multifamily (See § 70-7.1G.) No No BA No No No No No
Multifamily dwellings within business
districts by conversion of existing
building or new consruction (See
§ 79-7.1H.)
No No No SPS BA No SPS No
Dwelling units located above the first
story of a nonresidential use (See
§ 70-7.1H.)
No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes No
Mobile home park:
Within Mobile Home Park Overlay
District (See § 70-7.4C.)
BA BA BA BA BA BA BA BA
Elsewhere No No No No No No No No
Mobile home:
Within mobile home park Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Elsewhere:
For up to 12 months while
residence is being reconstruction
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Other cases No No No No No No No No
§ 70-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3.3
1:137
Use Regulation Schedule
Town of Williamstown
§ 70-3.3. USE REGULATION
SCHEDULE Districts
RR1
RR2
RR3 GR LB SG VB PB LI
Major residential development PB PB PB No PB No No No
Minor lane residential developments No PB PB No PB No No No
Assisted living residence
New construction or conversion of
existing building (See § 70-7.1F.)
No BA BA No BA No No No
Conversion of existing hotel, motel or
nursing home (See § 70-7.1F.)
No No No No No No BA No
Telecommunications (See § 70-7.2F)
Teleports No No No No No No No No
Facilities SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Towers SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Eligible facilities request Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
(2) BUSINESS USES
Gift shop, antique shop and place for
display or sale of handicrafts
No No No Yes3 Yes3 SPS3 SPS3 No
Retailing local crafts (See § 70- 7.2A.) No No No BA BA BA BA BA
Salesroom for automobiles, boats,
farm implements and similar
equipment
No No No BA No No BA No
Gasoline service station, garage or
repair shop (See § 70-7.2B.)
No No No BA No No BA No
Retail distribution of petroleum
products as the principal use (but not
gasoline service stations and garages)
No No No No No No No SPS
Building materials salesroom,
contractors storage warehouse and
building
No No No No No No No SPS
Funeral home No No BA BA No No BA No
Mortuary or crematory No No No BA No No BA No
Restaurant
Service for consumption within the
building
No No No Yes Yes SPS SPS No
§ 70-3.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-3.3
1:138
Use Regulation Schedule
Town of Williamstown
§ 70-3.3. USE REGULATION
SCHEDULE Districts
RR1
RR2
RR3 GR LB SG VB PB LI
More than incidental service for
consumption outside building
No No No BA No SPS SPS No
Boardinghouse or rooming house
For not more than four persons, in
a house also occupied as a private
residence
No Yes Yes BA Yes No No No
Tourist home BA BA BA BA BA SPS SPS No
Hotel or motel No No No BA SPS SPS SPS No
Theater, hall, bowling alley, skating
rink, club or other place for exercise,
amusement or assembly
No No No BA No SPS SPS No
Business office
500 square feet gross floor area or
less
No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
More than 500 but less than 5,000
square feet gross floor area
No No BA Yes BA Yes Yes Yes
More than 5,000 square feet gross
floor area
No No No BA BA Yes Yes Yes
Medical office
500 square feet gross floor area or
less
No BA BA Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
More than 500 but less than 5,000
square feet gross floor area
No No BA Yes BA Yes Yes Yes
More than 5,000 square feet gross
floor area
No No No BA BA Yes Yes Yes
Bank No No No Yes No SPS SPS No
Other retail or service:
Principally within buildings
Principally outdoors
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
SPS
No
SPS
No
No
No
Passenger depot, terminal No No No BA No No No No
Bus or taxi station No No No No No SPS SPS No
§ 70-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3.3
1:139
Use Regulation Schedule
Town of Williamstown
§ 70-3.3. USE REGULATION
SCHEDULE Districts
RR1
RR2
RR3 GR LB SG VB PB LI
Weddings and family celebrations on
farms (See § 70-7.2H.)
No BA No No No No No No
Small concerts on farms (See
§ 70-7.2I.)
No BA No No No No No No
Self storage No No No No No No Yes No
Marijuana retail No No No No BA No BA No
Marijuana production facility No BA No No No No No BA
Marijuana testing facility No No No No No No No BA
(3) INDUSTRIAL USES
Medical, dental or research laboratory No No No No No No No SPS
Printing or publishing establishment:
Under 2,000 square feet leasable
floor area
No No No Yes No SPS SPS SPS
Others No No No No No No No SPS
Manufacturing, wholesale distribution
Local crafts (See § 70-7.2A.) No No No BA BA BA BA SPS
Others No No No No No No No SPS
Storage yard No No No No No No No SPS
Public utility or communications No BA5 BA BA BA SPS SPS SPS
Research and development or
manufacturing for renewable energy
No No No No No No No SPS
(4) INSTITUTIONAL USES
Religious or educational use exempted
from prohibition by MGL c. 40A, § 3
Yes Yes Yes Yes — Yes Yes Yes
Day-care center (See also family daycare
home under Accessory Uses.)
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Other school, including nursery or
kindergarten school
No BA BA No BA No No No
School or college dormitory No BA BA BA No No No No
§ 70-3.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-3.3
1:140
Use Regulation Schedule
Town of Williamstown
§ 70-3.3. USE REGULATION
SCHEDULE Districts
RR1
RR2
RR3 GR LB SG VB PB LI
Fund-raising event, such as a festival,
art show, street dance, etc., sponsored
by a nonprofit organization (See
§ 70-7.2C.)
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SPS SPS Yes
Municipal use, nonprofit museum,
park, playground
BA BA BA BA BA BA BA BA
Membership club No No BA BA BA BA BA No
Creative or physical arts studios and
classes1
No BA BA No BA Yes Yes No
Cemetery, hospital, sanitarium,
nursing home or other medical
institution, including nonprofit
research laboratory or charitable
institution
No BA No BA BA BA BA No
(5) EXTENSIVE USES
Conservation areas for water, water
supply, plants and wildlife, and dams
necessary for achieving this purpose
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, orchards, nurseries,
forestry, or tree farms (See § 70-7.2D.):
On parcel of five acres or larger Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Piggery on smaller parcel Yes No No No No No No No
Other livestock raising on smaller
parcel
Yes Yes BA BA Yes BA BA BA
Other agriculture on smaller
parcel
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Hunting (where legally permitted),
fishing, hiking, nature study and
similar recreation
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Veterinary hospital, boarding stable
and kennel, provided that no buildings
or unfenced animals are within 100
feet of a district prohibiting this use
No BA No No BA No No No
§ 70-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3.3
1:141
Use Regulation Schedule
Town of Williamstown
§ 70-3.3. USE REGULATION
SCHEDULE Districts
RR1
RR2
RR3 GR LB SG VB PB LI
Picnic area BA BA BA BA BA BA BA BA
Recreation, including golf course, ski
area and tows, park (but not
amusement park), provided that no
buildings are within 100 feet of a
district prohibiting this use
BA BA BA BA BA BA BA BA
Day camp, overnight camp and camp
site where tents or Adirondack-type
trail shelters are used, provided that
no buildings are within 100 feet of a
district prohibiting this use
BA BA No BA BA BA BA BA
Campground No No No No No No No No
Earth removal (See § 70-7.2E.) BA BA BA BA BA BA BA BA
§ 70-3.3B ACCESSORY USES
Any use allowed by right as a principal
use
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Accessory farm outlet (See § 70-7.2D.) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Garage, yard or tag sales Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Family day-care home Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Other accessory day care
Professional office
Yes
No
Yes
BA
Yes
BA
Yes
Yes
Yes
BA
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Home occupation with no more than
one nonresident employee, or with no
client traffic on site.
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Home occupation with more than one
nonresident employee, or with client
traffic on site.
BA BA BA BA BA Yes Yes BA
Scientific research and development
(See § 70-7.3B.)
BA BA BA BA BA BA BA BA
The parking of vehicles with a gross
vehicle weight rating of 13,000 lbs. or
less, used by an occupant of the
premises
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Parking of larger vehicles Yes No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
§ 70-3.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-3.3
1:142
Use Regulation Schedule
Town of Williamstown
§ 70-3.3. USE REGULATION
SCHEDULE Districts
RR1
RR2
RR3 GR LB SG VB PB LI
Parking area or garage for use of
employees, customers or visitors
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SPS SPS SPS
Cafeteria for employees and other
occupants of the site, when contained
in the same structure as a permitted
use
No Yes Yes Yea Yes SPS SPS SPS
Keeping of pets and animals for use of
the residents of the premises
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SPS SPS SPS
Access to a permitted use in another
district
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Other use customarily accessory to a
permitted use, but not an airport or
heliport
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SPS SPS SPS
Canopy-mounted solar photovoltaic
systems
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Building- or roof-mounted solar energy
collection systems
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Small-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic systems
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Medium-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic systems
BA Yes BA BA BA No Yes Yes
Large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic systems
No Yes No No No No Yes Yes
§ 70-3.3C OTHER USES
Wind-generated energy production
facilities (See § 70-7.2G)
BA BA* NO NO No NO NO NO
Small-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic systems
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Medium-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic systems
BA Yes BA BA BA No BA Yes
Large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic systems
No BA No No No No BA Yes
§ 70-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3.3
1:143
* Not permitted in RR-3.
1 Creative or physical arts studios and classes shall include, without limitation, such uses as dance,
music, exercise, yoga, craft or art.
2 Provided that the Board of Appeals finds no health, safety, or congestion problems would be created.
3 Provided that all displays are within the building.
4 (Reserved)
5 Provided that there are no storage or service yards.
§ 70-3.4. Basic district special requirements.
Rural Residence District 1.
Prohibited development and activity. The following are not allowed
in the Rural Residence District 1, whether as a principal use, an
accessory use or as an attribute of a use.
(a) Public landfills.
(b) Storage of salt and road deicing chemicals.
Any building, structure, parking area, land disturbing activities
or excavations within 75 feet of the normal high-water line of
any water body or watercourse.
(c)
Any animal feedlots or confinement areas, or storage of
manure or drainage from such activities within 75 feet from
the seasonal high-water line of all water bodies and
watercourses.22
(d)
(e) The disposal of solid waste, other than brush and stumps.
The storage and/or sale of petroleum or any refined petroleum
product except as incidental to a permitted activity.
(f)
The dumping of snow contaminated by deicing chemicals
which is brought in from outside the district.
(g)
The storage of any hazardous material except as incidental to
a permitted use, or the disposal of any hazardous material, as
defined in Article IX.
(h)
(1)
Development requirements. All construction in the RR1 District
shall conform to the following requirements:
The total of all construction and paving of all kinds shall render
a total of not more than 5% of the total lot area substantially
impervious to the infiltration of water.
(a)
(2)
A.
22.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 10, Animals, Art. I, Poultry.
§ 70-3.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-3.4
1:144
Site grading shall result in no unretained slope greater than
25%. All slopes shall be vegetated or otherwise protected in
such a manner as to prevent erosion both during construction
and in long-term use.
(b)
No special permit may be granted for increasing peak rates of
runoff, as is otherwise authorized at § 70-5.3B.
(c)
No petroleum products of any kind shall be stored in
underground tanks or containers.
(d)
23Village Business District. [Amended 5-19-2009 ATM, Art. 32]
Spring Street development requirements.
Height requirements: For properties fronting on Spring Street,
height to 50 feet and up to four stories is allowed, and may
be increased to 60 feet, not to exceed four stories, on special
permit from the Board of Appeals.
(a)
Corner visibility: Properties fronting on Spring Street are
exempt from the corner visibility development requirements of
§ 70-4.2C.
(b)
Stormwater management: Notwithstanding § 70-5.3B, in the
Village Business District, for properties fronting on Spring
Street, an increase over predevelopment runoff peak is
permitted, provided:
The system is connected to the municipal stormwater
system; and
[1]
Approval to connect the system has been obtained, in
writing, from the Director of the Department of Public
Works.
[2]
(c)
Mixed Use development: Properties fronting on Spring Street
are permitted to have residential living areas above the first
floor, provided that the first floor is occupied by a
nonresidential use, and are exempted from the requirements
of § 70-7.1H(2).
(d)
Parking requirements: Properties fronting on Spring Street
shall comply with § 70-6.1D(2), District Parking Exceptions:
Spring Street parking requirements. [Added 5-18-2010
ATM, Art. 30]
(e)
The area of the Village Business District within 100 feet offset
from the center line of the spur of Denison Park Drive that
connects Knolls Road to the Oakley Center shall be maintained
(f)
(1)
B.
23.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the Business Campus District, was
repealed 5-18-2010 ATM, Art. 27. This article also redesignated former Subsection C as
Subsection B.
§ 70-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3.4
1:145
as a green space within which educational uses, structures,
and improvements are permitted, but the following are
prohibited: commercial uses, structures, and improvements
other than gardens or other landscaped areas, sidewalks or
other walkways, catch basins or other stormwater
management structures, and fire lanes, turnarounds, or other
drives for emergency access. [Added 5-17-2016 ATM, Art.
34]
§ 70-3.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-3.4
1:146
ARTICLE IV
Intensity Regulations
§ 70-4.1. Height regulations.
Basic limitation. The height of any building or structure shall not
exceed 35 feet, or 2 1/2 stories in the case of homes of conventional
design, or three stories above the average ground level in the case
of split-level design, except that in no case shall the height exceed
the limits permitted by Sections 35A to 35D, inclusive, of Chapter 90,
and any more restrictive amendments thereto, of the General Laws of
Massachusetts.
A.
Height modifications. [Added 5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 2924 ]
Intent. The intent of these modifications is to assure that all
structures in Williamstown fit into their surroundings in terms of
scale and mass and that viewsheds are maintained.
(1)
Village Business District. In the Village Business District, building
height may be increased to 40 feet. For properties fronting on
Spring Street, refer to § 70-3.4C(1)(a). [Amended 5-19-2009
ATM, Art. 32]
(2)
In the Cable Mills Redevelopment District, the height of the main
buildings (Buildings 2-6) shall not exceed 62 feet. [Added
5-15-2007 ATM, Art. 3225]
(3)
Height increase by special permit. In all districts except Village
Business and Rural Residence 1, building height (except one- and
two-family dwellings) may be increased to 45 feet, provided that
the Board of Appeals grants a special permit, based upon the
following criteria, in addition to the general special permit criteria
of § 70-8.4:
Siting. The building will be sited to take advantage of
topographic features, such as slopes, which can mitigate its
height and bulk.
(a)
Setbacks. The front setback will be no less than the setback
of adjacent buildings or the required setback (§ 70-4.3),
whichever is greater. Side and rear setbacks will preserve
access of adjoining premises to light and air and to allow for
landscaping consistent with the standard of Subsection (4)(d).
(b)
Building design. The exterior design will reduce the apparent
height and bulk of the building. Design features may include
emphasis on architectural elements (such as windows, entries,
(c)
(4)
B.
24.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsections B and C as Subsections C
and D, respectively.
25.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsection B(3) and (4) as Subsection
B(4) and (5), respectively.
§ 70-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4.1
1:147
§ 70-4.2. Area, frontage, yard and floor area requirements.
balconies, etc.) that divide the building into smaller pieces,
articulated rooflines, selection of facade material and color.
Applicants are required to present plans that demonstrate
consistency with this objective.
Landscaping. Landscaping should reduce the apparent height
and bulk of the building. Landscape design will include large
trees, singly or in clumps, arranged to break up the mass of the
building and provide a more human scale.
(d)
All special permit submittals shall include the following:
A locus plan, in accordance with the requirements of
§ 70-8.2B(1).
(a)
Plans showing predevelopment and proposed contours of the
land, locations and details of landscaping.
(b)
Plans showing detailed exterior elevations of all proposed
buildings.
(c)
A three-dimensional representation of the building,
postdevelopment topography and landscaping features of the
site and neighboring properties (within 300 feet).
(d)
(5)
Method of measurement. Height shall be measured as the vertical
distance from the average ground elevation around the exterior walls
of the structure or, in the case of built up land, the highest elevation at
the site prior to such change in contour, to the highest point of the roof
surface in the case of a flat roof, and to the mean height between eaves
and ridge in the case of a pitched roof.
C.
Exclusions. Limitations of height shall not apply to spires, domes,
steeples, radio towers, chimneys, broadcasting and television antennae,
bulkheads, cooling towers, ventilators, silos, temporary anemometers
used for the collection of wind data to site a wind-generated energy
production facility, and other appurtenances usually carried above the
roof. [Amended 5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 29; 5-20-2003 ATM, Art. 25]
D.
§ 70-4.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-4.2
1:148
Applicability. The erection, extension, alteration, placement or moving
of a structure or the creation or change in size or shape of a lot (except
through a public taking) must meet the requirements of this article
except for lot line changes which neither create additional lots nor
increase nonconformity, and except as otherwise expressly provided in
MGL c. 40A, § 6, or in this chapter (e.g., § 70-1.4B, authorization for
Board of Appeals approval of expansion of a nonconforming structure).
A.
Accessory buildings and structures. [Amended 5-17-2005 ATM, Art.
26]
Attached. An accessory building or structure attached to its
principal building shall be considered an integral part thereof,
and as such shall be subject to the front, side, and rear yard
requirements applicable to the principal building.
(1)
Detached. Except as modified by Subsections 70-42B(3 and 4)
below, detached accessory buildings or structures may be erected
in the rear and side yard areas (and front yard with Board of
Appeals approval) not closer than 15 feet to the property lines.
(2)
In General Residence Districts, on lots with a maximum frontage
of 80 feet and lot area of 10,000 square feet or less, one detached
accessory building, used for storage, with a building area of 120
square feet or less may located four feet from rear and side
property lines. [Amended 5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 35]
(3)
In General Residence Districts, on lots with a maximum frontage
of 80 feet and lot area of 10,000 square feet or less, one detached
accessory building, used for storage or a garage with a building
area of 121 to 300 square feet may be located six feet from rear and
side property lines provided: [Amended 5-21-2013 ATM, Art.
35]
(a) Building height shall not exceed 14 feet;
(b) The length of the building does not exceed twice the width;
(c) The use of the building must remain garage or storage;
The Board of Appeals grants a special permit based on the
following criteria:
The building exterior preserves and complements the
dwelling through architectural style and scale; and
The building will not be detrimental to the neighborhood.
(d)
(4)
B.
Corner visibility. On a corner lot, in order to provide visibility
unobstructed at intersections, no sign, fence, wall, tree, hedge or other
vegetation, and no building or other structure more than three feet
above the established street grades, shall be erected, placed or
maintained within the area formed by the intersecting street lines and a
C.
§ 70-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4.2
1:149
straight line joining said street lines at points which are 25 feet distant
from the point of intersection, measured along said street lines.
Multiple buildings and uses.
Preexisting dwellings. A lot on which two or more detached
dwelling buildings existed prior to February 28, 1955, may be
divided into as many lots as there were detached dwelling buildings
thereon, provided that the lot is divided in such manner that all
resulting lots conform as nearly as possible to area and frontage
requirements, said determination to be made by the Planning
Board. [Amended 5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 30]
(1)
Single-family dwellings. Not more than one single-family dwelling
shall be erected on a lot unless so authorized in a major residential
development approved under § 70-7.1C, Major residential
development, or authorized as a second dwelling unit approved
under the restrictions of § 70-7.1D, Second dwelling units.
[Amended 5-15-2012 ATM, Art. 30]
(2)
Other buildings. Two or more principal buildings other than singlefamily
dwellings may be erected on a lot, provided that, unless
otherwise stipulated in this chapter, lot area requirements are met
for each building without counting any lot area twice, and the
Planning Board has determined that each building will be served
with access, drainage and utilities functionally equivalent to that
required for separate lots under Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules
and Regulations.
(3)
D.
Special uses. Dimensional regulations for some specific uses differ from
those in § 70-4.3, Dimensional Schedule.
New (not converted) two-family dwellings must have lot area
equaling 50% more than that required at that location for a singlefamily
dwelling.
(1)
Multifamily dwellings in major residential developments must
comply with lot area and density requirements under § 70-7.1C(4).
Lot area and frontage requirements for other multifamily dwellings
are provided in § 70-7.1G.
(2)
E.
§ 70-4.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-4.2
1:150
§ 70-4.3. Dimensional Schedule.26
Mobile home parks are subject to the dimensional requirements
contained in regulations governing mobile home parks in
Williamstown, adopted by the Board of Selectmen, acting as the
Board of Health.
(3)
26.Editor's Note: The Dimensional Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 70-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4.3
1:151

ARTICLE V
Development Standards
§ 70-5.1. Procedures.
§ 70-5.2. Service adequacy requirements.
Applicability.
No building permit for development shall be granted in any district
unless the following requirements are met. Applicants may be
required to provide evidence of compliance, whether by example
of similar facilities or by engineering analysis. Issuance of a permit
on the basis of that evidence shall certify the Town's acceptance
of the conformity of the basic structure and equipment, but future
equipment changes and operating procedures must be such as to
also comply with these requirements.
(1)
Applicants are urged to confer with the Planning Administrator
regarding special permits likely to be required for major
developments or by this article, and the materials necessary for
submittal for those special permits and development plan review.
Following such conference, the applicant will receive a project
scoping letter outlining the scope and format of materials
appropriate to prepare and submit in applying. [Amended
5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38]
(2)
A.
Special permits.
Special permit granting authority. The special permit granting
authority (SPGA) for special permits required under Article V shall
be the Board of Appeals, except that if another agency is
designated under other provisions of this chapter as SPGA for the
use being applied for, that agency shall act as SPGA under this
article.
(1)
Submittals. Applicants shall submit such material, including
technical analyses, as is reasonably necessary for the SPGA to
make the determinations required below. That may include, as
germane, traffic impact analysis, water supply analysis, stormwater
control analysis, acoustic analysis, a lighting plan, visual analysis,
documentation of air or water quality modeling, identification of
any toxic or hazardous materials involved and substances to be
emitted, a description of precautions, handling practices,
monitoring and recovery systems proposed and, if appropriate,
a hazard prevention and contingency response plan. [Amended
5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 34]
(2)
B.
Access.
Building permits shall be issued only for development served by
a street providing "adequate access" as required at § 170-2.3 of
(1)
A.
§ 70-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5.2
1:153
Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations. Developments
requiring development plan review under § 70-8.2 of this chapter
shall be approved only if either the premises can be reached
without reliance on unpaved roads or reliance on such roads has
been authorized on special permit under § 70-5.1B upon
determination that such reliance poses no substantial hazard.
Applications for major developments (see definition, § 70-9.2) shall
include a traffic impact study, and such developments shall be
authorized only upon determination by the SPGA that, based upon
facilities as existing or committed to be improved by the Town or
the applicant, the following will be met:
Sight distance. Sight distance at the point of egress shall meet
AASHTO standards, based on observed (not posted) travel
speeds.
(a)
Volume/capacity ratio. On no lane of any street or intersection
shall the volume/capacity ratio be increased by more than 0.1
above baseline as a result of projected traffic, with "baseline"
being the ratio resulting from the traffic forecast in five years,
given development of the premises for single-family residences
as allowed under this chapter with no density bonuses.
(b)
(2)
Water supply.
Each development must be served either by an adequate public
water supply or by a private source approved by the Board of
Health or Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
(1)
Any major development (see definition, § 70-9.2) shall be
authorized only upon determination by the SPGA that, based upon
facilities as existing or committed to be improved by the Town
or the applicant, servicing this development will result in no
substantial limitation upon the public water system's ability to
adequately provide water service to other developed sites in the
Town, and that if relying upon private water supply, adequate
provisions have been made for fire protection and reliable supply
likely to meet DEP's Drinking Water Regulations of Massachusetts.
(2)
B.
Sewage disposal.
Each development must be served either by public sewerage or by
a private disposal system approved by the Board of Health or DEP.
(1)
Any major development (see definition, § 70-9.2) shall be
authorized only upon determination by the SPGA that, based upon
facilities as existing or committed to be improved by the Town,
other public agency or the applicant, servicing this development
will result in no substantial limitation upon the Town's ability to
adequately provide sewage collection service to other developed
sites in the Town. Where public sewerage is involved, the SPGA
(2)
C.
§ 70-5.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-5.2
1:154
§ 70-5.3. Environmental protection requirements.
shall consult with the Hoosic Water Quality District and the
Williamstown Department of Public Works in considering that
determination.
Water quality.
On-site sewage disposal systems.
On-site sewage disposal systems must be so designed and
located that no off-site water body or source of potable water
would have its water quality degraded below state or federal
drinking water standards as a result of development on that
site.
(a)
Any unsewered major development proposing effluent
discharge within 300 feet of an existing well or spring, or
for other major developments where the SPGA determines
such analysis to be necessary to determine compliance, a
hydrological analysis shall be submitted to the SPGA,
demonstrating either that discharges from the on-site disposal
system clearly could have no impact upon off-site water
supplies or that contaminants introduced into groundwater,
when diluted by the water also discharged from the
development plus rainwater recharged within the premises,
result in contaminant concentrations meeting all state and
federal standards for drinking water at all points beyond the
boundaries of the premises.
(b)
(1)
Drainage facilities. Drainage facilities shall employ sediment
basins, oil and gas traps and other facilities as necessary to assure
maintenance of the quality of surface and ground waters.
(2)
A.
Stormwater Management. [Amended 5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 34]
Purpose. This section establishes stormwater management
standards for construction and post-development conditions that
result from development and redevelopment projects to minimize
adverse impacts off site and downstream which would be borne by
abutters, and the general public.
(1)
Applicability. This section applies to the following development or
activities whether or not a building permit is required:
(a) The placement of more than 50 cubic yards of fill; or
The removal of more than 10,000 square feet of vegetative
cover, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing,
excavation, stockpiling material, grading, and related
activities.
(b)
(2)
(3) Exceptions. This section does not apply to:
B.
§ 70-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5.3
1:155
Construction or maintenance work to ways, utilities, or
structures owned by the Town of Williamstown.
(a)
Activities which require review by the Conservation
Commission under the Wetlands Protection Act 310 CMR
10.00.
(b)
Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural
use as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act 310 CMR 10.00.
(c)
Maintenance of existing landscaping, lawns, driveways, and
garden areas of single- or two-family dwellings.
(d)
The construction of fencing that will not substantially alter
existing terrain or drainage patterns.
(e)
Construction of utilities, other than drainage, which will not
alter drainage patterns.
(f)
Logging or forestry activities undertaken under an approved
forest management plan.
(g)
Procedure.
No development shall be undertaken without review and
approval of a stormwater management plan.
(a)
For development that requires development plan review, the
plans shall be part of the development plan and the procedure
for development plan review (§ 70-8.2C and D) shall be
followed.
(b)
For plans not subject to development plan review three copies
of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted to
the Town Clerk, who shall transmit them to the Planning
Administrator.
(c)
(4)
Plans not subject to development plan review. The Planning
Administrator shall review the plans, for compliance with the
standards of this section. If it complies, and a building permit is
required, it will be forwarded to the Building Commissioner as part
of the building permit submittal package. If no building permit
is required, the Planning Administrator shall file the plans for
future reference for any required progress inspections. [Amended
5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38]
If the Planning Administrator finds the plan to be incomplete,
or otherwise noncompliant with the requirements of this
section, he shall notify the applicant of his decision and
reasons why he deems the plans noncompliant.
(a)
A list of noncompliant items or missing information shall be
provided to the applicant for corrections to the plan. Once the
(b)
(5)
§ 70-5.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-5.3
1:156
corrections have been made, the plan shall be approved, and
work may be commenced.
Review and decision shall be no later than 21 days from the
receipt of the complete plans.
(c)
The Planning Administrator may waive or modify the
information required based upon the size or complexity of the
proposed development or redevelopment.
(d)
Applicants are urged to confer with the Planning Administrator
to determine the scope of required submittals.
(e)
Stormwater management plan.
The stormwater management plan shall contain sufficient
information for the reviewer(s) (Planning Board or Planning
Administrator) to evaluate the environmental impact,
effectiveness, and acceptability of the measures proposed by
the applicant for reducing the adverse impacts from
stormwater.
(a)
Stormwater design shall be evaluated using the DEP
Massachusetts Storm Water Management Policy using the
applicable Best Practices (BMP) Guidelines, set forth in the
latest editions of the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook,
Volumes 1-3 ("Guidelines"), and its companion handbook,
Erosion and Sediment Control for Urban and Suburban Areas,
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
("Handbook"). Designs that comply with the Guidelines and
Handbook or do so to the maximum extent practicable shall be
presumed to comply with this bylaw.
(b)
Redevelopment of previously developed sites shall meet the
applicable Guidelines and Handbook standards, principally
Standards 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9, to the maximum extent practicable.
However, if it is not practicable to meet all standards, new
(retrofitted or expanded) stormwater management systems
shall, at a minimum, be designed to improve existing
conditions.
(c)
(6)
Stormwater management system design.
To the maximum extent practicable, stormwater management
systems shall be designed to minimize down-gradient impacts
from changes in runoff both during and after construction.
(a)
Plan contents.
The submittal package shall contain a construction period
management plan, sedimentation, and pollution
prevention and a post-development management plan, and
operation and maintenance plans.
[1]
(b)
(7)
§ 70-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5.3
1:157
Design parameters.
The post-development peak discharge rate is equal or less
than the pre-development rate from the two-year and tenyear
twenty-four-hour storms. If increased off-site flooding
will result from peak discharges from the one-hundredyear
twenty-four-hour storm, BMPs must be provided to
attenuate these discharges.
[1]
The annual recharge from the post-development site shall
approximate the annual recharge from pre-development
conditions based upon soil type. Post-development
infiltration volume of precipitation into the ground shall be
at least as much as infiltration pre-development.
[2]
At sites with Class D soil or bedrock above grade,
infiltration recharge systems are permitted.
[3]
The system shall remove 80% of the average annual postconstruction
load of total suspended solids (TSS).
[4]
The developer is strongly encouraged to utilize low-impact
development (LID) and nonstructural best management
practices (BMPs) whenever possible, to reduce costs and
to minimize disturbance to the site. LID practices include:
Whenever practicable, natural vegetation shall be
retained, protected and supplemented. The landdisturbing
activity should be fitted to the topography
and soils so as to create less erosion potential.
(i)
(ii) Keeping the disturbed area to a minimum.
Minimizing sedimentation by reducing the volume of
runoff and the contact of stormwater.
(iii)
Reducing curb and gutter drainage systems that
concentrate volume and velocity of runoff and volume
of sedimentation.
(iv)
Using mulching or temporary revegetation to
minimize erosion and sedimentation.
(v)
Slopes left exposed shall immediately be planted or
otherwise be provided with permanent ground cover.
(vi)
[5]
(c)
Plan changes.
The applicant shall notify the Planning Administrator in
writing of any change or alteration in the approved
stormwater management plan before any change or
alteration is made. The Planning Administrator shall
determine whether the change or alteration is significant.
[1]
(d)
§ 70-5.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-5.3
1:158
If deemed significant, an amended plan shall be filed and
approved as provided in § 70-8.2D.
The owner(s) of the storm management system shall notify
the Planning Administrator of changes in ownership or
assignment of financial responsibility.
[2]
The maintenance schedule may be amended by mutual
agreement of the Planning Administrator or Planning
Board, as applicable, and the responsible parties.
Amendments shall be in writing and signed by all
responsible parties.
[3]
Inspections. The Planning Administrator shall inspect the project at
the following stages:
(a) Existing conditions: prior to the approval of plan(s).
Erosion control: inspection to ensure erosion control practices
are in accord with the approved plan.
(b)
Backfill: prior to backfilling of any underground drainage or
stormwater conveyance structures.
(c)
Final: After the system has been constructed, the applicant
shall submit a record plan detailing the actual system as
installed. The Planning Administrator shall inspect the system
to confirm its as-built feature, and evaluate the effectiveness of
the system in an actual storm.
(d)
If the system is found to be compliant with the approved plans,
the Planning Administrator shall issue a certificate of
completion.
(e)
(8)
Erosion control.
Stabilizing. Any area of bare earth exposed through
nonagricultural building development must be permanently
stabilized through replanting, paving or other means of eliminating
wind or water erosion. Such stabilization must be completed prior
to building occupancy, or a performance bond must be posted in an
amount sufficient to assure completion of such work.
(1)
Erosion control plan. An erosion control plan shall be submitted
for every development which will expose more than 60,000 square
feet of bare earth during development through either removal or
filling on the same parcel or on contiguous parcels in the same
ownership, and for developments exposing 20,000 to 60,000 square
feet of bare earth where the Planning Board deems such plan
to be necessitated by slopes in excess of 10%, highly erodible
soils or other unusual conditions. Such plan shall have sufficient
information on existing and proposed topography, vegetation and
control measures to allow determination of compliance.
(2)
C.
§ 70-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5.3
1:159
Requirements. All construction must comply with the following:
Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall
be done in a way which will minimize soil erosion.
(a)
Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected and supplemented.
(b)
(c) The disturbed area shall be kept to a minimum.
Where necessary, temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall
be used to protect areas exposed during development.
(d)
Sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps)
shall be installed and maintained where necessary to remove
from runoff waters any sediment from land undergoing
development.
(e)
The angle of graded slopes and fills shall be no greater than the
angle which can be retained by vegetative cover or alternative
proposed erosion control devices or structures. In any event,
slopes left exposed must immediately be planted or otherwise
provided with permanent ground cover or other means
sufficient to retain erosion.
(f)
A ground cover sufficient to retain erosion must be planted or
otherwise provided within 30 working days, season permitting,
on any portion of the tract upon which further active
construction is not being undertaken.
(g)
The development plan or land-disturbing activity shall be fitted
to the topography and soils so as to create the least erosion
potential.
(h)
(3)
Impervious coverage.
Except in the Village Business District, which is exempt from
this limitation, impervious coverage shall not exceed the
following percentages of site area, where "impervious
coverage" is the area covered by building roof area plus paved
areas, "site area" is the smallest single rectangle enclosing
the area within which ground vegetation is removed for
excavation, grading, drives, lawns or gardens and average
slope is measured prior to site preparation.
Average Site Area Slope
Maximum Impervious
Coverage
8% or less 80%
10% 70%
12% 60%
14% 50%
(a)
(4)
§ 70-5.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-5.3
1:160
Average Site Area Slope
Maximum Impervious
Coverage
16% 40%
18% 30%
20% 20%
22% 10%
24% or more 0%
(b) Interpolated values shall be used for intermediate slopes.
Higher coverage may be authorized on special permit, which
shall consider specific site soils and geology, erosion control
measures, proposed drainage patterns, type of use and
experience on comparable sites.
(c)
Erosion control report. The Building Commissioner, Planning Board
(in doing development plan review under § 70-8.2), or the SPGA
in acting on a special permit may require a report on the erosion
control proposals by the Soil Conservation Service or others expert
in soil mechanics in cases where doubt as to adequacy of proposed
measures exists. Selection of techniques and determination of
adequacy of measures shall, unless otherwise specified, be
consistent with Guidelines for Soil and Water Conservation in
Urbanizing Areas of Massachusetts, USDA Soil Conservation
Service, 1975. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38]
(5)
Air quality. Any use whose emissions are such as to cause it to be
classified as a major new stationary source of air pollution, as defined
by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the Clean Air
Act, and any use required to apply to DEP under 310 CMR 7.00 or
to EPA under Section 112 of the Clean Air Act for permission to emit
asbestos, benzene, beryllium, mercury, vinyl chloride or radionuclides
shall be permitted only if granted a special permit under § 70-5.1B,
upon determination by the SPGA that compliance with the
requirements of those agencies is assured and that health and safety
are adequately protected.
D.
Odors. No nonagricultural use shall cause the emission of odors
detectable more than 200 feet beyond the boundary of the premises
for receptors within a Limited Industrial District or more than 100 feet
beyond the boundary of the premises for receptors elsewhere.
E.
Plants and animals. Location and design shall not cause avoidable
damage to wildlife habitats or corridors, or to any plant species listed
as endangered, threatened or of special concern by the Massachusetts
Natural Heritage Program, or to any tree exceeding 24 inches trunk
diameter 4 1/2 feet above grade. Major developments must submit
documentation to the SPGA of having consulted with the Conservation
Commission and the Massachusetts Natural Heritage Program
F.
§ 70-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5.3
1:161
§ 70-5.4. Other design requirements.
regarding these considerations, and that the proposed site either
contains no such habitats or materials or that all feasible efforts to
avoid, minimize or compensate for damage have been reflected in the
proposal.
Hazardous materials.27 Use of premises involving one or more of the
following shall be permitted only if granted a special permit under
§ 70-5.1B. Such special permits shall be granted if the SPGA finds
that the proposed use will not cause harm or adverse disturbance
to the environment or to other premises, will not jeopardize health
or safety either on or off premises, and that either any control or
safety systems being relied upon are fail-safe or redundant, or it has
been demonstrated that there would be no adverse health or safety
consequences beyond the boundaries of the premises in the event of
system failure, in light of on-site decay, dilution or dispersion.
Hazardous materials manufacture. Manufacturing as the principal
use of the premises, if the products manufactured are either:
(a) When wastes, regulated as hazardous under MGL. c. 21C or
Substances listed on the Massachusetts Substance List
contained in 105 CMR 670.000, Appendix A.
(b)
(1)
Keeping of flammables. Keeping of flammable fluids, solids or
gasses in quantities exceeding four times that requiring licensing
under 527 CMR 14.00, except for storage of fuel28 for consumption
on the premises or by vehicles operated incidental to the principal
use of the premises.
(2)
Uses requiring licensing. Any use for which licensing is required
under 310 CMR 30.800 to transport, use, treat, store or dispose of
hazardous waste (but not those excluded under 310 CMR 30.801).
(3)
G.
Site design. Site designs determined by the Planning Board in
performing development plan review under § 70-8.2 to not comply with
one or more of the following guidelines shall be allowed only on special
permit under § 70-5.1B upon determination by the SPGA that, for the
given location, use and size of development, no design better serving
the purposes of this chapter is reasonably feasible.
Visibility reduced. Visibility of parking should be reduced through
location of not more than one-third of all parking within a required
front yard.
(1)
Vegetation. At least 50% of the required front yard area should be
vegetated.
(2)
A.
27.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 29, Hazardous Materials.
28.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 92, Fuel Storage Tanks.
§ 70-5.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-5.4
1:162
Building orientations. In General Residence Districts and
nonresidential districts, building orientations should be given
coherence through having the major facades of the building either
parallel or perpendicular to the street, if within 100 feet of it.
(3)
Existing grade. Existing grade should be changed minimally,
typically departing from existing grade by no more than six feet,
and resulting in a balance on site between cut and fill, except for
basement and cellar excavations.
(4)
Site circulation. Site circulation should have clarity from the
driver's perspective, aided by simple patterns and use of planting
islands or other devices in larger circulation areas.
(5)
Pedestrian access. Pedestrian access should be provided among all
facilities on the site, between them and the street and between
them and adjacent premises developed for uses open to the public.
(6)
Visibility minimized. In Rural Residence Districts, buildings should
be located to take advantage of topography and existing vegetation
to minimize visibility from the viewing street, in particular avoiding
siting so that building mass would extend above tree crowns as
seen from the viewing street.
(7)
Landscaping requirements.
Applicability. When any new building, addition or change of use
requires a parking increase of 10 or more spaces, plantings shall be
provided as specified below. The required plantings in such cases
shall include, as relevant, street, sideline, parking area and district
boundary planting areas or screening. In performing development
plan review, the Planning Board may authorize alternatives to the
following specifications, taking into consideration existing
vegetation, topography, soils and other site conditions, provided
that equivalent screening, shading and articulation are achieved.
(1)
Plants.
Type of materials. Required plants shall include both trees
and shrubs, and may include ones existing on the site. To be
credited towards meeting these requirements, trees must be
at least 2 1/2 inches in trunk diameter 4 1/2 feet above grade,
be of a species common in the area and be ones which reach
an ultimate height of at least 30 feet. To be credited towards
meeting these requirements, shrubs must be at least 24 inches
in height at the time of building occupancy, reach an ultimate
height of at least 36 inches and be of a species common in the
area.
(a)
Number of plants. The minimum number of trees in each
planting area equals planting area length (in feet) divided by
30, and the minimum number of shrubs in each planting area
(b)
(2)
B.
§ 70-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5.4
1:163
equals planting area length (in feet) divided by three. Plants
preferably shall be grouped, not evenly spaced, and shall be
located or trimmed to avoid blocking egress visibility. The
planting areas shall be unpaved except for access drives and
walks essentially perpendicular to the area.
Planting areas.
Street planting area. Street planting is required for premises
abutting any state-numbered highway. Required street
planting shall be provided within 15 feet of the street property
line along the entire street frontage except at drives.
(a)
Side-line planting area. Side line planting is required for
premises abutting any state-numbered highway. Required side
line planting shall be provided within five feet of the side lot
line between the front lot line and the building setback (as
built, not as required).
(b)
Parking area interior plantings. Parking lots containing 30 or
more spaces must be provided with plantings as follows: A
minimum of 2% of the interior area of the parking lot shall be
unpaved planting area. A minimum of one tree and four shrubs
exclusive of perimeter plantings must be planted for every
1,500 square feet of parking lot paved area. Planting areas
must each contain not less than 30 square feet of unpaved
soil area. Trees and soil plots shall be so located as to provide
visual relief and wind interruption within the parking area and
to assure safe patterns of internal circulation.
(c)
District boundary planting area. District boundary planting
is required on any premises being developed for a use not
allowed in a residential district which the premises abut or
extend into, unless in performing development plan review
the Planning Board determines that abutting property is
unbuildable or is visually separated by topographic features
or by isolation from the portion of the lot being developed.
Required planting shall be located within 10 feet of the
boundary.
(d)
Trail buffers. A buffer of land not less than 50 feet wide shall
be established between the trails that are designated in the
Williamstown Open Space Plan and adjacent buildings or
parking areas on both sides of these trails. Within the buffer
the clear-cutting of trees or the removal of the majority of
understory vegetation is prohibited.
(e)
Screening. Parking areas for five or more cars must be
screened from the street and from abutting premises unless
residential use of those premises is precluded by zoning,
current use or other restriction. "Screening" means materials
providing at least 90% opacity to six feet in height in all
(f)
(3)
§ 70-5.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-5.4
1:164
seasons. If such screening is not provided by the plantings
otherwise required, such plantings shall be supplemented with
additional plantings or fencing approved by the Planning Board
in performing development plan review.
Existing vegetation. The above requirements shall be met by
retention of existing plants where healthy plants meeting these
requirements exist at feasible locations. If located within 25 feet of
a street, no existing tree of 6 inches in trunk diameter or greater
(measured 4 1/2 feet above grade), dense hedgerow of four or more
feet in both depth and height or existing earth berm providing
similar visual screening shall be removed or have grade changed
more than one foot unless dictated by plant health, access safety or
identification of the premises.
(4)
Exceptions. Where plant materials as required would harmfully
obstruct a scenic view, substitution of additional low-level plantings
which will visually define the street edge or property line may be
authorized, provided that proposed buildings are also designed and
located to preserve that scenic view.
(5)
Maintenance. All plant materials required by this chapter shall be
maintained in a healthful condition. Dead limbs shall be promptly
removed, and dead plants shall be replaced at the earliest
appropriate season.
(6)
Agricultural protection. Development location and design shall be
configured to minimize displacement of agricultural activity,
nonagricultural use of locations having Class I or Class II agricultural
soils (as mapped by the SCS), or impairment of agricultural activity
because of the proximity between such activities and uses sensitive to
the impacts of those activities.
C.
Lighting.
Fixtures. Lighting fixture types are defined as follows:
(a) Type 1: no light cutoff.
Type 2: luminaire shielded such that peak candlepower is at
an angle of 75° or less from vertical, and essentially no light is
emitted above the horizontal.
(b)
Type 3: luminaire shielded such that total cutoff is at less
than 90° from vertical, and no light source is in direct view
of an observer five feet above the ground at any point off the
premises.
(c)
(1)
D.
§ 70-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5.4
1:165
Lighting limitations. The following limitations shall be observed
by all uses, unless granted a special permit under § 70-5.1B upon
determination by the SPGA that it is inherently infeasible for that
use (e.g. public outdoor recreation) to meet these standards, and
that all reasonable efforts have been made to avoid glare or light
overspill onto residential premises.
Lighting Limitations
District
Nonresidential Residential
Maximum luminaire
mounting height (feet)
Fixture Type 1 20 10
Fixture Type 2 30 15
Fixture Type 3 40 20
Maximum off-site overspill
(foot-candles)
Fixture Type 1 0.3 0.2
Fixture Type 2 1.0 0.3
Fixture Type 3 3.0 0.5
(2)
Glare restrictions. No flickering or flashing lights shall be
permitted. Processes, such as arc welding, which create light
flashes shall be confined within buildings or shielded to prevent
either direct glare or flashing reflected from the sky.
(3)
Exterior lighting plan. An exterior lighting plan is required for
applications requiring development plan review under § 70-8.2, to
include indication of location, mounting height and orientation of
luminaries, and sufficient technical information on the fixtures to
determine their type and resulting illumination levels.
(4)
E. Noise.29
29.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 40, Noise.
§ 70-5.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-5.4
1:166
Noise receptor zones. The following noise receptor zones are
hereby created:
(a) Noise Zone A: Nonresidential districts.
Noise Zone B: Locations in any residential district, but within
200 feet of a nonresidential district, or within 200 feet of a
state-numbered highway.
(b)
(c) Noise Zone C: All other locations.
(1)
Noise standards.
The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically
indicated, shall apply to noise as heard at any location off
the originating premises and within a designated noise zone.
No development shall be allowed which would result in the
following standards being exceeded by more than 20 db(A) at
any time, or by more than 10 db(A) for more than 10 minutes
in an hour, or at all for more than 30 minutes in an hour,
measured at any point off site, except for warning devices,
agricultural activity, temporary construction or maintenance
work, public events or other special circumstances. If the
generated noise has a single dominant frequency above 4,800
cps, the below standards shall be reduced by 5 db(A).
(a)
Departure from these standards may be authorized on special
permit under § 70-5.1B upon determination by the SPGA that
peculiarities of the location or activity assure that there will
be no adverse disturbance to use and enjoyment of nearby
premises.
Allowable Exterior Noise Level
Noise Zone
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
A 65 db(A) 60 db(A)
B 55 db(A) 50 db(A)
C 50 db(A) 45 db(A)
(b)
(2)
Vibration. Except for blasting and other activities within the jurisdiction
of the Board of Fire Prevention Regulations, no use shall be allowed
which produces vibration at or beyond the boundaries of the premises
exceeding two-thirds the frequency/amplitude limitations established
by the Board of Fire Prevention Regulations at 527 CMR 13.11(18) for
three minutes or more in any hour between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. or
for 30 seconds or more in any one hour between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
F.
Electrical disturbances. No electrical disturbance shall be permitted
which adversely affects the operation of any equipment other than that
of the creator of such disturbance.
G.
§ 70-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5.4
1:167
Historic and archaeological sites.
Location and design shall not cause avoidable damage or
impairment to the historic or archaeological value of buildings or
sites recorded on the Massachusetts Register of Historic Places.
(1)
Any major development (see definition, § 70-9.2) shall submit
documentation that either the site neither contains nor impacts
such buildings or sites, or that any potential damage or impairment
has been effectively mitigated.
(2)
H.
Solid waste. Each development must document arrangements for
satisfactory disposal of tree stumps and debris resulting from
construction and must make permanent arrangement for satisfactory
on-site storage of refuse pending its removal, such storage to be
screened from view from public ways, secure from vermin or other
animals and located to present minimal hazard in the event of fire and
minimal threat to water quality in the event of container failure.
I.
§ 70-5.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-5.4
1:168
ARTICLE VI
Other General Regulations
§ 70-6.1. Off-street parking and loading.
Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to limit the amount
of pavement coverage within the Town to the minima set forth. Special
event and overflow parking shall be permitted on grass, fields, and
where legally authorized, streets. Any increase in parking beyond the
minima prescribed shall be allowed only by special permit issued by the
Planning Board in conformance to the standards set forth in § 70-8.4.
[Added 5-20-2003 ATM, Art. 26;30 amended 11-14-2017 STM, Art.
5]
A.
Number of spaces. Off-street parking and loading spaces required to
meet the following standards shall not hereafter be reduced, nor shall
one be counted as or substituted for the other. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be required as follows:
Single-family and two-family dwellings, mobile homes and mobile
home parks: one parking space for each dwelling unit therein and
sufficient off-street parking for visitors and employees.
(1)
Multifamily dwellings: one off-street space per dwelling unit, plus
an additional off-street space for every three dwelling units within a
building. [Amended 5-20-2003 ATM, Art. 26; 5-16-2017 ATM,
Art. 34]
(2)
Places of public assembly.
All districts except Village Business: one parking space for
each three seats therein or one space for each 60 inches of
bleachers or benches, plus one space for every two employees
thereof.
(a)
Village Business Districts: The number of spaces shall be
determined by the Planning Board according to the same
criteria as § 70-6.1A(11), Nonlisted uses.
(b)
(3)
Schools: one parking space for each classroom and office therein,
plus one parking space for each three seats in the auditorium
thereof.
(4)
Hotels, motels and other places providing overnight
accommodations: one parking space for each room accommodation
therein, plus one space for each two employees, and adequate
spaces for delivery vehicles.
(5)
B.
30.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsections A through C as B through
D, respectively.
§ 70-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-6.1
1:169
Restaurants: 1-1/2 parking spaces for every four seats or fraction
there of, plus one space for each two employees, and adequate
spaces for delivery vehicles.
(6)
Other service and retail establishments: Parking areas, exclusive of
driveways, shall be in a minimum ratio of one space to 250 square
feet of gross floor area, exclusive of storage areas, plus one space
for each two employees, and adequate loading spaces.
(7)
Offices, research and development facilities and similar facilities:
one space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, plus
adequate loading spaces.
(8)
Warehouses, industrial and manufacturing establishments: one
space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus adequate
loading spaces.
(9)
Assisted living residences: 0.6 space per dwelling unit or seven
spaces, whichever is greater.
(10)
Nonlisted uses: such parking and loading spaces as may be
required by the Planning Board, to provide a comparable level of
service as is required of listed uses. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM,
Art. 38]
(11)
Development standards.
Space equivalents. For all required off-street parking spaces, open
or enclosed, each 300 square feet of net standing and maneuvering
area shall be considered one space. However, if such spaces are
located in a completely enclosed building, each 250 square feet of
net standing and maneuvering area shall be considered one space.
(1)
Location.
All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot
as the use with which such spaces are connected, or, in the
case of unenclosed spaces, within 200 feet of the lot, except
that two or more businesses may jointly provide the required
spaces on one or more of their lots. The number of spaces in
any such joint facilities shall at least equal the total number
required under the provisions of this article for their individual
uses, provided that the distance between the businesses and
joint parking facilities shall not exceed 250 feet.
(a)
Parking areas for five or more cars shall not be located within
15 feet of any street right-of-way, nor shall they be located
in any required side yard. Parking areas shall not be located
in any yard required in § 70-4.3 to be increased because of
abutting a residential district. Required side yards may be used
for access between parking areas in the front and rear of the
building or from parking in the rear to the street.
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 70-6.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-6.1
1:170
In the Planned Business District, not more than 1/3 of all
parking provided on the premises shall be located closer to
the street than the front building line of the building on the
premises closest to the street.
(c)
In the Village Business Districts, parking shall not be located
between the front building line and the street line.
(d)
Access. All required parking spaces shall be provided with
unobstructed access to and from a street and shall be properly
maintained in such a manner as to permit them to be used at all
times. Parking areas for five or more cars shall not require nor
permit vehicles to back into any public way. They shall be served by
one or more driveways satisfying the following standards:
Driveways to be a minimum of 10 feet wide if one way and a
minimum of 18 feet wide if two way and a maximum of 40 feet
wide.
(a)
Entrance or exit center lines shall not fall within 50 feet of an
intersection of street side lines or within 75 feet of the center
line of any other parking area entrance or exit on the same side
of the street whether on the same parcel or not.
(b)
Driveways to be defined by nonmountable curb of at least four
inches reveal and of granite or other suitable material that will
not deteriorate under winter conditions.
(c)
(3)
Surfacing. Parking areas for five or more cars shall be surfaced
by suitable materials and methods. A surface cross section of six
inches of suitable base material with 3 1/2 inches of bituminous
concrete Type l-1 over compact subgrade or equivalent shall be
deemed sufficient. Where approved by the Planning Board,
grasscrete or other suitable porous pavement, including well
graded crushed stone, may be substituted for some or all of the
parking area. Porous pavements shall have a suitable base of at
least eight inches of well graded compacted gravel. Crushed stone
surface layers shall be at least six inches thick. In all cases,
entrance- and/or exit ways shall be paved with bituminous
concrete. The parking surface shall be smooth and have a minimum
slope of 1% and a maximum slope of 5%.
(4)
Drainage. Drainage shall be by means of catch basins with suitable
inlets and underground pipes except where overland flow distance
is less than 300 feet or porous surfaces are employed. Runoff must
be managed as required at § 70-5.3B. Erosion must be controlled
as required at § 70-5.3C. [Amended 5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 34]
(5)
Lighting. Parking areas to be used at night shall be illuminated with
lights so designed and placed as to provide sufficient illumination
of the ground below, for the safe passage and identification of
vehicles and pedestrians in immediate areas and so as to meet the
(6)
§ 70-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-6.1
1:171
§ 70-6.2. Signs.
Signs are permitted in accordance with the Chapter 53, Signs, adopted by
the Town of Williamstown at its Annual Town Meeting on May 17, 1994, and
any amendments thereto.
standards of § 70-5.4D. An average of from 0.3 to 0.5 footcandle
lighting level throughout the parking area shall be required for safe
and sufficient illumination. Where lighting levels in excess of the
above average are deemed necessary by owners, lessees or others
exercising control of said parking areas, a lighting level in excess
of 0.5 footcandle may be authorized on special permit by the Board
of Appeals upon its determination that the standards of § 70-5.4D
will still be met, and that the increased level is important to safety.
District parking exceptions.
On-street spaces.
In the Limited Business Districts, legal on-street parking shall
be credited towards meeting parking requirements if located
between the premises side lot lines on the same side of the
street.31
(a)
(1)
Village Business District parking requirements: Off-street parking
shall not be required for properties located in the Village Business
District, except for the following uses: [Added 5-18-2010 ATM,
Art. 30; amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 40]
Multifamily dwellings: one off-street space per dwelling unit.
[Amended 5-16-2017 ATM, Art. 34]
(a)
Places of public assembly: The number of spaces shall be
determined by the Planning Board according to the same
criteria as § 70-6.1B(11), Nonlisted uses.
(b)
(2)
D.
31.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(1)(b), regarding parking in the Village Business
District on properties abutting Spring Street, as amended, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 5-18-2010 ATM, Art. 30.
§ 70-6.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-6.2
1:172
ARTICLE VII
Special Use or Place Regulations
§ 70-7.1. Residential development.
Meeting housing objectives.
In order to assure that new residential development will, at
minimum, meet its own share of providing for the diversity and
balance of housing in Williamstown, the following shall be complied
with by all major residential developments of 10 or more dwelling
units:
At least 10% of the housing units shall be affordable to
households having incomes not exceeding 100% of the thencurrent
median income for non-Metropolitan Berkshire County,
as estimated by the HUD Regional Economist; or
(a)
An alternative effort approved by the Planning Board shall be
made, determined by the Board to make no less contribution
than the above towards meeting the goal of economically
balanced development.
(b)
Continuing affordability shall be assured for at least 25 years
through means enforceable by the Town.
(c)
(1)
"Affordable" shall mean having a cost for rent, excluding utilities,
not exceeding 30% of income or having a purchase price
supportable at a given income under then-prevailing underwriting
guidelines, given not more than a 5% down payment.
(2)
Fractional requirements of 0.5 dwelling units or more shall be
rounded to the next higher number, others being rounded
downward.
(3)
A.
Flexible development. At the owner's option, any parcel may be divided
into not more than eight lots, whether a subdivision or not, and built
upon under the following alternative area and frontage requirements:
Frontage. The average frontage for all building lots created shall
be no smaller than the minimum required under § 70-4.3, but
individual lots may have frontage of as little as 2/3 that
requirement.
(1)
Lot area. Individual lot area may be as little as 1/2 that required at
§ 70-4.3, except that lots relying upon on-site water supply and/or
sewage disposal shall have lot area of not less than 10,000 square
feet, and no lot shall have lot area of less than 7,500 square feet.
(2)
Number of lots.
The total number of building lots created from any parcel
shall be no larger than the number which reasonably could
(a)
(3)
B.
§ 70-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.1
1:173
be expected to be built upon in consideration of how much of
the land is actually buildable, and in compliance with § 70-4.3
and all other applicable zoning, subdivision and health
requirements.
That number shall be determined at the applicant's option
either by a registered land surveyor's certification of the
number obtained by dividing 80% of lot area (see definition,
§ 70-9.2) by the lot area required for a single-family dwelling
at § 70-4.3; or by the Planning Board, based upon review of a
sketch conventional plan submitted by the applicant showing
division in compliance with § 70-4.3.
(b)
Open space. At least 20% of the lot area of the premises being
divided shall be restricted from building through limitations
established on the plan.
(4)
Endorsement. The plan creating the lots shall be endorsed by the
Planning Board as "Approved for Flexible Development."
(5)
Limitation. No further increase in the number of lots shall be
allowed through subsequent land division.
(6)
Major residential development.
Applicability. Major residential development (see definition,
§ 70-9.2) is allowed only on special permit from the Planning Board.
Such special permits shall be acted upon in accordance with the
following, except for multifamily development proposed subject
to § 70-7.1G or other specific authorization in this chapter. In
addition, smaller developments may, at the owners option, be
considered as if a major residential development and employ the
following provisions.
(1)
Procedures. Applicants for major residential development shall file
with the Planning Board four copies of the following:
A development plan conforming to the requirements for a
preliminary subdivision plan under the Chapter 170,
Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board. Such
plan shall also indicate wetlands and groundwater recharge
potential, as shown on Town mapping or, at the applicant's
option, as determined through individual project analysis.
Topography shall be shown at two-foot intervals, except that
the Planning Board may authorize ten-foot intervals in such
areas as steep slope or where physical change is not proposed.
(a)
Other submittals required under other sections of this chapter.
Note in particular those required for major projects, which
include all major residential development. Those include
documentation referenced in Article V, Development
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 70-7.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.1
1:174
Standards, of the Williamstown Zoning Bylaw. [Amended
5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 34]
Any additional information necessary to make the
determinations and assessments cited in Subsection C(4) and
(5) of this section.
(c)
Flexible development. The Planning Board may authorize flexible
development within a major residential development, subject to
the following in lieu of the requirements of § 70-7.1B, Flexible
development.
Lots having reduced area or frontage are not limited in number
to eight, but shall not have frontage on a street other than one
created by the subdivision involved.
(a)
Each lot shall contain not less than 1/2 that lot area required at
§ 70-4.3 and have frontage of not less than 50 feet, except that
lots relying upon on-site water supply and/or sewage disposal
shall have lot area of not less than 10,000 square feet, and no
lot shall have lot area of less than 7,500 square feet.
(b)
At least 20% of the lot area of the premises being divided
or developed shall be reserved as open space which shall be
either conveyed to the Town or its Conservation Commission
or, if held by some other body (e.g., held in common by owners
within the development or conveyed to a nonprofit
conservation organization), shall be covered by a recorded
restriction enforceable by the Town, provided that such land
shall be permanently kept in an open state and responsibly
maintained.
(c)
(3)
Number of lots and dwelling units.
The basic maximum number of lots or dwelling units allowed
shall equal the number of building lots for single-family
development which could reasonably be expected to be
developed on that parcel under a conventional plan in full
conformance with zoning, subdivision regulations, health
codes and other applicable laws and regulations, as
determined by the Planning Board.
(a)
Where the basic maximum number of lots is not otherwise
clear, the applicant shall be required to submit a sketch
conventional plan to assist in the determination. The
determination of the basic maximum is an administrative act,
which may be appealed to the Board of Appeals by any party
having standing, as provided at MGL C. 40A, § 8.
(b)
(c) Increase over basic maximum number of dwelling units.
(4)
§ 70-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.1
1:175
The Planning Board may approve a major residential
development containing more than the basic maximum
number of dwelling units, upon the Board's determination
that the proposed development provides public benefits
or amenities through open space reservation or efforts
at housing affordability. The increase over the basic
maximum number of dwelling units allowed shall normally
be equal to:
The number of units (up to 25% of the basic maximum)
for which there is assurance for at least 20 years
through covenant, repurchase agreement or other
means enforceable by the Town, that the unit will
be sold or leased at costs and with income eligibility
limits meeting the guidelines of state or federal
housing assistance programs, such as the MHFA
Home Mortgage Loan Program; plus
[a]
The number of units (up to 25% of the basic maximum)
which could otherwise reasonably have been expected
to be developed on land to be restricted under a
conservation restriction or deeded to the Town or its
Conservation Commission, provided that such land is
either:
Land abutting and within 200 feet of a street
other than one created by the subdivision, or
[i]
Land determined by the Planning Board, following
consultation with the Conservation Commission,
to be of special resource value because of special
habitat, fragile terrain, visual importance or other
quality which distinguishes it from land in the
district generally.
[ii]
[b]
[1]
In no event, however, shall the Planning Board allow an
increase (including transfers as provided below) to the
extent that overall density is more than 50% higher than
allowable by right.
[4]
Calculations resulting in fractional units of 0.5 or more
shall be rounded to the next larger number, while others
shall be rounded downward.
[5]
Multifamily development. Multifamily dwellings may be allowed
in a major residential development. Unless in a district where
multifamily development is allowed subject to § 70-7.1E and unless
developed in accordance with that section, multifamily
development shall comply with the following:
To assure internal diversity and continuity with surrounding
development, single-family and two-family dwellings are
(a)
(5)
§ 70-7.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.1
1:176
allowed within a multifamily development. [Amended
5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 30]
To maintain the visual scale of the community, each dwelling
unit shall have its own exterior entrance and three exposures;
there shall be not more than four dwelling units in any
structure; multifamily structures shall be clustered in groups,
with not more than 16 dwelling units in any group, and with
buildings within groups separated from each other by not less
than twice the required side yard. [Amended 5-17-2011
ATM, Art. 30]
(b)
Visual separation from nearby premises shall be assured
through providing yards of double the usually required
dimension between any multifamily structure or parking area
for six or more cars and the boundaries of the major residential
development.
(c)
To assure environmental benefit from the compact form which
this type of development facilitates, not less than 35% of the
site area shall be retained in a vegetated state, either held in
common by the owners of units in the development or deeded
to a not-for-profit conservation organization, in either case
subject to a conservation restriction, or alternatively deeded to
the Town.
(d)
Agricultural protection incentive. In order to benefit the Town
through the visual, economic and ecological benefits of
preservation of agricultural use of land, and to benefit owners of
land well-suited to agriculture, the following optional procedure
may be followed by owners of eligible land if they so choose:
Land assessed under MGL C. 61A may be designated
"agricultural protection land", and may be included within a
major residential development application by reference,
whether or not contiguous with or in the same ownership as
other land within such application.
(a)
Such land shall be included in calculating the basic maximum
number of dwelling units determined under § 70-7.1C(4).
However, the number of allowable units determined for such
land shall be multiplied by two in determining the total number
of units allowed in the overall major residential development,
provided that all such agricultural protection land is made
subject to a perpetual conservation restriction to be granted
to the Conservation Commission, prohibiting nonagricultural
development, with the result that the units authorized will
actually be constructed on the nonagricultural portions of the
development.
(b)
(6)
§ 70-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.1
1:177
In approving such transfer of development rights, the Planning
Board must make the determination that the impacts of
increased density on the developed parcel are balanced by the
absence of development on the preserved parcel, considering
such things as streets and utilities which service both parcels.
(c)
Decision. The Planning Board shall approve or approve with
conditions a special permit for major residential development,
provided that the Board determines that the plan complies fully
with the requirements of this chapter, and is on balance more
beneficial to the Town than the development likely without such
approval, taking into consideration the following, among other
concerns:
Preservation of natural resources, especially in relatively
large-scale contiguous areas.
(a)
Protection of visual character by having open spaces which are
visible from major roads.
(b)
Reduction in length of publicly maintained road and utility per
dwelling unit served.
(c)
Location of development on sites best suited for such and
avoiding environmentally fragile locations.
(d)
Protection of major street appearance and capacity by avoiding
development close to or egressing directly onto such streets.
(e)
(f) Contribution to meeting housing needs.
(7)
Development timing. As a condition of its approval, the Planning
Board may require a development schedule limiting the rate of
development for the premises, taking into consideration the intent
of avoiding large year-to-year variations in Town-wide development
rate while allowing development consistent with historic average
rates, and also taking into consideration the housing needs which
the development will serve, the housing cost and feasibility
consequences of the limitation and the ability of the Town to
timefully provide needed services to the site. In no event shall a
development be limited to fewer than 16 lots or dwelling units per
year, or be obliged to spread development out over more than eight
years.
(8)
Limitation. No further increase in the number of lots shall be
allowed through subsequent land division.
(9)
Second dwelling units. [Amended 5-17-2005 ATM, Art. 27;
5-15-2012 ATM, Art. 30]
Purpose. This section establishes standards to allow flexibility in
designing alternative housing choices in Williamstown and to give
purpose to previously underutilized agricultural buildings.
(1)
D.
§ 70-7.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.1
1:178
Dwelling conversion. Where permitted, the conversion of a onefamily
dwelling into a two-family dwelling must comply with the
following:
New construction shall be no larger than 900 square feet,
gross floor area.
(a)
Off-street parking requirements of § 70-6.1 shall be met
without addition of any parking spaces within a required yard.
(b)
Preexisting nonconforming single-family dwellings.
A nonconforming single-family dwelling may be extended
for the purpose of converting a single-family dwelling to
a two-family dwelling by right, provided the extension
complies with § 70-4.3, Dimensional Schedule.
[1]
A proposed extension not in compliance with § 70-4.3 that
does not increase the degree of nonconformity of the
dwelling is permitted, provided the Board of Appeals
grants a special permit following its determination that
such extension would not be substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing
dwelling, applying the criteria of § 70-8.4D.
[2]
(c)
Conversion is not permitted on lots that do not comply with
§ 70-4.3, Dimensional Schedule.
(d)
No unenclosed stairs shall be located on any street-facing side
of a building.
(e)
(2)
Detached second dwelling units. Where permitted, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may issue a special permit authorizing the
installation and use of a second dwelling unit in an existing
detached structure on a lot containing a single-family dwelling,
provided that the following are complied with:
The second dwelling unit shall be no larger than 900 square
feet, gross floor area, unless completely contained within the
building area of a larger existing accessory structure.
(a)
An existing accessory building shall be eligible for conversion
if it has been in existence for at least 10 years, or if it was in
existence prior to the adoption of this provision.
(b)
A second dwelling unit must comply with all requirements of,
§ 70-4.3. Dimensional Schedule, and is not permitted on lots
that do not comply with § 70-4.3, Dimensional Schedule.
(c)
Off-street parking requirements of § 70-6.1 shall be met
without addition of any parking spaces within a required yard.
(d)
(3)
§ 70-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.1
1:179
No unenclosed stairs shall be located on any street-facing side
of a building.
(e)
The Zoning Board of Appeals makes a determination that the
second dwelling will be in compliance with the special permit
criteria of § 70-8.4D and a finding that the second dwelling will not
be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood.
(4)
Elderly housing. In districts where authorized in § 70-3.3, Use
Regulation Schedule, new buildings for the elderly containing more
than one but not more than 48 dwelling units may be allowed on special
permit, provided that the following are complied with:
Operation and occupancy.
The building or group of buildings is operated by a nonprofit
organization or a limited dividend corporation (approved by
the Williamstown Housing Authority). For the purpose of this
section, a nonprofit group shall mean the Williamstown
Housing Authority or a corporation, foundation or other
organization not organized for profit which qualifies for state
and federal aid for nonprofit housing and which pays real
estate taxes to the Town or equivalent payment in lieu thereof.
Further for the purpose of this section a limited dividend
corporation is a nonpublic body eligible to receive a subsidy
from a federal or state agency to construct housing for the
elderly.
(a)
The dwelling units shall be for occupancy by a family unit
consisting of one or more persons at least 1/2 of whom are 62
years of age or older.
(b)
(1)
Basic design guidelines. Provisions of § 70-7.1G, Other multifamily
housing, must be complied with, except as noted therein.
(2)
Special spaces.
Interior community spaces for recreation and group purposes
shall be equal to at least 25 square feet per unit.
(a)
An outdoor area of at least 20 square feet per unit is available
to the occupants for individual gardens and a south-facing
exterior area receiving at least three hours of direct sunlight
daily of at least 150 square feet per unit for sitting with tables
and chairs as well as similar area of ten 10 square feet per unit
which is protected from the sun.
(b)
The outdoor recreation areas provided in Subsection E(3)(b)
above shall include facilities such as shuffleboard, horse shoes
and table games and such other facilities as may be approved
by the Planning Board located so that residents can reach them
without crossing drives or parking areas.
(c)
(3)
E.
§ 70-7.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.1
1:180
Other design requirements.
The front yard, side yard and rear yard shall assure privacy on
the site.
(a)
A ramp at every place on the site where it is deemed necessary
by the Planning Board shall be provided.
(b)
A canopy to the entrance drive from the door of a building
requiring an elevator shall be installed.
(c)
On-site standby power for emergency illumination purposes
shall be provided. There shall be supplementary heating in the
community space provided in Subsection E(3)(a).
(d)
(e) Adequate lighting for all exterior walkways shall be provided.
Exemptions from provisions of this chapter are allowed for
housing for the elderly as follows:
Maximum building coverage allowed by § 70-4.3 shall be
increased to 30%.
[1]
Site area constructed or reserved for off-street parking
spaces required by § 70-6.1 shall be reduced to that
sufficient for one space per dwelling unit. The number of
spaces to initially be constructed is to be determined by
the Planning Board, but shall not be less than one space
per two units.
[2]
(f)
(4)
Assisted living residence. Assisted living residences, either new
construction or conversion of existing buildings, may be permitted by
special permit from the Board of Appeals.
Dimensional requirements for new construction. Assisted living
residence uses shall be subject to the following additional
dimensional requirements:
Minimum lot area:
General Residence: 3,000 square feet of lot area per
dwelling unit. [Amended 5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 35]
[1]
Rural Residence 2 and 3: 8,700 square feet of lot area per
dwelling unit.
but not less than the minimum lot area required by the
table in § 70-4.3.
[2]
(a)
(b) 32Building height shall comply with § 70-4.1A.
(1)
F.
32.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1)(b), providing for front and side yards, and former
Subsection F(1)(d), regarding building height, were repealed 5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 29. Said
article also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection F(1)(c) and (e) as
Subsection F(1)(b) and (c), respectively.
§ 70-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.1
1:181
33Parking areas shall be located so that not more than 1/4 of
all parking provided is located closer than the front line of the
building furthest from the street.
(c)
Dimensional requirements for conversions of existing buildings.
Conversions of existing buildings to assisted living residence uses
shall be subject to the additional dimensional requirements:
Minimum lot area shall be:
General Residence: 3,000 square feet of lot area per
dwelling unit. [Amended 5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 35]
[1]
Rural Residence 2 and 3: 8,700 square feet of lot area per
dwelling unit.
[2]
Planned Business: 2,300 square feet of lot area per
dwelling unit.
but not less than the required minimum lot area of the
table in § 70-4.3.
[3]
(a)
(b) 34Building height shall comply with § 70-4.1A.
35Parking areas shall be located so that not more than 1/4 of
all parking provided is located closer than the front line of the
building furthest from the street.
(c)
(2)
Accessory uses.
Garages for resident vehicles and common use vehicles owned
by the operating entity.
(a)
A single-story building to house snow removal, lawn,
maintenance and recreational equipment. Such building shall
not exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(b)
Outdoor swimming pools, tennis and other recreational courts,
playing fields, gardens and residential greenhouses of not
more than 250 square feet, covered and uncovered sitting
areas.
(c)
(3)
33.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1)(b), providing for front and side yards, and former
Subsection F(1)(d), regarding building height, were repealed 5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 29. Said
article also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection F(1)(c) and (e) as
Subsection F(1)(b) and (c), respectively.
34.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(2)(b), providing for front and side yards, and former
Subsection F(2)(e), regarding building height, were repealed 5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 29. Said
article also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection F(2)(c) and (e) as
Subsection F(2)(b) and (c), respectively.
35.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(2)(b), providing for front and side yards, and former
Subsection F(2)(e), regarding building height, were repealed 5-18-1999 ATM, Art. 29. Said
article also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection F(2)(c) and (e) as
Subsection F(2)(b) and (c), respectively.
§ 70-7.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.1
1:182
Nonresidential uses. The operator of an assisted living residence
may also provide optional services on the site, including, but not
limited to, local transportation, barber/beauty services, sundries
for personal consumption and other similar amenities, provided
that:
Such uses serve the residents, their guests and employees of
the assisted living residence only;
(a)
Such uses are conducted within and may be entered only from
within a principal building;
(b)
There is no external evidence (including signs) of such uses
visible beyond the site;
(c)
The appearance and character of the nonresidential uses are
compatible with the residential development; and
(d)
Such uses are accessory uses to the principal assisted living
residence use.
(e)
(4)
Other multifamily development. In districts where authorized in
§ 70-3.3, Use Regulation Schedule, new dwellings containing more than
two but not more than 16 dwelling units may be authorized on special
permit, provided that the following are complied with:
Basic site characteristics.
The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet per dwelling
unit for structures each containing up to five dwelling units,
7,000 square feet per dwelling unit for structures each
containing six or more dwelling units. For elderly housing
under § 70-7.1E, required lot area may be reduced to 2,000
square feet per dwelling unit, provided that the housing is
constructed on a site of at least three acres.
(a)
Lot frontage must equal 100 feet for the first unit on the lot
plus 20 feet per dwelling unit after that, up to a maximum
requirement of 500 feet. For elderly housing under § 70-7.1E
that requirement may be reduced to 200 feet, provided that
there are separate entrance- and exitways.
(b)
Each structure shall be connected to Town water or to a water
supply certified to be suitable by the Williamstown Board of
Health.
(c)
Each dwelling unit shall be connected to the Town sewerage
system.
(d)
On Soil Associations A and D - G as shown on the Soil
Association Map, dated 1963, prepared by the United States
Soil Conservation Service on file with the Planning Board, the
applicant must provide evidence that the site is satisfactory.
(e)
(1)
G.
§ 70-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.1
1:183
The dwelling units shall not be contained in a building used
as a single-family dwelling at the time of the adoption of this
section of the chapter.
(f)
Site design and development.
Parking. All off-street parking as required under § 70-6.1 shall
be in the rear of the buildings unless specifically approved
otherwise with the site plan. No more than 50 spaces shall
be allowed in any one parking lot, and each parking lot shall
be adequately screened from view from any exterior street by
landscaping meeting the requirements of § 70-5.4B(3). Parking
spaces shall be delineated, and wheel stops or bumpers shall
be placed at the head of each space. No parking spaces shall
be located within 30)feet of a building used for residential
purposes. For each 250 square feet of parking space placed
within an enclosed structure, the gross floor area devoted to
multifamily dwellings may be increased by 100 square feet. If
all the required parking area for a building containing dwelling
units is enclosed within that building, the height regulation of
§ 70-4.1 shall be raised by 10 feet for that building.
(a)
Landscaping.
All areas not covered by pavement, curbing or structures
such as, but not limited to, walkways, parking areas,
access roads and paths and playing areas used for court
games, shall have appropriate landscaping of grass,
shrubbery, trees, flowers or suitable ground cover
indigenous to the area.
[1]
Adjacent to and for the length of each exterior wall of
each principal building, there shall be a three-foot wide
area landscaped with bushes, shrubbery, hedge or trees,
or other perennial foundation planting indigenous to the
area. Adjacent to and for the length of each lot line there
shall be a landscaped buffer strip of 30 feet in width
containing landscaping meeting the requirements for
district boundary planting area at § 70-5.4B(3)(d). This
screening should not obstruct a view of oncoming traffic
when entering or exiting from the property. All such
landscaping shall be indicated on the site plan required by
§ 70-8.2B.
[2]
(b)
Building spacing. If there is more than one such structure
on a lot of record, there shall be at least 40 feet between
each structure. The only exception shall be that no more than
three buildings may be interconnected by a covered walkway
or breezeway for reasons of convenience and shelter from
the elements. Such walkway shall not be constructed in such
manner as, in the opinion of the Planning Board, to impair the
(c)
(2)
§ 70-7.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.1
1:184
services to the buildings by emergency vehicles or equipment.
Such buildings so interconnected shall be deemed as separate
and individual buildings for the purpose of administering
Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
Trash. There shall be a satisfactory design and location of
collection points for solid waste recovery and for disposal of
garbage and trash, adequately screened for reasons of health
and safety as determined by the Planning Board and the Board
of Health.
(d)
Utilities and lighting. All existing or proposed utilities shall
be installed underground at the time of initial construction.
Lighting facilities, whether placed along service drives, in
parking areas or on the exterior of buildings, shall be so
arranged that they do not cause illumination in excess of 1/2
of a footcandle at any point vertically above the property line
or upon any window surface of a building or buildings used for
dwelling purposes.
(e)
Open space.
Amount required. There shall be 1,500 square feet of usable
common open space per dwelling unit (1,000 square feet for
elderly developments under § 70-7.1E). Usable common open
space shall mean areas left substantially in a natural state
or improved by such landscaping as required in Subsection
G(2)(b) and primarily designed and intended for the active and
passive recreation of the occupants of the dwellings. Usable
common open space shall not include street rights-of-way, open
parking or service areas, driveways, easements for
aboveground utilities, required minimum front yards or any
other land deemed unsuitable by the Planning Board for
reasons of excessive slope or poor drainage.
(a)
Public access. In case of public open space dedicated in fee to
the Town, such open space shall be maintained as public land,
accessible to the public. This shall not preclude the Town from
refusing to accept such land without a favorable report from
the Planning Board.
(b)
Rental responsibility. In cases of rental property, the owner
shall, for reasons of health, safety and convenience of the
residents, assume the responsibility for maintaining the open
space.
(c)
Homeowners' association. In cases of the sale of individual
units as in a condominium, there shall be included in the
deed a requirement obligating the purchasers to join in a
homeowners' association, and by paying assessments to the
association, to support the maintenance of the common open
space. The organization of such homeowners' association shall
(d)
(3)
§ 70-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.1
1:185
be on file with the Town Clerk, along with an annual report,
including the names of officers, to be submitted to the Town
Clerk by February 15 of each year.
Building design.
Exposures. Each dwelling unit shall have three exposures,
except only one is required for elderly developments under
§ 70-7.1E.
(a)
Egress. A secondary exit shall be available to each family unit
above the first floor consisting of an exterior stairway, or a fire
escape of noncombustible construction when approved by the
Building Commissioner, with access to the street or a second
interior enclosed stairway. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art.
38]
(b)
Floor area. Gross floor area shall equal at least 720 square
feet for the first dwelling unit plus 600 square feet for each
additional dwelling unit. For elderly housing under § 70-7.1E,
floor area may be as little as 550 square feet per one-bedroom
unit and 450 square feet per efficiency unit.
(c)
(4)
Multifamily and mixed use development in Business Zones. [Amended
5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 33, 35; 11-14-2017 ATM, Art. 6]
No unenclosed stairs may be located on a street facing side of a
building.
(1)
(2) Visibility of parking from public ways should be minimized.
H.
Mobile homes and campers. No area shall be occupied or used by a
mobile home or camper for a total time in excess of 30 days during any
one calendar year, with the following exceptions:
Campers owned by the occupant of the premises may be stored in
the side or rear yard when not in use.
(1)
Mobile homes may be located and occupied in a duly established
mobile home park conforming to the regulations governing mobile
home parks in Williamstown adopted by the Board of Selectmen
acting as the Board of Health, or as such regulations may from time
to time be amended by the Board of Selectmen acting as the Board
of Health.
(2)
The owner or occupier of a dwelling which has been destroyed by
fire or other holocaust may reside in a mobile home on the site
of such dwelling for up to 12 months while the dwelling is being
rebuilt.
(3)
I.
J. Minor lane residential development.
§ 70-7.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.1
1:186
Applicability. The Planning Board may issue a special permit for
a minor lane residential development if it determines, in addition
to the requirements of § 70-8.4, that the minor lane residential
development better serves the Town than a lane built under
Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, and Chapter 113,
Road Construction Standards, considering whether the use of
minor lane requirements shall:
(a) Decrease the number of driveways entering Town streets.
Be a special value because of characteristics of the terrain
vulnerable to damage from paved or wider streets.
(b)
Encourage infill housing in the case of General Residence
Districts.
(c)
Provide superior protection for the natural environment,
including trees, outstanding rock formations and other
features.
(d)
Encourage clustering and preservation of open space in the
Rural Residence Districts.
(e)
(1)
Limitations.
Lot sizes for lots fronting on minor lanes shall not be larger
than two times the district minimum for Rural Residence 2 and
3, and three times the district minimum for General Residence.
[Amended 5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 35]
(a)
Minor lanes must connect directly with a street over land in
the same ownership as the parcel to be divided.
(b)
The frontage provided by the minor lane shall be used to create
not more than three lots for single-family dwelling use, and
shall provide access for no more than three total lots.
(c)
Minor lanes shall not connect with each other, or connect with
any two streets.
(d)
The parcel of land subdivided under this provision shall not
be contiguous with other property subdivided under minor
lane residential development requirements if at any time
subsequent to May 18, 1993 (effective date of this provision),
that property has been in common ownership or interest with
that proposed for subdivision.
(e)
No land within a minor lane residential development may be
further subdivided until the lane is improved to meet the
applicable public roadway construction standards of Chapter
170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, then in effect.36
(f)
(2)
36.Editor's Note: Original Section 7.1.9.2, Subsection 7, was deleted 5-17-1994 ATM, Art. 30.
§ 70-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.1
1:187
Minor lanes shall be deemed substandard in dimension and
construction within the meaning of Article III, Road
Acceptances, of Chapter 60, Streets and Sidewalks, of the
Code of the Town of Williamstown, and shall not be eligible for
acceptance by Town Meeting as public ways.
(g)
Minor lanes shall not be maintained by the Town. All special
permits issued for minor lane residential development shall
contain a condition requiring maintenance of the lane to be the
responsibility of the lot owners.
(h)
Submittals. Applicants for a minor lane residential development
shall file with the Planning Board eight copies of a development
plan conforming to the requirements of a preliminary subdivision
plan, Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, § 170-3.3.
(3)
37Cable Mills Redevelopment District - Multifamily Housing
Development. Multifamily development, by new construction or the
conversion of an existing historic building, may be authorized by special
permit provided the following are complied with: [Added 5-15-2007
ATM, Art. 32]
Basic requirements.
Floor area ratio. Density in the district shall be controlled
through a ratio of the gross floor area within buildings on a lot
to the lot area of that lot. This ratio shall not be lower than .50
or higher than 2.50. [Amended 11-14-2017 STM, Art. 8]
(a)
Open space. The Riverwalk, as defined by the Town's
Community Preservation Act grant agreement, and areas in a
substantially natural state surrounding the Riverwalk shall be
maintained in perpetuity as open space for the benefit of the
users of the district. [Amended 11-14-2017 STM, Art. 8]
(b)
Utilities. All buildings shall be connected to Town water and
sewer. All utilities shall be underground, in accordance with
the development standards of Chapter 170. There shall be
satisfactory design and location of collection points for rubbish
and recyclables.
(c)
Nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses are permitted in
multifamily buildings on the first floor and are subject to the
requirements of Table 7.6. There are no open space or lot area
requirements for nonresidential uses.
(d)
Building design. Existing buildings shall retain their original
nineteenth-century architecture. New construction shall be
consistent with existing buildings in the Water Street
(e)
(1)
K.
37.Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, Station Mill Redevelopment District - Multifamily
Housing Development added 5-18-2004 ATM, Art. 28, was repealed 5-15-2007 ATM, Art.
29.
§ 70-7.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.1
1:188
§ 70-7.2. Nonresidential development.
Neighborhood. No unenclosed exterior stairways above the
first floor shall be permitted.
Minimum floor area. Minimum gross floor area for dwelling
units shall not be less than 700 square feet.
(f)
Parking. Off-street parking shall comply with § 70-6.1 for
number of parking spaces and parking lot development.
(g)
Smokestack. The existing smokestack shall be retained as a
historic architectural feature.
(h)
Affordable unit set aside.
Not less than 10% of the dwelling units shall be affordable,
defined as 80% of the then-current median household
income of nonmetropolitan Berkshire County, as estimated
by the HUD Regional Economist.
[1]
The distribution of affordable units shall be proportional
across the total number of units according to number of
bedrooms, size, quality, and location.
[2]
Continuing affordability shall be assured for at least 30
years through means enforceable by the Town.
[3]
(i)
Local crafts. Products indigenous to the Berkshires, or to the arts or
to handicraft industries (such as handloomed fabrics, hand-blown glass,
pottery, paintings) or specialty food products (such as baked goods or
candy) may be manufactured on the premises and sold at retail or
wholesale in districts as indicated in § 70-3.3, provided that:
The only machinery on the premises shall be powered by hand or
motors of not more than five horsepower.
(1)
Instructional classes shall be limited to those in connection with
the manufacturing of products on the premises.
(2)
An agreement for maintenance of common areas, where two or
more uses occupy a structure, shall be filed with and approved by
the Board of Appeals as a condition of the special permit.
(3)
A.
Auto service facilities. Where so indicated in § 70-3.3, Use Regulation
Schedule, gasoline service stations, garages and repair shops may be
located, provided that the following are complied with:
Repairs shall be limited to minor repairs and adjustments unless
conducted in a building.
(1)
There shall be no storage of motor vehicles, appliances and
equipment on the premises other than those in process of repair
(2)
B.
§ 70-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:189
or awaiting delivery, or required in the operation of the service
station, garage or repair shop.
(3) The area used to service, repair or store vehicles shall be paved.
There shall be an area at least 15 feet deep between the street
line and the paved area which shall be separated from the street
by a curb, and which shall be seeded and landscaped except at an
entrance and exit which shall be at least 20 feet wide and at least
50 feet apart, and further provided that there shall be only one
entrance and one exit for each 150 feet of street frontage.
(4)
The paved area shall be screened from all adjacent lots (whether
on the side or rear) by a strip 15 feet wide, densely planted with
shrubs or trees, which are at least three feet high at the time of
planting and are of the type which may be expected to form a
year-round dense screen at least five feet high within three years.
This screening should not obstruct a view of oncoming traffic when
entering or exiting from the property.
(5)
Fund-raising. In all districts, special fund-raising events, such as
festivals, art shows, street dances, etc., which are sponsored by a
nonprofit organization shall be permitted, provided that all necessary
licenses have been obtained, the event is of less than four days duration
and no more than two such events are scheduled by the same
organization in one calendar year.
C.
Agriculture and related uses. Farming, horticulture, floriculture or
viticulture, including raising and harvesting crops, truck gardening,
pasturage, orchards and tree farming, are allowed on parcels of five
acres or larger in all districts, and on smaller parcels as indicated in
§ 70-3.3, Use Regulation Schedule. Agricultural uses shall comply with
the following:
No buildings shall be located within 100 feet of a district not
allowing that use.
(1)
Animals permitted to graze closer than 100 feet of a district where
their raising is not allowed shall be enclosed by fencing.
(2)
Any logging equipment, spraying equipment or other equipment
necessary for orchards, nurseries, forestry and tree farms shall
be normally stored in an enclosure subject to the provisions for
location of farm buildings or is not visible from district or property
boundaries.
(3)
No farm outlet or stand shall be located within 25 feet of a street
line. Provision shall be made for off-street parking in accord with
§ 70-6.1.
(4)
D.
Earth removal. The removal of earth, including soil, loam, sand, gravel,
clay, stone, quarried rock or other subsurface products, except water,
E.
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:190
from land in the Town of Williamstown, except when entirely incidental
to or in connection with the construction of a building, pool or street for
which a permit has been granted, or for which a development plan or
subdivision plan has been approved, must comply with the following:
Special permit required. A special permit from the Board of
Appeals is required prior to such removal. If more than 25 cubic
yards of removal will take place in any one year, the applicant
shall file with the Board of Appeals a map or plan, prepared at
the expense of the applicant, showing the existing contours of the
land, the contours as they are proposed after the completion of
operations and a revegetation plan showing location and species
of trees, shrubs and other plantings, mulchings and other planting
details and aspects of revegetation, as prepared by a registered
professional engineer or landscape architect. Such map or plan
shall be accurately drawn on tracing cloth, Mylar or other suitable
base material, the contour interval being two feet and shall contain
complete information to make the physical characteristics clear.
(1)
Special permit conditions. A special permit granted for the removal
of sand, gravel, stone, quarried stone or loam shall state the time
within which work is to be carried on and finished, the extent of
operations to be permitted, temporary and permanent drainage,
and the predetermined grade to which the land shall be brought
at the completion of the operations, the amount of topsoil to be
replaced over cuts and the revegetation practices to be followed. It
shall require that, after completion of the operations, the land shall
be left in a usable condition.
(2)
Performance bond. The Board shall require a surety company bond
not to expire until restoration in accord with this subsection is
made, in the amount equal to the estimated cost of restorations
as estimated by a registered professional engineer or landscape
architect licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
(3)
Personal wireless service facilities and towers. [Added 5-19-1998
ATM, Art. 25]
Purposes. The purposes of this personal wireless service facilities
and towers section are to:
Preserve the character and appearance of the Town while
simultaneously allowing adequate personal wireless services
to be developed.
(a)
Protect the scenic, historic, environmental and natural or manmade
resources of the community.
(b)
Provide standards and requirements for regulation, placement,
construction, monitoring, design, modification and removal of
personal wireless service facilities.
(c)
(1)
F.
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:191
Provide a procedural basis for action within a reasonable
period of time for request for authorization to place, construct,
operate or modify personal wireless service facilities.
(d)
(e) Preserve property values.
Minimize the total number and height of towers throughout the
community.
(f)
Locate towers so that they do not have negative impacts, such
as, but not limited to, attractive nuisance, noise and falling
objects, on the general safety, welfare and quality of life on the
community.
(g)
Require owners of towers and personal wireless service
facilities to configure them so as to minimize and mitigate the
adverse visual impact of the towers and facilities.
(h)
Require tower sharing and the clustering of personal wireless
service facilities where possible.
(i)
(j) Encourage regional planning and use.
Consistency with federal law. These regulations are intended to be
consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in that:
They do not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the
provision of personal wireless services.
(a)
They are not intended to be used to unreasonably discriminate
among providers of functionally equivalent services.
(b)
They do not regulate personal wireless services on the basis of
the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the
extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with
the FCC's regulations concerning such emissions.
(c)
(2)
Exempted wireless telecommunications uses. This section
specifically exempts the following wireless telecommunications
facilities: police, fire, ambulance and other emergency dispatch;
amateur (ham) radio; citizens band radio; any existing commercial
radio tower; radio dispatch services for local businesses. No
personal wireless service facility shall be considered exempt from
this section for any reason whether or not said facility is proposed
to share a tower or other structure with such exempt uses.
(3)
Provisions of independent consultants.
Upon submission of an application for a special permit under
this section, the SPGA shall hire independent consultants
whose services shall be paid for by the applicant(s). These
consultants shall each be qualified professionals with a record
of service to municipalities in one of the following fields:
(a)
(4)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:192
[1] Telecommunications engineering.
[2] Structural engineering.
[3] Monitoring of electromagnetic fields.
[4] Others as determined necessary by the SPGA.
The SPGA shall select the independent consultant(s) after
consultation with the Planning Board, which may propose a list
of qualified candidates.
(b)
Prohibition of teleports. There shall be no teleport(s) within the
Town of Williamstown.
(5)
Application requirements:
No tower or personal wireless service facility shall be erected,
constructed or installed, excepting work that is determined
to be an eligible facilities request as defined by this chapter
without first obtaining a special permit from the SPGA. One or
both of two kinds of special permits are required: [Amended
5-20-2014 ATM, Art. 36]
For new tower construction (or major modification of an
existing tower); or
[1]
Personal wireless service facilities (or major modification
of an existing facility) to be mounted on an existing or
newly permitted tower or structure.
If the applicant is applying for both permits, they shall be
submitted and examined concurrently.
(c) Eight copies of the following additional information
must be submitted:
[1]Adequate coverage, adequate capacity and
justification of need:
[2]
(a)
(6)
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:193
[a] The applicant shall provide written
documentation of any facility sites in
Williamstown, in abutting towns and in Florida,
Massachusetts, in which it has a legal or
equitable interest, whether by ownership,
leasehold or otherwise. From each such facility
site, it shall demonstrate with written
documentation that these facility sites are not
already providing, or do not have the potential
by adjusting the site to provide, adequate
coverage and/or adequate capacity to the Town
of Williamstown. The documentation shall
include, for each facility site listed, the exact
location (in longitude and latitude, to degrees,
minutes and seconds), ground elevation, height
of tower or structure, type of antennas,
antenna gain, height of antennas on tower or
structure, output frequency, number of
channels, power input and maximum power
output per channel. Potential adjustments to
these existing facility sites, including changes
in antenna type, orientation, gain, height or
power output shall be specified. Radial plots
from each of these facility sites, as they exist,
and with adjustments as above, shall be
provided as part of the application.
[b] The application shall demonstrate with written
documentation that the applicant has
examined all facility sites located in
Williamstown, in abutting towns and in Florida,
Massachusetts, in which the applicant has no
legal or equitable interest, whether by
ownership, leasehold or otherwise to
determine whether those existing facility sites
can be used to provide adequate coverage and/
or adequate capacity to the Town of
Williamstown. The documentation shall
include, for each facility site examined, the
exact location (in longitude and latitude, to
degrees, minutes and seconds), ground
elevation, height of tower or structure, type
of antennas proposed, proposed antenna gain,
height of proposed antennas on tower or
structure, proposed output frequency,
proposed number of channels, proposed power
input and proposed maximum power output
per channel. Radial plots from each of these
facility sites, as proposed, shall be provided as
part of the application.
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:194
[c] The applicant shall demonstrate with written
documentation that they have analyzed the
feasibility of repeaters in conjunction with all
facility sites listed in compliance with
Subsection F(6)(c)[1][a] and [b] above to
provide adequate coverage and/or adequate
capacity to the Town of Williamstown. Radial
plots of all repeaters considered for use in
conjunction with these facility sites shall be
provided as part of the application.
Required documentation:
Eight copies of all submittals and showings pertaining
to FCC licensing, environmental impact statements, FAA
Notice of Construction or Alteration, aeronautical studies
and all data, assumptions and calculations relating to
service coverage and power levels regardless of whether
categorical exemption from routine environmental
evaluation under the FCC rules is claimed.
[1]
Eight copies of all information submitted in compliance
with requirements of the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health, 105 CMR 122, Fixed Facilities Which
Generate Electromagnetic Fields in the Frequency Range
of 300 KHz to 100 GHz and Microwave Ovens, or any
revisions thereof as the Department of Public Health may,
by written notice, create.
[2]
The exact legal name, address or principal place of
business and phone number of the applicant. If any
applicant is not a natural person, it shall also give the state
under which it was created or organized.
[3]
The name, title, address and phone number of the person
to whom correspondence or communications in regard to
the application are to be sent. Notice, orders and other
papers may be served upon the person so named, and such
service shall be deemed to be service upon the applicant.
[4]
Name, address, phone number and written consent to
apply for this permit of the owner of the property on which
the proposed tower shall be located or of the owner(s) of
the tower or structure on which the proposed facility shall
be located.
[5]
Required plans and engineering plans, prepared, stamped
and signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice
in Massachusetts. (Note: survey plans should also be
stamped and signed by a professional land surveyor.) Each
plan sheet shall have a title block indicating the project
[6]
(b)
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:195
title, sheet title, sheet number, date, revision dates,
scale(s) and original seal and signature of the professional
engineer (P.E.) and other professionals who prepared the
plan.
For new tower construction, or major modification of an
existing tower, a tower construction special permit is required.
The applicant shall provide a written, irrevocable
commitment valid for the duration of the existence of the
tower, to rent or lease available space for collocation on
the tower at fair-market prices and terms, without
discrimination to other personal wireless service
providers.
[1]
If applicant is not simultaneously applying for a personal
wireless service facilities special permit, it shall provide a
copy of its existing lease/contract with a personal wireless
service provider. A tower construction special permit shall
not be granted for a tower to be built on speculation.
[2]
The following plans and maps:
Location map: copy of a portion of the most recent
USGS Quadrangle Map, at a scale of 1:25,000, and
showing the area within at least two miles from the
proposed tower site. Indicate the tower location and
the exact latitude and longitude (degrees, minutes and
seconds).
[a]
Vicinity map at a scale not less than one inch equals
200 feet (1:2,400) with contour intervals no greater
than 10 feet (3 meters) showing the entire vicinity
within a two-thousand-foot radius of the tower site,
and including the topography, public and private
roads, buildings and structures, bodies of water,
landscape features (as listed in the Town of
Williamstown Open Space Plan), historic sites.
Indicate the property lines of the proposed tower site
parcel and of all abutters within 300 feet of the tower
site parcel, (from Assessors' maps or available
surveys). Include the names of all abutters within 300
feet of the tower site parcel. Indicate any access
easement or right-of-way needed for access from a
public way to the tower, and the names of all abutters
or property owners along the access easement or who
have deeded rights to the easement.
[b]
Existing conditions plan: a recent survey of the tower
site at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet
(1:480 or metric equivalent 1:500) with topography
drawn with a minimum of five-foot contour intervals,
[c]
[3]
(c)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:196
showing existing utilities, property lines, existing
buildings or structures, stone walls or fence lines,
wooded areas, individual trees with diameters greater
than 12 inches within a two-hundred-foot radius from
the base of the proposed tower (labeled with their
current heights). Show the boundary of any wetlands
or floodplains or watercourses, and of any bodies of
water included in the Aquifer Protection District
within 200 feet from the tower or any related facilities
or accessways or appurtenances. The survey plan
must have been completed, on the ground, by a
professional land surveyor within five years prior to
the application date, unless there has been substantial
change.
Proposed site plans: proposed facility site layout,
grading and utilities at the same scale as the existing
conditions plan.
Proposed tower location and any appurtenances,
including supports and guy wires, if any, and any
accessory building (communication equipment
shelter or other). Indicate property boundaries
and setback distances to the base(s) of the tower
and to the nearest corners of each of the
appurtenant structures to those boundaries, and
dimensions of all proposed improvements.
[i]
Indicate proposed spot elevations at the base of
the proposed tower and at the base of any guy
wires, and the corners of all appurtenant
structures.
[ii]
Proposed utilities, including distance from source
of power, sizes of service available and required,
locations of any proposed utility or
communication lines, and whether underground
or above ground.
[iii]
Limits of areas where vegetation is to be cleared
or altered, and justification for any such clearing
or alteration.
[iv]
Any direct or indirect wetlands alteration
proposed.
[v]
Detailed plans for drainage of surface and/or
subsurface water; plans to control erosion and
sedimentation both during construction and as a
permanent measure.
[vi]
[d]
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:197
Plans indicating locations and specifics of
proposed screening, landscaping, ground cover,
fencing, etc.; any exterior lighting or signs.
[vii]
Plans of proposed access driveway or roadway
and parking area at the tower site. Include
grading, drainage, traveled width. Include a cross
section of the access drive indicating the width,
depth of gravel, paving or surface materials.
[viii]
Proposed tower and appurtenances:
Plans, elevations, sections and details at
appropriate scales but no smaller than one inch
equals 10 feet.
[i]
Two cross sections through the proposed tower
drawn at right angles to each other, and showing
the ground profile to at least 100 feet beyond
the limit of clearing, and showing any guy wires
or supports. Dimension the proposed height of
tower above average grade at tower base. Show
all proposed antennas, including their location on
the tower.
[ii]
Details of proposed tower foundation, including
cross sections and details. Show all ground
attachments, specifications for anchor bolts and
other anchoring hardware.
[iii]
[iv] Detail proposed exterior finish of the tower.
Indicate relative height of the tower to the tops of
surrounding trees as they presently exist, and the
height to which they are expected to grow in 10
years.
[v]
Illustration of the modular structure of the
proposed tower indicating the heights of sections
which could be removed or added in the future to
adapt to changing communications conditions or
demands.
[vi]
A structural professional engineer's written
description of the proposed tower structure and
its capacity to support additional antennas or
other communications facilities at different
heights and the ability of the tower to be
shortened if future communications facilities no
longer require the original height.
[vii]
[e]
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:198
A description of available space on the tower,
providing illustrations and examples of the type
and number of personal wireless service facilities
which could be mounted on the structure.
[viii]
Proposed communications equipment shelter: floor
plans, elevations and cross sections at a scale of no
smaller that 1/4 inch equals one foot (1:48) of any
proposed appurtenant structure.
[f]
Sight lines.
A minimum of eight view lines in a zero to twomile
radius from the site, shown beginning at true
North and continuing clockwise at forty-fivedegree
intervals.
[i]
A plan map of a circle of two miles radius of the
facility site on which any visibility of the proposed
tower from a public way shall be indicated.
[ii]
Applicant shall utilize the USGS Quadrangle Map,
at a scale of 1:25,000, and submit profile
drawings on a horizontal scale of one inch equals
400 feet, with a vertical scale of one inch equals
40 feet. Trees shall be shown at existing heights
and at projected heights in 10 years.
[iii]
[g]
Balloon test. Within 35 days of submitting an
application, the applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise
upon a temporary mast, a three-foot diameter brightly
colored balloon at the maximum height of the
proposed tower. The dates (including a second date,
in case of poor visibility on the initial date), times
and location of this balloon test shall be advertised,
by the applicant, at seven and 14 days in advance
of the first test date in a newspaper with a general
circulation in the Town of Williamstown. The applicant
shall inform the SPGA and the Planning Board, in
writing, of the dates and times of the test, at least
14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at
least four consecutive hours sometime between 9:00
am and 5:00 p.m. of the dates chosen.
[h]
For new personal wireless service facility, or major
modification of an existing facility, a personal wireless service
facility special permit is required.
The following plans and maps:
Location map: copy of a portion of the most recent
USGS Quadrangle Map, at a scale of 1:25,000, and
[a]
[1]
(d)
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:199
showing the area within at least two miles from the
proposed facility site. Indicate the location of the
proposed personal wireless service facility, or of the
facility undergoing major modification, and the exact
latitude and longitude (degrees, minutes and
seconds).
Proposed facility plan: a recent survey of the facility
site at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet
(1:480 or metric equivalent 1:500) showing:
Horizontal and radial distances of antenna(s) to
nearest point on property line.
[i]
Horizontal and radial distances of antenna(s) to
nearest dwelling unit.
[ii]
Proposed utilities, including distance from source
of power, sizes of service available and required,
locations of any proposed utility or
communication lines, and whether underground
or above ground.
[iii]
Any changes to be made to the existing facility's
landscaping, screening, fencing, lighting,
drainage, wetlands, grading, driveways or
roadways, parking or other infrastructure as a
result of this proposed modification of the facility.
[iv]
[b]
Proposed communications equipment shelter:
Floor plans, elevations and cross sections at a
scale of no smaller than 1/4 inch equals one foot
(1:48) of any proposed appurtenant structure.
[i]
Representative elevation views, indicating the
roof, facades, doors and other exterior
appearance and materials.
[ii]
[c]
Proposed equipment plan.
Plans, elevations, sections and details at
appropriate scales but no smaller than one inch
equals 10 feet.
[i]
Number of antennas and repeaters, as well as the
exact locations, of antenna(s) and of all repeaters
(if any) located on a map as well as by degrees,
minutes and seconds of latitude and longitude.
[ii]
Mounting locations on tower or structure,
including height above ground.
[iii]
[d]
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:200
Antenna type(s), manufacturer(s), model
number(s).
[iv]
For each antenna, the antenna gain and antenna
radiation pattern.
[v]
Number of channels per antenna, projected and
maximum.
[vi]
[vii] Power input to the antenna(s).
Power output, in normal use and at maximum
output for each antenna and all antennas as an
aggregate.
[viii]
[ix] Output frequency of the transmitter(s).
General requirements.
New towers shall be set back at least one time the height of
the tower, plus 50 feet, from all boundaries of the site on which
the tower is located.
(a)
If the facility or tower site is in a wooded area, a vegetated
buffer strip of undisturbed trees shall be retained for at least
50 feet in width around the entire perimeter, except where the
access drive is located. The applicant shall obtain a financial
surety to cover the cost of the remediation of any damage to
the landscape that occurs during the clearing of the site.
(b)
Fencing and signs: The area around the tower and
communication equipment shelter(s) shall be completely
fenced for security to a height of six feet and gated. Use
of razor wire is not permitted. A sign no greater than one
square foot indicating the name of the facility owner(s) and a
twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number shall be posted
adjacent to the entry gate. In addition, no-trespassing or other
warning signs may be posted on the fence.
(c)
Communication equipment shelters and accessory buildings
shall be designed to be architecturally similar and compatible
with each other, and shall be no more than 12 feet high. The
buildings shall be used only for the housing of equipment
related to this particular site. Whenever possible, the buildings
shall be joined or clustered so as to appear as one building.
(d)
New towers shall not exceed the minimum height necessary
to provide adequate coverage for the personal wireless service
facilities proposed for use on the tower. The applicant may
submit a request for additional height to accommodate future
sharing and shall provide design information to justify such
additional height.
(e)
(7)
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:201
Tower finish. New tower(s) shall have a galvanized finish
unless otherwise required. The SPGA may require the tower(s)
to be painted or otherwise camouflaged to minimize the
adverse visual impact.
(f)
Tower(s) must be of a type which will maximize potential
sharing. Lattice-type structures are preferred, but where a
monopole is requested, the applicant must demonstrate the
future utility of such structure for expansion of service for the
applicant and other future applicants.
(g)
The use of repeaters to assure adequate coverage, or to fill
holes within areas of otherwise adequate coverage, while
minimizing the number of required towers is permitted and
encouraged. An applicant who has received a personal wireless
service facility special permit under this section may, with at
least 30 days' written notice to the Planning Administrator,
install one or more additional repeaters by right. Applicants
shall detail the number, location, power output and coverage
of any proposed repeaters in their systems and provide
engineering data to justify their use. [Amended 5-19-2015
ATM, Art. 38]
(h)
If primary coverage (greater than 50%) from proposed
personal wireless service facility is outside Williamstown, then
the permit may be denied unless the applicant can show that
he or she is unable to locate within the Town which is primarily
receiving service from the proposed facility.
(i)
Commercial advertising shall not be allowed on any antenna,
tower or accessory building or communication equipment
shelter.
(j)
Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration, no
night lighting of towers, or the personal wireless service
facility, is permitted, except for manually operated emergency
lights for use only when operating personnel are on site.
(k)
No tower or personal wireless service facility that would be
classified as a hazard to air navigation, as defined by the
Federal Aviation regulations (Title 14 CFR) is permitted.
(l)
No tower or personal wireless service facility with the
exception of repeaters shall be located:
No repeater shall be located closer than 50 feet to an
existing dwelling unit nor less than 25 feet above ground.
[1]
Within any of the following prohibited areas:
[a] Massachusetts or federally regulated wetland.
[b] A Massachusetts certified vernal pool.
[2]
(m)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:202
The habitat of any state-listed rare or endangered
wildlife or rare plant species.
[c]
Within 100 feet horizontally from any Massachusetts
regulated wetland.
[d]
Within the 200 feet horizontally of the Outer Riparian
Zone measured horizontally from any river or
perennial stream.
[e]
Parameters of appropriate siting:
Towers and personal wireless service facilities shall be
located so as to minimize the following potential impacts:
Visual/aesthetic: Towers shall, when possible, be sited
off ridge lines, and where their visual impact is least
detrimental to highly rated scenic areas.38
[a]
[b] Diminution of residential property values.
Safety: in cases of structural failure and attractive
nuisance.
[c]
Safety from excessive electromagnetic radiation: in
cases the tower or personal wireless service facility is
found to exceed the FCC guidelines.
[d]
[1]
The following locations are ranked in order of preference:
Shared use of existing personal wireless service
facilities shall be encouraged.
[a]
Clustering of towers: Applications for tower adjacent
to existing towers shall be encouraged.
[b]
The use of municipal lands which comply with other
requirements of this section, and where visual impact
can be minimized and mitigated, shall be encouraged.
[c]
The use of repeaters to provide adequate coverage
without requiring new tower(s) shall be encouraged.
[d]
The use of land distant from higher density residential
properties, and where visual impact can be minimized
shall be encouraged.
[e]
[f] Sharing with neighboring communities.
[2]
Towers and personal wireless service facilities shall be
located so as to provide adequate coverage and adequate
[3]
(n)
38.Editor's Note: See Massachusetts Landscape Inventory, MGL § 131, § 39A, conducted by
the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Management, 1982.
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:203
capacity with the least number of towers and antennas
which is technically and economically feasible.
The SPGA shall request input from the chiefs (or their
designees) of fire, police and other emergency services
regarding the adequacy for emergency access of the
planned drive or roadway to the site.
[4]
Evaluation by independent consultants.
Upon submission of a complete application for a special permit
under this section, the SPGA shall provide its independent
consultant(s) with the full application for their analysis and
review.
(a)
Applicants for any special permit under this section shall
obtain permission from the owner(s) of the proposed
property(s) or facility site(s) for the Town's independent
consultant(s) to conduct any necessary site visit(s).
(b)
(8)
Approval criteria.
In acting on the special permit application, the SPGA shall
proceed in accordance with the procedures and timelines
established for special permits in § 70-8.4D of this chapter.
(a)
In addition to the findings required by in § 70-8.4D of this
chapter, the SPGA shall, in consultation with the independent
consultant(s), make all of the applicable findings before
granting the special permit, as follows:
That applicant is not already providing adequate coverage
and/or adequate capacity to the Town of Williamstown;
and
[1]
That applicant is not able to use existing towers/facility
sites either with or without the use of repeaters to provide
adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity to the Town
of Williamstown; and
[2]
That the applicant has agreed to rent or lease available
space on the tower, under the terms of a fair-market lease,
without discrimination to other personal wireless service
providers; and
[3]
That proposed personal wireless service facility or tower
will not have an undue adverse impact on historic
resources, scenic views, residential property values,
natural or man-made resources; and
[4]
That the applicant has agreed to implement all reasonable
measures to mitigate the potential adverse impacts of the
facilities; and
[5]
(b)
(9)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:204
That the proposal shall comply with FCC Reg. 96-325
regarding emissions of electromagnetic radiation and that
the required monitoring program is in place and shall be
paid for by the applicant; and
[6]
Any decision by the SPGA to deny any application for a special
permit under this section shall be in conformance with Sec.
332 (47 USC 332) (7)(B)(iii) of the Act, in that it shall be in
writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a
written record.
(c)
Monitoring and evaluation of compliance.
Pretesting. After the granting of a special permit and before
the applicant's personal wireless service facilities begin
transmission, the applicant shall pay for an independent
consultant, hired by the Town, to monitor the background
levels of EMF radiation around the proposed facility site and/
or repeater locations to be utilized for the applicant's personal
wireless service facilities. The independent consultant shall
use the monitoring protocol. A report of the monitoring results
shall be prepared by the independent consultant and submitted
to the Planning Administrator. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM,
Art. 38]
(a)
Post-testing. After transmission begins, the owner(s) of any
personal wireless service facility(ies) located on any facility
site shall pay for an independent consultant, hired by the Town,
to conduct testing and monitoring of EMF radiation emitted
from said site, and to report results of said monitoring, as
follows:
There shall be routine annual monitoring of emissions by
the independent consultant using actual field
measurement of radiation, utilizing the monitoring
protocol. This monitoring shall measure levels of EMF
radiation from the facility site's primary antennas as well
as from repeaters (if any). A report of the monitoring
results shall be prepared by the independent consultant
and submitted to the Planning Administrator. [Amended
5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 30]
[1]
Any major modification of existing facility, or the activation
of any additional permitted channels, shall require new
monitoring.
[2]
(b)
Excessive emissions: Should the monitoring of a facility site
reveal that the site exceeds the FCC 96-326 standard, then the
owner(s) of all facilities utilizing that site shall be so notified.
The owner(s) shall submit to the SPGA and the Planning
Administrator a plan for the reduction of emissions to a level
(c)
(10)
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:205
that complies with the FCC 96-326 standard within 10 business
days of notification of noncompliance. That plan shall reduce
emissions to the standard within 15 days of initial notification
of noncompliance. Failure to accomplish the reduction of
emission within 15 business days of initial notification of
noncompliance shall be a violation of the special permit and
subject to penalties and fines as specified in § 70-8.1C of this
chapter. Such fines shall be payable by the owner(s) of the
facilities and antennas on the facility site, until compliance is
achieved. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38]
Structural inspection. Tower owner(s) shall pay for an
independent consultant (a licensed professional structural
engineer), hired by the Town, to conduct inspections of the
towers structural integrity and safety. Guyed towers shall be
inspected every three years. Monopoles and nonguyed lattice
towers shall be inspected every five years. A report of the
inspection results shall be prepared by the independent
consultant and submitted to the Planning Administrator. Any
major modification of an existing facility that includes changes
to tower dimensions or antenna numbers or type shall require
a new structural inspection. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art.
38; 5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 30]
(d)
Unsafe structure. Should the inspection of any tower reveal
any structural defect(s) which, in the opinion of the
independent consultant render(s) that tower unsafe, the
following actions must be taken. Within 10 business days of
notification of unsafe structure, the owner(s) of the tower shall
submit a plan to remediate the structural defect(s). This plan
shall be initiated within 10 days of the submission of the
remediation plan and completed as soon as reasonably
possible. Failure to accomplish this remediation of structural
defect(s) within 10 business days of initial notification shall be
a violation of the special permit and subject to penalties and
fines as specified in in § 70-8.1C of this chapter. Such fines
shall be payable by the owner(s) of the tower, until compliance
is achieved.
(e)
Removal requirements. Any personal wireless service facility which
ceases to operate for a period of one year shall be removed. "Cease
to operate" is defined as not performing the normal functions
associated with the personal wireless service facility and its
equipment on a continuous and ongoing basis for a period of one
year. At the time of removal, the facility site shall be remediated
such that all personal wireless service facility improvements that
have ceased to operate are removed. If all facilities on a tower
have ceased to operate, the tower shall also be removed, and the
site shall be revegetated. Existing trees shall only be removed if
necessary to complete the required removal. The applicant, upon
(11)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:206
obtaining a permit, shall obtain a financial surety to cover the
cost of removal of the personal wireless service facility and the
remediation of the landscape, should the facility cease to operate.
Insurance. Towers and personal wireless service facilities shall be
insured by the owner(s) against damage to persons or property. The
owner(s) shall provide a certificate of insurance to the Selectmen's
office on an annual basis in which the Town of Williamstown shall
be an additional named insured.
(12)
Severability cause. The invalidity of any section or provision of this
section shall not invalidate any other section or provision hereof.
(13)
Wind-generated energy production facilities. [Added 5-21-2002 ATM,
Art. 21]
Purposes. The purposes of this wind-generated energy production
facilities section are to:
Preserve the character and appearance of the Town while
simultaneously allowing alternative energy technologies to be
developed.
(a)
Protect the scenic, historic, environmental and natural or manmade
resources of the community.
(b)
Provide standards and requirements for regulation, placement,
construction, monitoring, design, modification and removal of
wind facilities.
(c)
Provide a procedural basis for action within a reasonable
period of time for request for authorization to place, construct,
operate or modify wind facilities.
(d)
(e) Preserve property values.
Locate wind facilities so that they do not have negative impacts
such as, but not limited to, attractive nuisance, noise and
falling objects on the general safety, welfare and quality of life
in the community.
(f)
Require owners of wind facilities to configure them so as to
minimize and mitigate the adverse impact of the wind facilities.
(g)
(1)
Application requirements:
No wind facility or part thereof (or major modification to any
of the foregoing) shall be erected, constructed or installed
without first obtaining a special permit from the Board of
Appeals. For purposes of this Subsection G(2)(a), "major
modification" shall be defined as any change that would alter
the criteria on which the original permit was granted such as
(a)
(2)
G.
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:207
modification of wind turbine height, size or number of blades,
noise levels or visual impact.
Required documentation. The applicant shall provide the
Board of Appeals with eight copies of each of the following:
[1] Duly executed application form.
The following plans and maps prepared, stamped and
signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in
Massachusetts:
Location map: copy of a portion of the most recent
USGS Quadrangle Map, at a scale of 1:25,000, and
showing the area within at least two miles from the
proposed wind facility.
[a]
Vicinity map at a scale not less than one inch equals
200 feet (1:2,400) with contour intervals no greater
than 10 feet showing the entire vicinity within a twothousand-
foot radius of the wind facility site, and
including the topography, public and private roads,
buildings and structures, bodies of water, landscape
features (as listed in the Town of Williamstown Open
Space Plan), historic sites. Indicate the property lines
of the proposed wind facility site parcel and of all
abutters within 300 feet of the site parcel (from
Assessors' maps or available surveys). Indicate any
access easement or right-of-way needed for access
from a public way to the wind facility, and the names
of all abutters or property owners along the access
easement or who have deeded rights to the easement.
[b]
Existing conditions plan: a recent survey of the site at
a scale no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet (1:480)
with topography drawn with a minimum of five-foot
contour intervals, showing existing utilities, property
lines, stone walls or fence lines, wooded areas,
individual trees with diameters greater than 12 inches
within a three-hundred-foot radius from the base of
the proposed wind facility (labeled with their current
heights) and existing buildings or structures within
a one-thousand-foot radius from the base of the
proposed wind facility. Show the boundary of any
wetlands or floodplains or watercourses, and of any
bodies of water included in the Water Resources
Overlay District within 200 feet from the wind facility
or any related facilities or accessways or
appurtenances. The survey plan must have been
completed, on the ground, by a professional land
surveyor within five years prior to the application
[c]
[2]
(b)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:208
date, unless there has been substantial change since
such date.
Proposed site plans: proposed wind facility site layout,
grading and utilities at the same scale as the existing
conditions plan.
Proposed wind facility location and any
appurtenances, including supports and guy wires,
if any, and any appurtenant structures and
equipment, including without limitation, power
lines and transformers. Indicate property
boundaries and distances to the base(s) of the
wind turbine(s) and to the nearest corners of each
of the appurtenant structures and equipment to
those boundaries and dimensions of all proposed
improvements. Indicate distances from the
base(s) of the wind turbines and the nearest
corners of each of the appurtenant improvements
to all buildings, skiing facilities, public and private
airports and airstrips and areas used by migratory
birds within a one-thousand-foot radius from the
base of each wind turbine.
[i]
Indicate proposed spot elevations at the base of
the proposed wind machine and the base of any
guy wires, and the corners of all appurtenant
structures.
[ii]
Proposed utilities, including distance from source
of power, sizes of service available and required,
locations of any proposed utility or
communication lines, and whether underground
or above ground. Limits of areas where vegetation
is to be cleared or altered and justification for any
such clearing or alteration.
[iii]
Detailed plans for drainage of surface and/or
subsurface water; plans to control erosion and
sedimentation both during construction and as a
permanent measure.
[iv]
Plans indicating locations and specifics of
proposed screening, landscaping, ground cover,
fencing, exterior lighting or signs.
[v]
Plans of proposed access driveway or roadway
and parking area at the wind facility whether
temporary or permanent; include grading,
drainage, and traveled width. Include a cross
section of the access drive indicating the width,
depth of gravel, paving or surface material.
[vi]
[d]
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:209
Proposed wind facility:
Plans, elevations, section and details at
appropriate scales but no smaller than one inch
equals 10 feet.
[i]
Two cross sections through the proposed wind
turbine drawn at right angles to each other and
showing the ground profile to at least 100 feet
beyond the limit of clearing, and showing any
guy wires or supports. Dimension the proposed
height of wind turbine above average grade at
wind turbine base.
[ii]
Detail of proposed exterior finish of the wind
turbine and any aboveground appurtenant
structures.
[iii]
Indicate relative height of the wind turbine to the
tops of surrounding frees as they presently exist,
and the height to which they are expected to grow
in 10 years.
[iv]
[e]
Proposed pad-mounted transformers, operations
control facility and maintenance facility: floor plans,
elevations and cross sections at a scale of no smaller
than 1/4 inch = one foot (1:48) of any proposed
appurtenant structure. Applicant shall also provide
representative elevation views, indicating the roof,
facades, doors and other exterior appearance and
materials.
[f]
Applicant shall submit computer-generated modeling
or other form of documentation acceptable to the
Board of Appeals to show the following:
[g]
Sight lines.
A minimum of eight view lines in zero-to-two-mile
radius from the site, shown beginning at true
North and continuing clockwise at intervals of
45°.
[i]
A plan map of a circle of two-mile radius of the
wind facility site on which any visibility of the
proposed wind turbines from a public way shall be
indicated.
[ii]
Applicant shall utilize the U.S.G.S. Quadrangle
map, at a scale of 1:25,000, and submit profile
drawings on a horizontal scale of one inch = 400
feet, with a vertical scale of one inch = 40 feet.
[iii]
[h]
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:210
Trees shall be shown at existing heights and at
projected heights in 10 years.
Post-construction simulated views. Applicant shall
provide projected post-construction simulated views
of the wind facility from up to six view lines with
locations as determined by the Board of Appeals and
Planning Board, in a one-to-three mile radius of the
project site.
[i]
Balloon test. Within 35 days of submitting an
application, applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise
upon a temporary mast, a three-foot diameter, nineand-
one-half-foot long brightly colored balloon at the
maximum blade tip height of the proposed wind
facility and at each end of the array of the wind facility.
The dates (including a second date, in case of poor
visibility on the initial date in the reasonable opinion
of the Board of Appeals), times and location of this
balloon test shall be advertised, by the applicant, at
seven and 14 days in advance of the first test date (and
the second date, if applicable) in a newspaper with a
general circulation in the Town of Williamstown. The
applicant shall inform the Board of Appeals, in writing,
of the dates and times of the test, at least 14 days in
advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least four
consecutive hours sometime between 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. of the dates chosen.
[j]
A regrading and revegetation program for temporary
roads required in connection with development of the
wind facility but no longer required after project
completion.
[k]
An avian risk assessment evaluating the potential
impact of the proposed facility on avian life, including,
without limitation, resident and migratory bird
habitats in and adjacent to the wind facility site.
[l]
Wildlife risk assessment evaluating the potential
impact of the proposed facility on resident and
migratory wildlife habitats in and adjacent to the wind
facility site.
[m]
Independent consultants.
Upon submission of a complete application for a special permit
under this article, the Board of Appeals shall hire independent
consultants whose services shall be paid for by the
applicant(s).
(a)
(3)
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:211
Applicants for any special permit under this section shall
obtain permission from the owner(s) of the proposed
property(s) or wind facility site(s) for the Town's independent
consultant(s) to conduct any necessary site visit(s).
(b)
General requirements.
Wind facilities shall be located in the RR-1 District and RR-2
District.
(a)
The height of any wind turbine as measured from average
grade shall be less than 200 feet and have a minimum blade
clearance from the ground immediately below each wind
turbine of 20 feet.
Height calculation. For purposes of calculating the overall
height of a wind turbine, the total height shall be measured
from average grade to the uppermost extension of any blade
or the maximum height reached by any part of the wind
turbine.
(b)
Setbacks.
Setbacks from adjacent parcels. A minimum setback for
each wind facility shall be maintained equal to two times
the overall wind turbine height, or 300 feet, whichever is
greater, from all boundaries of the site on which the wind
facility is located.
[1]
Setbacks for residences. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Subsection G(4)(c)[1] above, a minimum setback for each
wind turbine of at least 600 feet shall be maintained from
any building occupied by humans whether on site or on
adjacent parcels.
[2]
(c)
All electrical wires associated with the wind facility shall be
located underground between the wind turbine and the project
substation.
(d)
If the wind facility site is in a wooded area, a vegetated buffer
strip of undisturbed trees shall be retained for at least 50
feet in width around the entire perimeter except where the
access drive is located. Applicant shall obtain a financial surety
in form and amounts reasonably acceptable to the Board of
Appeals to cover the cost of the remediation and revegetation
of any damage to the landscape that occurs during the clearing
of the site.
(e)
Fencing and signs: The area around each wind turbine and
any appurtenant structure (other than an access road) shall
be completely fenced for security to a height of six feet and
gated. Use of razor wire is not permitted. One sign no greater
(f)
(4)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:212
than one square foot indicating the name of the wind facility
owner(s) and a twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number
shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. Signs warning of
high voltage electricity shall be posted on stationary portions
of each wind turbine, transformers and the operations control
facility. In addition, "No Trespassing" or other warning signs
may be posted on the fence. No advertising signs or logos shall
be permitted on site.
All appurtenant structures shall be designed to be
architecturally similar and compatible with each other, and
shall be no more than 12 feet high. The structures shall be used
only for the housing of equipment related to this particular
site. As a condition to granting a special permit, the Board of
Appeals may require the structures to be joined or clustered so
as to appear as one building.
(g)
Wind turbine finish. Wind turbines shall be of a nonreflective,
unobtrusive color with a nonreflective finish. The Board of
Appeals may require the wind turbines to be painted or
otherwise camouflaged to minimize the adverse visual impact.
(h)
Commercial advertising shall not be allowed on any part of the
wind facility.
(i)
Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
no night lighting of wind turbine, or any appurtenant building,
is permitted, except for manually operated emergency lights
for use only when operating personnel are on site. Applicant
shall provide the Board of Appeals with an official
determination by the FAA as to its lighting requirements and/
or markings.
(j)
No wind turbine that would be classified as a hazard to air
navigation, as defined by the Federal Aviation regulations
(Title 14 CFR) is permitted.
(k)
The Board of Appeals may impose such safety-related
conditions as it deems reasonably necessary, including but not
limited to manual and automatic controls to limit blade speed
and fire protection controls.
(l)
Parameters of appropriate siting:
Wind facilities shall be located so as to minimize the
following potential impacts:
Visual/Aesthetic: Wind facilities shall, when possible,
be sited off ridgelines, and where their visual impact
is least detrimental to highly rated scenic areas.
[a]
[b] Diminution of residential property values.
[1]
(m)
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:213
Safety: resulting from structural failure, "blade
throw," falling ice, and attractive nuisance.
[c]
Safety from excessive electromagnetic radiation: in
the event the wind facility is found to exceed the FCC
guidelines.
[d]
The following locations are ranked in order of preference:
The use of land which has already been developed for
another similar purpose, such as path of high-power
electric lines.
[a]
The use of land, distant from higher-density
residential properties, and where visual impact can be
minimized shall be encouraged.
[b]
Location can be accessed from existing developed
roads in order to avoid creation of new roads and
disruption of vegetation.
[c]
[2]
The Board of Appeals shall request input from the Chiefs
(or their designees) of fire, police and other emergency
services regarding the adequacy for emergency access of
the planned drive or roadway to the site.
[3]
The project operator shall be required to keep a log of all dead
birds found within 500 feet of a wind facility and make such log
available to the Board of Appeals upon request.
(n)
Operational noise. Operational noise from the wind facility
shall comply with the noise standards set forth in § 70-5.4E of
the Code. Wind facilities shall comply with the requirement for
Noise Zone C.
(o)
The Board of Appeals may impose such conditions as it deems
reasonably necessary to minimize or mitigate detrimental
effects to the environment, including, but not limited to glare
caused by construction and/or operation of the wind facility.
(p)
Construction of on-site roads for the installation and operation
of a wind facility shall be minimized. Temporary roads used
for initial installation shall be regraded and revegetated to a
natural condition upon completion of construction.
(q)
Wind facility projects which are granted a special permit by the
Board of Appeals pursuant to this section of the Code shall be
exempt from development plan review by the Planning Board
as set forth in § 70-8.2 of the Code.
(r)
(5) Approval criteria.
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:214
In acting on the special permit application, the Board of
Appeals shall proceed in accordance with the procedures and
timelines established for special permits in § 70-8.4D of this
chapter.
(a)
In addition to the findings required by in § 70-8.4D of this
chapter, the Board of Appeals shall, in consultation with the
independent consultant(s), make all of the applicable findings
before granting the special permit, as follows:
That wind facility will not have an undue adverse impact
on historic resources, scenic views, residential property
values, natural or man-made resources, wildlife; and
[1]
That the applicant has agreed to implement all reasonable
measures to mitigate the potential adverse impacts of the
wind facility; and
[2]
That the proposal shall comply with FCC Reg. {96-325}
regarding emissions of electromagnetic radiation and that
the required monitoring program is in place and shall be
paid for by the applicant; and
[3]
(b)
Monitoring and evaluation of compliance. [Amended 5-19-2015
ATM, Art. 38]
Pre-testing. After the granting of a special permit and before
the applicant's wind facility begins operation, the applicant
shall pay for an independent consultant, hired by the Town,
to monitor the background levels of EMF radiation and
operational noise, around the facility site. A report of the
monitoring results shall be prepared by the independent
consultant and submitted to the Planning Administrator.
(a)
Excessive emissions: Should the monitoring of a wind facility
site reveal that the site exceeds the FCC 96-326 standard with
respect to EMF radiation or violates § 70-5.4E with respect to
noise levels, then the owner shall be so notified. The owner
shall submit to the Board of Appeals and the Planning
Administrator a plan for the reduction of emissions to a level
that complies with the FCC 96-326 standard and/or noise levels
to comply with § 70-5.4E within 10 business days of notification
of noncompliance. That plan shall reduce emissions and/or
noise as required within 15 days of initial notification of
noncompliance. Failure to accomplish such reduction within 15
business days of initial notification of noncompliance shall be
a violation of the special permit and subject to penalties and
fines as specified in § 70-8.1C of this chapter. Such fines shall
be payable by the owner of the wind facility, until compliance
is achieved.
(b)
(6)
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:215
Removal requirements. Any wind facility which has reached the
end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be removed.
"Abandoned" is defined as the failure to operate the facility on
a continuous and ongoing basis for a period of one year. At the
time of removal, the wind facility site shall be reclaimed. All wind
turbines and appurtenant structures shall also be removed and the
wind facility site shall be revegetated. Existing trees shall only be
removed if necessary to complete the required removal. Applicant,
upon obtaining a special permit, shall deliver to the Board of
Appeals a financial surety, in form and amounts reasonably
acceptable to the Board of Appeals, to cover the cost of removal
and disposal of the wind facility and the remediation of the
landscape in accordance with this subsection. Such financial surety
shall be renewed and updated as necessary throughout the life of
the wind facility so as to continue to cover the removal, disposal
and remediation costs as set forth above. The foregoing
notwithstanding, the applicant shall be entitled to apply for a
special permit to leave the foundation of the wind facility intact in
order to minimize disruption to existing vegetation and minimize
erosion problems.
(7)
Severability clause. The invalidity of any section or provision of this
section shall not invalidate any other section or provision hereof.
(8)
Weddings and family celebrations on farms. Weddings and family
celebrations on farms (the "events") are allowed as indicated in
§ 70-3.3, Use Regulation Schedule. The purpose of this bylaw is to
provide an option to farms of sufficient size in order to promote the
sustainability of farming, the enhancement of our community and the
preservation of open space. Such uses shall comply with the following:
[Added 5-15-2012 ATM, Art. 31]
The events may only be held on farm property which qualifies as a
farm as defined by the Right to Farm Bylaw, Chapter 46, § 46-2 of
the Code of the Town of Williamstown.
(1)
The side, front and back setbacks for the event must be no less than
100 feet.
(2)
There shall be no electronically amplified sound at events except
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(3)
The maximum number of events per calendar year, per farm, shall
not exceed six events.
(4)
The Board of Appeals may approve such events for a multiyear
period of time, revocable subject to the applicant complying with
the provisions of this section, and any other conditions established
by the Board.
(5)
H.
Small concerts. Small concerts on farms are allowed as indicated in
§ 70-3.3, Use Regulation Schedule. The purpose of this bylaw is to
I.
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:216
provide an option to farms of sufficient size in order to promote the
sustainability of farming, the enhancement of our community and the
preservation of open space. Such uses shall comply with the following:
[Added 5-15-2012 ATM, Art. 32]
A "small concert" shall be defined as a concert at which no more
than 40 guests attend.
(1)
Small concerts may only be held on farm property which qualifies
as a farm as defined by the Right to Farm Bylaw, Chapter 46, § 46-2,
of the Code of the Town of Williamstown.
(2)
If outdoor, a small concert must have side, front and back setbacks
for the event of no less than 100 feet.
(3)
No small concert shall be held before 10:00 a.m. in the morning, or
later than 9:30 p.m. in the evening.
(4)
The Board of Appeals may approve such small concerts for a
multiyear period of time, revocable subject to the applicant
complying with the provisions of this section, and any other
conditions established by the Board.
(5)
Solar energy systems.39 [Added 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 39]
Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection J is to promote the
deployment of solar energy systems of all sizes by providing
reasonable standards for the placement, design, construction,
operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such
installations that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic,
natural and historic resources, and in the case of large
installations, to provide adequate financial assurance for their
eventual decommissioning.
(1)
General requirements for all canopy-mounted solar energy
systems.
Utility notification. No grid-connected canopy-mounted solar
photovoltaic system shall be installed until evidence has been
provided to the Building Commissioner as part of a building
permit application that the owner has notified the utility
company of the customer's intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems are exempt from
this requirement.
(a)
Design standards. All canopy-mounted solar energy
installations must fulfill the following requirements:
[1] Height limitations.
(b)
(2)
J.
39.Editor's Note: This subsection was originally enacted as Subsection H but was
renumbered as Subsection J to follow already existing Subsections H and I.
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:217
Maximum height: Each canopy-mounted solar array
(one or more solar panels that are joined as a unit),
together with its supporting structure, may not exceed
a height of 18 feet above the ground. In the case of
movable or tracking mounts, height is measured at
maximum design tilt.
[a]
Minimum clearance: Each canopy-mounted solar
array, together with its supporting structure, must
provide a minimum clearance of 13 feet to allow for
emergency vehicle and maintenance vehicle access.
[b]
General requirements for all ground-mounted solar energy
systems.
Utility notification. No grid-connected ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic system shall be installed until evidence has been
provided, to the Building Commissioner as part of a building
permit application for systems permitted by right or to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for systems permitted by special
permit, that the owner has notified the utility company of the
customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
(a)
Design standards. All ground-mounted solar energy
installations must fulfill the following requirements:
Height limitations. Each ground-mounted solar array (one
or more solar panels that are joined as a unit), together
with its supporting structure, may not exceed a height
of 15 feet above the ground. In the case of movable or
tracking mounts, height is measured at maximum design
tilt.
[1]
Dimension and density requirements.
Coverage area is calculated as the amount of
impervious area created by the panel support
structures.
[a]
All ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations
shall conform to the minimum yards, building cover
and open space requirements defined for the
underlying district in § 70-4.3.
[b]
Building cover shall be calculated as measured at
minimum design tilt.
[c]
The minimum required yard where abutting a
residential district for an installation in Limited
Industrial is reduced to 75 feet.
[d]
[2]
(b)
(3)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:218
Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be
subject to the district's regulations concerning the bulk
and height of structures, lot area, setbacks, open space,
parking and building coverage requirements. All such
appurtenant structures, including, but not limited to,
equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and
substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each
other. Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded
from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid
adverse visual impacts.
[3]
Lighting. No lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation
is permitted. Lighting of appurtenant structures is limited
to that required for safety and operational purposes. All
lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties
and shall comply with the requirements of 70-5.4D.
[4]
Requirements for large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations. In addition to the requirements of § 70-7.2J(3), the
additional requirements of this section shall apply to large-scale
solar photovoltaic installations.
Required documentation. The applicant shall submit
documentation required by § 70-8.2, Development plan review,
and shall also submit the following documentation to the
Zoning Board of Appeals or authority performing development
plan review:
Plans showing the following;
Property lines, easements, and physical features,
including roads, for the project site;
[a]
Proposed changes to the landscape of the site,
grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior
lighting, screening vegetation or structures;
[b]
Drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation signed
by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the
proposed layout of the system and any potential
shading from nearby structures;
[c]
Electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic
installation, associated components, and electrical
interconnection methods, with all National Electrical
Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices;
[d]
Documentation of the major system components to be
used, including the PV panels, mounting system, and
inverter;
[e]
[1]
(a)
(4)
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:219
Name, address, and contact information for proposed
system installer;
[f]
Name, address, phone number and signature of the
project proponent, as well as all co-proponents or
property owners, if any;
[g]
The name, contact information and signature of any
agents representing the project proponent.
[h]
Site control. The project proponent shall submit
documentation of actual or prospective access and control
of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and
operation of the proposed solar photovoltaic installation.
[2]
Operation and maintenance plan. The project proponent
shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance
of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation, which shall include measures for maintaining
safe access to the installation, stormwater controls, as well
as general procedures for operational maintenance of the
installation.
[3]
Design standards. In addition to the design standards of
§ 70-7.2J(3)(b), the following standards apply to large-scale
solar photovoltaic installations:
Signage. A sign is required to identify the owner and
provide a twenty-four-hour emergency contact phone
number. Solar energy installations shall not be used for
displaying any advertising except for reasonable
identification of the manufacturer or operator of the
installation. All signage must comply with Chapter 53,
Signs.
[1]
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts shall be made to
place all utility connections from the solar photovoltaic
installation underground, depending on appropriate soil
conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any
requirements of the utility provider. Electrical
transformers for utility interconnections may be above
ground if required by the utility provider.
[2]
Safety and environmental standards.
Emergency services. Upon request, the owner or
operator shall cooperate with local emergency
services in developing an emergency response plan.
All means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic
installation shall be clearly marked. The owner or
operator shall identify a responsible person for public
inquiries throughout the life of the installation.
[a]
[3]
(b)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:220
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts.
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what
is necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by
applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws.
[b]
Fencing. The entire perimeter of a large-scale solar
photovoltaic system shall be fenced and gated for
security purposes to a height of six feet or more. The
use of razor wire is not permitted.
[c]
Screening. All large-scale solar photovoltaic
installations shall be screened from the public way
and any adjacent residential property by plantings
of at least six feet in height and 90% opacity or in
cases where this may not be feasible by an alternative
deemed acceptable by the Zoning Board of Appeals or
other development plan review authority.
[d]
Monitoring and maintenance.
Solar photovoltaic installation conditions. The largescale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good
condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to, painting, structural repairs, stormwater
management, access, and integrity of security
measures. The owner or operator shall be responsible
for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic
installation and any access road(s).
[a]
Modifications. All material modifications to a solar
photovoltaic installation made after issuance of the
required building permit shall require approval by
either the Zoning Board of Appeals, if the original
installation was permitted pursuant to a special
permit, or other development plan review authority,
for all other large-scale ground-mounted solar
installations.
[b]
[4]
Abandonment or decommissioning.
Removal requirements. Any large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation which has
reached the end of its useful life or has been
abandoned shall be removed. The owner or operator
shall physically remove the installation no more than
150 days after the date of discontinued operations.
The owner or operator shall notify the Planning
Administrator by certified mail of the proposed date
[a]
[5]
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.2
1:221
of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
Decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations,
structures, equipment, security barriers and
transmission lines from the site.
[i]
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in
accordance with local, state, and federal waste
disposal regulations.
[ii]
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as
necessary to minimize erosion. The Planning
Administrator may allow the owner or operator
to leave landscaping or designated below-grade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and
disruption to vegetation.
[iii]
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating
circumstances, the solar photovoltaic installation shall
be considered abandoned when it fails to operate for
more than one year without the written consent of the
Zoning Board of Appeals or other development plan
review authority. If the owner or operator of the largescale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
fails to remove the installation in accordance with
the requirements of this section within 150 days of
abandonment or the proposed date of
decommissioning, the Town may enter the property to
the extent it is duly authorized by law and physically
remove the installation. As a condition of site plan or
special permit approval, the applicant and landowner
shall agree to allow entry to remove an abandoned
or decommissioned installation. The Town's cost for
the removal will be charged to the property owner in
accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 139, § 3A, as
a tax lien on the property.
[b]
Special permit approval criteria. Where a special permit is
required for a large- or medium-scale solar photovoltaic
installation, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall apply the
following guidelines to its deliberations:
In acting on the special permit application, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall proceed in accordance with the
procedures and timelines established for special permits
in § 70-8.4D of this chapter.
[1]
In addition to the findings required by § 70-8.4D of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make the
[2]
(c)
§ 70-7.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.2
1:222
§ 70-7.3. Accessory uses.
§ 70-7.4. Overlay District requirements.
following finding, that the applicant has taken all
reasonable measures to ensure the solar photovoltaic
facility will not have an undue adverse impact on historic
resources, scenic views, or natural or man-made
resources.
Home occupations. A home occupation is allowed in accordance with
§ 70-3.3B, Accessory Uses, as an accessory use, provided that the
following are complied with: [Amended 5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 32]
The profession or home occupation shall be conducted by not more
than two residents of the premises.
(1)
Not more than two persons, other than residents of the premises,
shall be regularly employed on the premises in connection with
such use.
(2)
No noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, unsightliness,
electrical interference or other nuisance shall be produced which
is discernible from other properties.
(3)
The use shall be clearly incidental to and secondary to the use as a
residence.
(4)
Less than 50% of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be
used for home occupation.
(5)
There shall be no external evidence of the office or occupation,
except as allowed by Chapter 53, Signs, of the Code of the Town of
Williamstown, and no exterior storage or display of goods or wares.
(6)
There shall be adequate off-street parking for employees and
visitors in connection with such use.
(7)
Excessive vehicular traffic is not generated. Vehicles used in
connection with the occupation shall be parked in the rear or side
yard or under cover.
(8)
A.
Accessory scientific uses. In all districts, activities accessory to
activities otherwise permitted as a matter of right, which activities
are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific
development or related production, whether or not on the same parcel
as activities permitted as a matter of right, are allowed subject to Board
of Appeals approval as provided in § 70-8.4.
B.
Floodplain District.
(1) Purpose. The purposes of the Floodplain District are to:
A.
§ 70-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:223
Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and
personal injury.
(a)
(b) Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials.
Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from
water quality, contamination and pollution due to flooding.
(c)
Avoid the loss of utility services which, if damaged by flooding,
would disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact
regions of the community beyond the site of flooding.
(d)
Eliminate costs associated with the response and cleanup of
flooding conditions.
(e)
Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from
flooding waters.
(f)
Notification of watercourse alterations. Notify, in a riverine
situation, the following of any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse:
(a) Adjacent communities.
NFIP State Coordinator: [Amended 5-16-2006 ATM, Art.
39]
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 800
Boston, MA 02114-2104
(b)
NFIP Program Specialist: [Amended 5-16-2006 ATM, Art.
39]
FEMA Region 1
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
(c)
(2)
Use regulations. [Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 26]
General. All development in the district, including structural
and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by
special permit, must be in compliance with MGL C.131, § 40,
and with the following:
Section of the Massachusetts State Building Code, which
addresses floodplain areas (currently 780 CMR 3107.0,
"Flood Resistant Construction").
[1]
(a)
(3)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:224
Wetland Protection Act Regulations, Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR
10.00).
[2]
Inland Wetlands Protection Restriction Regulations, DEP
(currently 310 CMR 13.00). [Amended 5-16-2006 ATM,
Art. 39]
[3]
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of
Sanitary Sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR, 15, Title 5).
[4]
Large developments. Base flood elevation data is required for
subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50
lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered
A Zones.
(b)
Variance. Any variances from the provisions and requirements
of the above-referenced regulations may only be granted in
accordance with the required variance procedures of these
state regulations.
(c)
In zones A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that have a
regulatory floodway designated on the Williamstown FIRM
Map, encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway
which would result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
[Added 5-16-2006 ATM, Art. 39]
(d)
Administrative. All definitive subdivision plans shall be reviewed by
the Planning Board to assure that:
(a) Such proposals minimize flood damage.
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(b)
Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(c)
(4)
Upland Conservation District.
Intent. The Upland Conservation District is intended to protect the
public health and safety; to protect persons and property against
the hazards of floodwater inundation and unsuitable and unhealthy
development of steep slopes, unsuitable soils, swamp land, marsh
land and watercourses; to protect the balance of nature, including
the habitat for birds, wildlife, insects and plants essential to the
survival of humans; to conserve and increase the amenities of the
Town, natural conditions and open spaces for education, recreation
and the general welfare.
(1)
Superimposition. The Upland Conservation District shall be
considered to be superimposed over any other district established
(2)
B.
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:225
by this chapter. Land in the district shall be used only for such uses
as are permitted in the underlying district subject to the following
additional restrictions.
Uses permitted. In the Upland Conservation District uses permitted
or permitted subject to approval under a special permit shall be the
same as for a Rural Residence District 1, except that single-family
dwellings are not allowed.
(3)
Development plan approval. All development within the Upland
Conservation District shall be subject to the requirements of
development plan approval as set forth in § 70-8.2.
(4)
Mobile Home Park District.
Intent. The Mobile Home Park District is intended for locations
suitable for the development of mobile home parks, compatible
with existing development and environmental constraints.
(1)
Mobile home parks are allowed in the overlay district subject to
special permit approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals under
the criteria of § 70-8.4D and to the Regulations Governing Mobile
Home Parks in Williamstown adopted by the Board of Health, as
most recently amended. [Amended 5-16-2017 ATM, Art. 35]
(2)
C.
Water Resource 1 and 2 and Confined Aquifer Districts.
Intent. The intent of the Water Resource and Confined Aquifer
Districts is to preserve and protect the water resources of the Town
of Williamstown and related areas against degradation through
either excessive planned disposal of wastes or unplanned
contingency resulting in contamination. The intent of the Water
Resource 1 District is to provide such protection for those areas
most clearly providing recharge to aquifers drawn upon for public
water supply, while Water Resource District 2 is intended to
provide such protection to other important recharge areas. The
Confined Aquifer District is intended to protect the integrity of
the impervious cover above aquifers drawn upon for public water
supply.
(1)
WRD use regulations.
Within Water Resource Districts 1 and 2 (WRD1 and WRD2),
the requirements of the underlying zoning districts continue
to apply, except that uses are prohibited where indicated by
"No" in the following schedule, and require a special permit
for water resource use where indicated by "SP", even where
underlying district requirements are more permissive. Where
there is no entry in this schedule, the underlying district
requirements are controlling.
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:226
DISTRICT
Uses WRD1 WRD2
Principal uses:
Manufacture, use, transport,
storage, transfer and disposal of
hazardous materials
No No
Truck terminal No SP
Sanitary landfill, junkyard, salvage
yard, sludge disposal, other solid
waste disposal
No No
Motor vehicle service, repair or
washing
No SP
Unsewered single-family dwelling
with lot area under 40,000 square
feet
SP SP
Accessory uses or activities:
Underground storage of hazardous
materials
No SP
Nonagricultural use involving
manufacture, processing, mixing,
transport or storage of hazardous
materials in excess of quantities
which, as wastes, are allowed
small quantity generators, as
defined in DEP Regulations 310
CMR 30
SP SP
Storage of ice control chemicals in
quantities requiring state reporting
No SP
Disposal of snow from outside the
district, if containing deicing
materials
No SP
Parking lot with 200 or more
spaces capacity
SP SP
Solid waste disposal, except brush
and stumps generated on the site
SP SP
Waste characteristics:
On-site disposal of industrial
waste, as defined in Title V
SP SP
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:227
DISTRICT
Uses WRD1 WRD2
Use (other than single-family
dwellings) having estimated on-site
sewage disposal exceeding 10
gallons per day per 1,000 square
feet of lot area or exceeding
15,000 gallons per day regardless
of lot area (flow based on Title V)
SP SP
Waste generation requiring the
obtaining of an EPA identification
number in excess of limits for a
very small quantity generator, as
required under DEP regulations,
310 CMR 30
SP SP
Other characteristics:
Rendering impervious more than
30% of lot area within the Water
Resource District
SP SP
Use (other than single-family
dwellings) retaining less than 30%
of lot area in its natural state with
no more than minor removal of
trees and ground vegetation
SP SP
Discharge to surface water
requiring an NPDES permit (314
CMR 3.00)
SP SP
Changes in activity resulting in the necessity of obtaining an
Environmental Protection Agency identification number as a
waste generator (other than a very small quantity generator),
changes resulting in crossing the thresholds of § 70-7.4D(2),
or change of proprietorship for a use which exceeds the
thresholds of § 70-7.4D(2) shall constitute change of use and
is allowed only under special permit as provided under
§ 70-7.4D(4) or as provided under § 70-1.4 for existing
nonconforming uses.
(b)
Confined Aquifer District use regulations. Within the Confined
Aquifer District, the requirements of the underlying zoning
districts continue to apply, except as follows:
Excavations, wells, borings or other man-made intrusions,
other than those made for a municipal use, shall extend into
the confined aquifer only if granted a special permit for water
resource use under Subsection D(4) of this section. Any
intrusion of greater than 50 feet depth below natural grade
(a)
(3)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:228
shall be presumed to extend into the confined aquifer unless
demonstrated otherwise either to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board in its development plan review, or to the
special permit granting authority, through its hearing on the
special permit application.
Wells must be constructed in accordance with any applicable
Board of Health regulations.40 Wells shall have top openings
higher than any potential surface sources of contamination and
above the base flood level (see § 70-7.4A), unless located in a
floodproofed well house, and shall employ approved backflow
preventers.
(b)
All nonyielding holes installed in the process of constructing
a well must forthwith be filled and sealed so as to not act as
a conduit to the groundwater, and any abandoned well shall
similarly be filled and sealed within one year of abandonment.
Filling shall be done with clean puddled clay, neat cement
grout or concrete grout. The well point shall be recovered if
possible.
(c)
Special permits.
Authority and procedure.
The special permit granting authority (SPGA) shall be the
Zoning Board of Appeals, except that if another agency is
designated under other provisions of this chapter as the
SPGA for the use being applied for, that agency shall act
as SPGA under this section.
[1]
Upon receipt of a complete application, the SPGA shall
transmit one copy each to the Planning Board,
Conservation Commission, Board of Health, Health
Department, Department of Public Works, Local Water
Resources Management Official, Municipal Coordinator
for Hazardous Substances and Planning Administrator for
their written recommendations. Failure to respond within
35 days of transmittal shall indicate approval by said
agencies and officials. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art.
38]
[2]
(a)
Submittals. When applying for a special permit for water
resource use, 10 copies of the following shall be submitted
to the SPGA by the date of first publication of public hearing
notice, unless the SPGA, prior to formal application,
determines that certain of these items are not germane:
A complete list of all hazardous materials to be used or
stored on the premises, accompanied by a description of
[1]
(b)
(4)
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Wells.
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:229
proposed storage containers and measures proposed to
protect from vandalism, corrosion and leakage and to
provide for spill prevention and countermeasures.
A description of potentially hazardous wastes to be
generated, indicating storage and disposal method.
[2]
A description of the site sufficient to describe any
hydraulic connection with off-site water supplies and
water bodies and of potential pollution by coliform
bacteria, nutrients or other contaminants, including, as
necessary, rock fracture trace mapping, test drilling and
test well observations, as detailed in administrative
regulations to be adopted and from time to time amended
by the Board of Appeals, following consultation with the
Board of Health, Health Department, Conservation
Commission, Planning Board and Director of Public Works.
[3]
Evidence of Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) approval of any wastewater treatment
system over 15,000 gallons per day capacity and of any
industrial waste treatment or disposal system.
[4]
For underground storage of hazardous materials, evidence
of qualified professional supervision of system design and
installation.
[5]
For disposal on-site of domestic wastewater with an
estimated sewage flow greater than 15,000 gallons per
day, evidence of qualified professional supervision of
system design and installation.
[6]
Special permit criteria.
Special permits for water resource use under § 70-7.4D
shall be granted only if the SPGA makes the following
determinations:
If waste characteristics of on-site disposal is the
reason a special permit is required under
§ 70-7.4D(2), that for the portion of the site within
the Water Resource District, nitrate loading would not
exceed 10 parts per million based upon the following
estimates, or other figures approved for the specific
project:
Sewage volume based on realistic estimate (not
simply design volume as required under Title V).
[i]
Rainfall:
[A] Valley = 40 inches.
[ii]
[a]
[1]
(c)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:230
[B] Mountain = 50 inches.
Fertilized area adds 0.6 pounds of nitrates per
1,000 square feet of lawn or garden.
[iii]
Nitrate concentrations:
[A] Sewage effluent = 40 parts per minute.
[B] Pavement runoff = 3.0 parts per million.
[C] Roof runoff = 0.75 parts per million.
Natural area recharge = 0.05 parts per
million.
[D]
[iv]
Recharge percentages:
[A] Sewage effluent = 95%.
[B] Pavement and roof = 95%.
Natural and fertilized areas = 40%.
and also that for other contaminants, similar
analysis would indicate groundwater
meeting all water quality standards (310
CMR 22.00).
[C]
[v]
That no private well or spring located off-site will be
degraded below State drinking water standards (310
CMR 22.00) as a result of development on this site;
and
[b]
That proposed control and response measures
adequately and reliably mitigate risk to groundwater
quality resulting from accident or system failure.
[c]
The SPGA shall retain qualified experts at the reasonable
expense of the applicant in order to evaluate the
application and submittals, except in those cases where
such assistance is determined by the SPGA to be
unnecessary because of the simplicity of the specific case.
[2]
Decision.
Conditions. Special permits shall be granted only subject
to such conditions as necessary to assure adequate
safeguarding of water quality, which may include the
following, among others:
Monitoring wells to be located down-gradient of
potential pollution sources, with periodic sampling to
[a]
[1]
(d)
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:231
be provided to the Health Department at the owner's
expense.
Pollutant source reduction, including limitations on
use of parking area deicing materials and periodic
cleaning or renovation of pollution control devices,
such as catch-basin sumps.
[b]
Departures. In its written decision, the SPGA shall explain
any departures from the recommendations of other Town
agencies or its retained experts.
[2]
Design and operations guidelines. Within Water Resource Districts,
the following design and operations guidelines shall be observed:
Safeguards. Provision shall be made to protect against
hazardous materials discharge or loss through corrosion,
accidental damage, spillage or vandalism. This shall be
accomplished through such measures as provision for spill
control in the vicinity of chemical or fuel delivery points,
secure storage areas for hazardous materials and indoor
storage provisions for corrodible or dissolvable materials.
(a)
Locations. Where the premises are partially outside of the
Water Resource District, such potential pollution sources as
on-site waste disposal systems shall, to the degree feasible, be
located outside the district.
(b)
Disposal. Provisions shall be made to assure that any waste
disposed on the site shall contain no hazardous materials, or
shall be disposed of in strict accordance with 310 CMR 30,
Hazardous Waste Regulations.
(c)
Drainage.
Provision shall be made for on-site recharge of all
stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces other than
roofs unless, in conducting development plan review, the
Planning Board determines that recharge either is
infeasible because of site conditions or is undesirable
because of uncontrollable risks to water quality from such
recharge.
[1]
Stormwater recharge shall be by surface infiltration
through vegetative surfaces unless otherwise approved
by the Planning Board during development plan review.
Where dry wells or leaching basins are used, they shall
be preceded by oil, grease and sediment traps. Drainage
from loading areas for toxic or hazardous materials shall
be separately collected for safe disposal.
[2]
(d)
(5)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:232
The Planning Board may require the submittal of a
maintenance and monitoring plan for stormwater facilities
to assure the continuing effectiveness of pollution control
provisions.
[3]
Sewerage. Sewerage within the Water Resource District shall
be designed and constructed in a manner such that
groundwater levels, flows and/or recharge will not be
significantly lowered, diverted or otherwise altered by such
construction, and that risk of leakage is minimized.
(e)
Ice-control chemicals. Where allowed, storage of ice-control
chemicals in quantities requiring state reporting shall be
authorized only within a weatherproof shelter having an
impervious floor and only if all loading and unloading will be
done within that shelter, with provisions made for safe cleanup.
(f)
Septic system cleaners. Septic system cleaners containing
toxic organic chemicals shall not be employed.
(g)
Fertilizers and pesticides. Fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides
and other leachable hazardous materials shall be stored
indoors only, and shall be applied in amounts not exceeding US
EPA and Massachusetts Pesticide Board standards and USDA
Best Management Practices standards.
(h)
Monitoring. Periodic monitoring may be required as a
condition of approval under development plan review or for
special permits, including sampling of wastewater disposed to
on-site systems or dry wells and sampling from groundwater
monitoring wells to be located and constructed as specified in
the special permit with reports to be submitted to the SPGA,
the Health Department and the Board of Water Commissioners.
The costs of monitoring, including sampling and analysis, shall
be borne by the owner of the premises.
(i)
Violations. Written notice of any violation shall be provided by the
Planning Administrator to the owner of the premises, specifying
the nature of the violation and specifying a time for compliance,
including cleanup of any spilled materials. The time allowed shall
be reasonable in relation to the public health hazard involved and
the difficulty of compliance, but in no event shall more than 30 days
be allowed for either compliance or finalization of a plan for longerterm
compliance. The costs of achieving compliance shall be borne
by the owner of the premises or, if uncollectible from the owner, by
the responsible occupant. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38]
(6)
Wellhead Protection District.
Intent. The Wellhead Protection District (WPD) is established to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community
by ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of drinking water for
(1)
E.
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:233
the residents, institutions and businesses of the Town; to preserve
and protect existing and potential sources of drinking water
supplies; to conserve the natural resources of the Town of
Williamstown; and to prevent temporary and permanent
contamination of the environment.
Superimposition. The Wellhead Protection District shall be
considered to be superimposed over any other district established
by this chapter. Within WPD, the requirements of the underlying
zoning districts continue to apply, except that uses are prohibited
where indicated by "No" in Table 7.4, and require a special permit
where indicated by "SP" in Table 7.4, even where the underlying
district requirements are more permissive. Where there is no entry
in Table 7.4, the underlying district requirements control.
Table 7.4
Wellhead Protection District Use Schedule
USES
1 Landfills and open dumps as defined in 310 CMR
19.006.
No
2 Storage of liquid petroleum products, except the
following:
No
a. Normal household use, outdoor maintenance
and heating of a structure,
b. Waste oil retention facilities, required by
statute, rule or regulation,
c. Emergency generators, required by statute,
rule or regulation,
d. Treatment works approved under 314 CMR
5.00 for treatment of ground or surface
waters,
provided that such storage, listed in items a through
d above, is in freestanding containers within
buildings or above ground with secondary
containment adequate to contain a spill the size of
the container's total storage capacity.
3 Landfilling of sludge or septage as defined in 310
CMR 32.05.
No
4 Storage of sludge and septage, unless such storage
is in compliance with 310. CMR 32.30 and 310 CMR
32.31.
No
(2)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:234
Table 7.4
Wellhead Protection District Use Schedule
USES
5 Individual sewage disposal systems that are
designed in accordance with 310 CMR 15.00 to
receive more than 110 gallons of sewage per
quarter acre under one ownership per day, or 440
gallons of sewage on any one acre under one
ownership per day, whichever is greater, provided
that the replacement or repair of a system, which
will not result in an increase in design capacity over
the original design, or the design capacity of 310
CMR 15.00, whichever is greater, shall be
exempted; in cluster subdivision the total sewage
flow allowed shall be calculated based on the
number of percable lots in the entire parcel.
No
6 Storage of deicing chemicals unless such storage,
including loading areas, is within a structure
designed to prevent the generation and escape of
contaminated runoff or leachate.
No
7 Storage of animal manure unless covered or
contained in accordance with the specifications of
the United States Natural Resources Conservation
Service.
No
8 Earth removal, consisting of the removal of soil,
loam, sand, gravel or any other earth material
(including mining activities) to within six feet of
historical high groundwater as determined from
monitoring wells and historical water table
fluctuation data complied by the United States
Geological Survey, except for excavations for
building foundations, roads, or utility works.
No
9 Facilities that generate, treat, store or dispose of
hazardous waste subject to MGL C. 21C and 310
CMR 30.000, except the following, which shall
require a special permit pursuant to subsection 20,
below:
No
a. Very small quantity generators as defined
under 310 CMR 30.000;
b. Household hazardous waste centers and
events under 310 CMR 30.390;
c. Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL
C. 21, § 52A;
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:235
Table 7.4
Wellhead Protection District Use Schedule
USES
d. Water remediation treatment works approved
by Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) or, where
applicable, a licensed site
professional (LSP) under 310 CMR 40.00, as
amended, for the treatment of contaminated
ground or surface waters.
10 Automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in
MGL C. 140B, § 1.
No
11 Treatment works that are subject to 314 CMR 5.00,
including privately owned sewage treatment
facilities, except the following:
No
a. The replacement or repair of an existing
treatment works that will not result in a
design capacity greater than the design
capacity of the existing treatment works;
b. The replacement of existing subsurface
sewage disposal system(s) with wastewater
treatment works that will not result in a
design capacity greater than the design
capacity of the existing system(s);
c. Treatment works approved by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection or, where applicable, an LSP,
designed for the treatment of contaminated
groundwater or surface water;
d. Sewage treatment facilities in those areas
with existing water quality problems when it
has been demonstrated to the Department of
Environmental Protection's and the special
permit granting authority's satisfaction and
approval both that these problems are
attributable to current septic systems and
that there will be a net improvement in water
quality.
12 Storage of hazardous materials, as defined in MGL
C. 21E, unless in a freestanding container within a
building or above ground with secondary
containment adequate to contain a spill the size of
the container's total storage capacity.
No
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:236
Table 7.4
Wellhead Protection District Use Schedule
USES
13 Industrial and commercial uses which discharge
process wastewater on-site.
No
14 Stockpiling and disposal of snow and ice containing
deicing chemicals if brought in from outside the
district.
No
15 Storage of commercial fertilizers, as defined in MGL
C. 128, § 64, unless such storage is within a
structure designated to prevent the generation and
escape of contaminated runoff or leachate.
No
16 The use of septic system cleaners which contain
toxic or hazardous chemicals.
No
17 Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that do
not conform to the Groundwater Protection District.
SP
18 The application of pesticides, including herbicide,
insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides, for
nondomestic or nonagricultural uses in accordance
with state and federal standards. The special permit
shall be granted if the applicant demonstrates that
such standards will be met. If applicable, the
applicant should provide documentation of
compliance with a Yearly Operating Plan (YOP) for
vegetation management operations under 333 CMR
11.00 or a Department of Food and Agriculture
approved Pesticide Management Plan or Integrated
Pest Management Plan (IPM) program under 333
CMR 12.00.
SP
19 The application of fertilizers for nondomestic or
nonagricultural uses. Such applications shall be
made in a manner so as to minimize adverse
impacts on groundwater due to nutrient transport,
deposition and sedimentation.
SP
20 Those activities that are exempt under Subsection 9
above, and activities that involve the handling of
toxic or hazardous materials as defined herein, in
quantities greater than those associated with
normal household use, if permitted in the
underlying zoning. Such activities shall require a
special permit to prevent contamination of
groundwater.
SP
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:237
Table 7.4
Wellhead Protection District Use Schedule
USES
21 The construction of dams or other water control
devices, ponds, pools, basins or other changes in
water bodies or courses, created for swimming,
fishing or other recreational uses, agricultural uses
or drainage controls or improvements. Such
activities shall not adversely affect water quality or
quantity.
SP
22 Any use that will render impervious more than 15%
or 2,500 square feet of any lot, whichever is greater.
A system for groundwater recharge must be
provided which does not degrade groundwater
quality. For nonresidential uses, recharge shall be
by stormwater infiltration basins or similar system
covered with natural vegetation. Dry wells shall be
preceded by oil, grease and sediment traps to
facilitate removal of contamination. Any and all
recharge areas shall be permanently maintained in
full working order by the owner.
SP
Special permits.
Authority. The special permit granting authority (SPGA) shall
be the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a)
Procedure.
Twelve copies of the following shall be submitted to the
SPGA by the date of the first publication of public hearing
notice, unless the Planning Administrator, prior to formal
application, determines that certain of these items are not
germane:
[a] Items [1] - [6] of § 70-7.4D(4)(b)
Evidence of compliance with the regulations of the
Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act
(310 CMR 30.000), including obtaining an EPA
identification number from the DEP.
[b]
Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous
materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces.
[c]
Proposed down-gradient location(s) for groundwater
monitoring well(s), should the SPGA determine the
activity a potential groundwater threat.
[d]
[1]
(b)
(3)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:238
Upon receipt of a complete application, the SPGA shall
transmit one copy each to the Planning Board,
Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works,
Board of Health, Planning Administrator and Municipal
Coordinator for Hazardous Substances for their written
recommendations. Failure to respond within 35 days of
transmittal shall indicate approval by said agencies and
officials. [Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38]
[2]
Special permit criteria.
In addition to the special permit criteria of § 70-8.4D,
special permits for the uses in Table 7.4 requiring a special
permit, except for 17 preexisting nonconforming uses
(which need only comply with the criteria of § 70-8.4D),
shall comply with the following criteria:
That no private well or spring located off-site will be
degraded below state drinking water standards (310
CMR 22.00) as a result of development on this site;
and
[a]
That proposed control and response measures
adequately and reliably mitigate risk to groundwater
quality resulting from accident or system failure.
[b]
[1]
The SPGA shall retain qualified experts at the reasonable
expense of the applicant in order to evaluate the
application and submittals, except in those cases where
such assistance is determined by the SPGA to be
unnecessary.
[2]
(c)
Decision.
Conditions. Special permits shall be granted subject to
such conditions as necessary to assure adequate
safeguarding of water quality, which may include the
following, among others:
Monitoring wells to be located down-gradient of
potential pollution sources, with periodic sampling to
be provided to the Health Department at the owner's
expense.
[a]
Pollutant source reduction, including limitations on
use of parking area deicing materials and periodic
cleaning or renovation of pollution control devices,
such as catch-basin sumps.
[b]
[1]
Departures. In its written decision, the SPGA shall explain
any departures from the recommendations of other Town
agencies or its retained experts.
[2]
(d)
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:239
Design and operations guidelines. Within the Wellhead Protection
District, the following design and operations guidelines shall be
observed:
Safeguards. Provision shall be made to protect against
hazardous materials discharge or loss through corrosion,
accidental damage, spillage or vandalism. This shall be
accomplished through such measures as provision for spill
control in the vicinity of chemical or fuel delivery points,
secure storage areas for hazardous materials and indoor
storage provisions for corrodible or dissolvable materials.
(a)
Locations. Where the premises are partially outside of the
Wellhead Protection District, such potential pollution sources
as on-site waste disposal systems shall, to the degree feasible,
be located outside the district.
(b)
Disposal. Provisions shall be made to assure that any waste
disposed on the site shall contain no hazardous materials, or
shall be disposed of in strict accordance with 310 CMR 30,
Hazardous Waste Regulations.
(c)
Drainage.
Provision shall be made for on-site recharge of all
stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces other than
roofs unless, in conducting development plan review, the
Planning Board determines either (i) that recharge is
infeasible because of site conditions, or (ii) that the
recharge is undesirable because of uncontrollable risks
to water quality from such discharge, or (iii) within the
Village Business District, that the runoff is designed to
flow to a stormwater sewer and the authority having
jurisdiction over said stormwater sewer gives written
confirmation and acceptance to the applicant, with a copy
filed with the Department of Inspection Services, that the
stormwater sewer system is capable of accepting such
runoff. [Amended 5-19-2009 ATM, Art. 32]
[1]
Stormwater recharge shall be by surface infiltration
through vegetative surfaces unless otherwise approved
by the Planning Board during development plan review.
Where dry wells or leaching basins are used, they shall
be preceded by oil, grease and sediment traps. Drainage
from loading areas for toxic or hazardous materials shall
be separately collected for safe disposal.
[2]
The Planning Board may require the submittal of a
maintenance and monitoring plan for stormwater facilities
to assure the continuing effectiveness of pollution control
provisions.
[3]
(d)
(4)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:240
Stormwater systems shall comply with § 70-5.3B,
Stormwater management. [Added 5-17-2011 ATM, Art.
34]
[4]
Sewerage. Sewerage within the Wellhead Protection District
shall be designed and constructed in a manner such that
groundwater levels, flows and/or recharge will not be
significantly lowered, diverted or otherwise altered by such
construction, and that risk of leakage is minimized.
(e)
Ice control chemicals. Where allowed, storage of ice control
chemicals in quantities requiring state reporting shall be
authorized only within a weatherproof shelter having an
impervious floor and only if all loading and unloading will be
done within that shelter, with provisions made for safe cleanup.
(f)
Septic system cleaners. Septic system cleaners containing
toxic organic chemicals shall not be employed.
(g)
Fertilizers and pesticides. Fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides
and other leachable hazardous materials shall be stored
indoors only, and shall be applied in amounts not exceeding US
EPA and Massachusetts Pesticide Board standards and USDA
Best Management Practices standards.
(h)
Monitoring. Periodic monitoring may be required as a
condition of approval under development plan review or for
special permits, including sampling of wastewater disposed to
on-site systems or dry wells and sampling from groundwater
monitoring wells to be located and constructed as specified in
the special permit with reports to be submitted to the SPGA,
Board of Health and Board of Water Commissioners. The costs
of monitoring, including sampling and analysis, shall be borne
by the owner of the premises.
(i)
Waubeeka Overlay District.41 [Added 5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 35]
Intent. The Waubeeka Overlay District is intended to permit and
encourage redevelopment at the Waubeeka property in a manner
that:
Preserves the majority of the area within the district, including
the golf course, as an important community recreational and
open space asset.
(a)
Is consistent and in keeping with the historical context of the
adjacent South Williamstown Historic District and the greater
community.
(b)
(1)
F.
41.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Station Mill Redevelopment District, added 5-18-2004
ATM, Art. 28, was repealed 5-15-2007 ATM, Art. 29.
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:241
Promotes the public welfare by encouraging the reuse and
enhancement of an existing economic asset.
(c)
The Waubeeka Overlay District is superimposed over the
underlying Rural Residence 2 District. Land in the district may be
used for such uses as are permitted by right or allowed subject
to special permit approval in the underlying district, subject to
the same requirements as in the underlying district. Within the
WOD, requirements of the underlying district shall apply except
where superseded by the special requirements of the WOD in
connection with WOD special permits. In the event a WOD special
permit lapses pursuant to § 70-8.4B, is permanently revoked, or is
permanently surrendered, the special requirements of such WOD
special permit shall expire.
(2)
Permissible uses. The following primary and accessory uses are
permitted in the WOD upon special permit from the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
Primary uses.
[1] Country inn.
[2] Restaurant.
[3] Membership club.
[4] Golf course which provides for public access.
(a)
Accessory uses.
[1] Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic systems.
(b)
(3)
Development standards.
Height Requirements: Buildings shall be limited to three
stories in height, and no higher than 40 feet. The exterior
design will reduce the apparent height and bulk of the
building. Design features should have architectural elements
that divide the building into smaller pieces. Applicants are
required to present plans that demonstrate consistency with
this objective.
(a)
Landscaping. Landscaping should reduce the apparent height
and bulk of the building. Landscape design will include trees,
singly or in clumps, arranged to break up the mass of the
building and provide a more human scale and shall be oriented
in order to reduce massing from adjacent properties and
preserve existing distant mountain view sheds to the maximum
extent practicable.
(b)
Dimensional requirements. The underlying dimensional
standards of the Rural Residence 2 District shall apply.
(c)
(4)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:242
Parking requirements: subject to parking determination from
the Planning Board as an unlisted use.
(d)
Access requirements. Access to building envelopes shall be
from New Ashford Road.
(e)
Open space and building envelopes. In connection with any WOD
special permit, the entire WOD shall be divided into open space and
building envelopes.
All areas not included in a building envelope shall remain open
space as a condition of any WOD special permit.
Permitted open space improvements. Open space shall
be inclusive of: subsurface infrastructure; accessory use,
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic infrastructure and
panels; golf course playing area; and such accessory
buildings reasonably necessary to support the operation
of such permitted open space improvements, provided no
such accessory buildings shall have an area in excess of
600 square feet. Examples of such accessory buildings
include pump houses, equipment shelters, control
technology shelters, rain shelters, restrooms and snack
sheds.
[1]
Prohibited open space improvements: all structures other
than those permitted under Subsection F(5)(a)[1] above.
[2]
(a)
Building envelopes. Structures, infrastructure, improvements
and landscaping may be permitted as described in the
definitions of "primary building envelope" and "secondary
building envelopes" set forth in Subsection F(8) below.
(b)
Infrastructure. All infrastructure in the district need not be
located on the same parcel, premises, or Assessor's Map Lot
as the structures or uses it supports. Building envelopes and
the structures, infrastructure, improvements and landscaping
within them may span parcels, premises, or Assessor's parcels
within the WOD.
(c)
Plan requirements. Any applicant for a WOD special permit
shall submit a plan defining open space areas and building
envelopes in accordance with this section and the definitions
of "primary building envelope" and "secondary building
envelopes" set forth in Subsection F(8) below. The plan shall be
prepared by an engineer, architect or registered surveyor, and
any WOD special permit shall include a condition approving
and referencing the open space/building envelope plan.
(d)
(5)
Special permit criteria. Any proposed development shall meet the
following criteria in addition to the special permit criteria of
§ 70-8.4D.
(6)
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:243
The overall development, including architectural design, shall
be of a form, style and scale that maintains and enhances those
qualities and historical traditions of the Five Corners National
Registered Historic District in order to protect the historic and
scenic character of the adjacent district.
(a)
The development shall considerately treat and not detract from
viewsheds described as Noteworthy and Distinctive in the
1982 Massachusetts Landscape Inventory published by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Management.
(b)
No dwelling units shall be located in the WOD as a condition of
any special permit which permits a country inn.
(c)
WOD conservation restriction. As a condition of the use and
occupancy of any country inn allowed by WOD special permit, a
conservation restriction (CR) shall be placed on all of Map 304, Lot
30 (the "CR Lot") under the following terms.
Allowed uses. The following uses are allowed on the CR Lot:
[1] A well or wells and all related infrastructure;
[2] Ground-mounted photovoltaic infrastructure and panels;
[3] Geothermal heating or cooling infrastructure;
All necessary activity and infrastructure to explore, dig for,
drill, affix upon, install and then draw from and convey
from the CR Lot the product of the above uses for the
purpose of serving any and all development located on
Map 303, Lots 17 and/or 51 and/or any division thereof:
[a] Forestry or tree farming;
[b] Passive recreation;
[c] Any use not inconsistent with CR as granted.
[4]
(a)
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited on the CR
Lot:
The construction or placing of any buildings,
improvements, or roadways other than as needed to
support the uses reserved in Subsection F(7)(a).
[1]
The placing, storage, or dumping of refuse, trash, vehicle
bodies or parts, rubbish, debris, junk, or waste;
[2]
The excavation from the CR Lot of any loam, peat, sand,
gravel, rock or other mineral resources, other than that
which is necessary to accommodate an allowed use.
[3]
(b)
(7)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:244
The CR shall be offered as a permanent conservation
restriction to the Town of Williamstown provided that if the
permanent CR is not approved by any governmental body as
required by MGL c. 184, § 26, 31, or 32, this Subsection F(7)
CR condition shall be satisfied by offering the CR to the Town
of Williamstown for 30 years pursuant to MGL c. 184, § 27, in
which case it shall be renewable for additional periods of 20
years, all as provided in said MGL c. 184, § 27.
(c)
In the event a WOD special permit lapses pursuant to
§ 70-8.4B, no CR shall be granted in connection with such
lapsed permit, but shall be granted pursuant to the terms
hereof in the event the lapsed permit is reinstated.
(d)
The CR shall not grant to the public any right to enter upon the
CR Lot.
(e)
WOD definitions. For the purposes of consideration of any WOD
special permit, the following terms, abbreviations and words shall
be defined as follows.
BUILDING ENVELOPES — Those areas of the WOD up to, but
not more than, 10 acres in total, in which all structures other
than permitted open space improvements as defined in Subsection
F(5)(a) must be located. The total acreage of the primary building
envelope and secondary building envelope(s), if any, shall not
exceed 10 acres.
COUNTRY INN — An establishment where overnight transient
sleeping accommodations are provided to lodgers in one or more
guest rooms without kitchens, not to exceed 120 such rooms. If
more than one room or area (for example, bedroom, living room or
dining area) is located within a single suite or unit, each component
room or area within such suite or unit counts as a separate "room"
for purposes of this section. Country inns have common sitting and
dining areas and may include a restaurant which may be open to
the general public. Country inns may further include the following
accessory uses:
GOLF COURSE — An area with at least 18 holes for playing golf,
including improved tees, greens, fairways, and hazards, and may
include a driving range, golf playing area. Golf course facilities may
include a clubhouse with golf related retail sales, e.g., pro-shop,
as well as a restaurant which may be open to the general public
("golf patron structures"); and golf course equipment maintenance
Limited accessory recreation facilities, e.g., swimming pool,
hiking trails, and tennis courts but not activities regulated by
MGL c. 140, § 205A.
(a)
Areas to accommodate social events or gatherings, e.g.,
conferences and weddings.
(b)
(8)
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:245
and storage structures and golf cart storage barns ("golf operations
structures").
OPEN SPACE — Areas left substantially in a natural or landscaped
state. The only improvements allowed in open space are permitted
open space improvements as described in Subsection F(5)(a)[1].
PRIMARY BUILDING ENVELOPE — A single area of up to but not
more than 10 acres of the WOD shall be designated the primary
building envelope. The primary building envelope shall be for
structures and uses listed in Subsection F(3)(a) above. All country
inns, golf course patron structures, and parking necessary for such
structures shall be located in the single primary building envelope.
Golf operations structures also may be located in the primary
building envelope or may be located in a secondary building
envelope or envelopes. The single primary building envelope shall
be located on Assessor's Map 303, Lot 17 and a contiguous portion
of Map 303, Lot 51 to the south of Map 303, Lot 17.
SECONDARY BUILDING ENVELOPES — One or more building
envelopes separate from the primary building envelope. Only golf
operations structures and parking for such structures are
permitted in a secondary building envelope. The total amount of
acreage devoted to any secondary building envelope(s) shall be
subtracted from the acreage available for the primary building
envelope such that the total acreage of the primary building
envelope and secondary building envelope(s), if any, shall not
exceed 10 acres.
Cable Mills Redevelopment District.
Intent. The intent of the Cable Mills Redevelopment District
(CMRD) is to encourage the redevelopment of the historic Cable
Mills site in a manner that:
(a) Preserves and complements adjacent historic properties;
Preserves the historic character and viability of the Cable Mills
District and maintains its place in Williamstown's history; and
(b)
Promotes diverse housing opportunities and uses including
residential, commercial, retail, office, or a combination thereof.
(c)
(1)
Superimposition. The Cable Mills Redevelopment District shall be
considered to be superimposed over the underlying Village
Business District. Within CMRD, the requirements of the
underlying district continue to apply, except that uses are
prohibited where indicated by "No," or require a special permit
where indicated by "SP" in Table 7.6, even when the underlying
district requirements are more permissive.
(2)
G.
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:246
Table 7.6
Cable Mills Redevelopment District Use Schedule
USES
(A) RESIDENTIAL USES
1 New two-family dwellinqs SP
2 New multifamily dwellings (see 70-7.1K) SP
3 Multifamily dwellings by conversion of an existing
historic building (see 70-7.1K)
SP
(B) BUSINESS USES
1 Theater, bowling alley, skating rink, club or other
place for amusement, exercise, or assembly
SP
2 Tourist home No
3 Hotel SP
4 Bus or taxi terminals No
5 Cemetery, hospital, sanitarium, nursing home or
other medical institution, including nonprofit
research laboratory or charitable institution.
No
6 Salesroom for automobiles, bicycles, boats, farm
implements and similar equipment
No
7 Gasoline service station, garage or repair shop
(see § 70-7.2.B)
No
8 Funeral Home No
9 Mortuary or crematory No
10 Restaurants closer than 50 feet to the south
property line
No
(C) INDUSTRIAL USES
1 Printing or publishing establishment No
(D) ACCESSORY USES
1 Parking of larger vehicles SP
Special permits.
Authority. The special permit granting authority (SPGA) shall
be the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a)
Procedure. All applications for special permits for the
construction or conversion of buildings for uses in Table 7.6
shall include a development plan, prepared in accordance with
§ 70-8.2. The Historical Commission shall receive copies of the
plan and proposal. The Historical Commission may comment
on whether the proposed use meets the criteria of § 70-8.4 and
(b)
(3)
§ 70-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7.4
1:247
recommend conditions and safeguards to meet the criteria or
mitigate negative impacts.
Criteria for special permits. In addition to the criteria set forth
in § 70-8.4D, special permits required for uses in Table 7.6
shall issue only after consideration of the project's compliance
with the following criteria: The development facilitates the
intent of the CMRD set forth in § 70-7.4.G(1) through:
Connection of buildings to the adjoining properties
through architectural style and scale;
[1]
[2] A mix of residential and commercial uses;
[3] Access to the Green River for recreation;
Diverse housing opportunities, including market rate
dwelling units and dwelling units that are affordable to
households at or below the then-current median income
for nonmetropolitan Berkshire County, as estimated by the
HUD Regional Economist; and
[4]
[5] Limiting risk to the Wellhead Protection District.
(c)
Decision. Special permits shall be granted subject to specific
findings by the SPGA that the development meets the criteria
of § 70-8.4 and the more specific criteria set forth above. In
granting special permits, the SPCA reserves the right to
impose conditions for the protection of the neighborhood and
Town water supply and the implementation of the stated intent
of the CMRD. Such conditions, safeguards, or limitations may
include, but not be limited to, those contained in § 70-8.4D.
(d)
§ 70-7.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-7.4
1:248
ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 70-8.1. Administration and enforcement. [Amended 5-19-2015
ATM, Art. 38; 5-17-2016, Art. 30]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced as
specified herein:
Building permits. No building permit, as defined by the Massachusetts
State Building Code, 780 CMR, shall be issued by the Building
Commissioner without certification from the Planning Administrator
that the construction, alteration, relocation, or change of use for which
the permit is sought complies with the then applicable zoning and any
applicable decisions from the SPGA or DPRA. Permit applications shall
be accompanied by a description of the existing and proposed use of
land or structures, a plan showing the dimensions of the development
site and locations and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures and dimensions of yards, as well as other information that
may be requested by the Planning Administrator. The Planning
Administrator may waive the required submittals if the proposed work
is of a minor nature.
A.
Occupancy certificates. A certificate of occupancy as defined by the
Massachusetts State Building Code, 780 CMR, shall not be issued
by the Building Commissioner without certification from the Planning
Administrator that the then applicable zoning and any applicable
decisions from the SPGA or DPRA are complied with. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the Building Commissioner, following
certification from the Planning Administrator, shall serve as evidence of
compliance with then applicable zoning.
B.
Violations and penalty. Violation shall be determined by the Planning
Administrator by an investigation of the fact and inspection of the
premises, after which he shall give notice thereof in writing to the
owner or to his duly authorized agent and to the occupant of the
premises, and shall order that any use of any premises contrary to the
provisions of Chapter 70, Zoning, shall immediately cease. Whoever
violates any provision of Chapter 70, Zoning, or any of the conditions
under which a permit is issued by the Building Commissioner, following
certification by the Planning Administrator, permission granted by the
Board of Appeals, or any decision rendered by the SPGA, or DPRA, shall
be liable to a fine as provided in the Noncriminal Disposition Bylaw42
for each violation. Each day of violation after such written notice will
be considered a separate offense. If, after such notice, the premises
continue to be used in a manner contrary to the provisions of Chapter
70, Zoning, or if any such owner or occupant shall fail to obey any law,
or if any such owner or occupant shall fail to obey any lawful order of
the Planning Administrator in respect to any violation or use contrary to
C.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, Noncriminal Disposition.
§ 70-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-8.1
1:249
§ 70-8.2. Development plan review.
the provisions of this chapter, the Planning Administrator shall institute
appropriate legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter
or to restrain by injunction any violation thereof, or both.
Request for enforcement. If the Planning Administrator is requested
in writing to enforce the Zoning Bylaw against any person allegedly
in violation thereof, and he declines to act, he shall notify, in writing,
the party requesting such enforcement, informing them of any action
or refusal to act, and the reasons therefor, within 14 days of receipt of
such request.
D.
Applicability. A development proposal is subject to development plan
review by the Development Plan Review Authority (DPRA) which shall
be the Planning Board for all proposals which do not need a special
permit, and the special permit granting authority (SPGA) for proposals
which require special permits. A development plan review is required
for development proposals which, under a single building permit,
involve: [Amended 5-18-2004 ATM, Art. 31]
Construction of a new nonresidential nonagricultural building, or
an addition to such a building of 2,500 square feet or more gross
floor area, or
(1)
Creation of, substantial alteration to, or addition to parking
facilities resulting in 10 or more parking spaces, or
(2)
Removal of existing vegetative ground cover from more than
20,000 square feet of site area, unless for agricultural use, or
(3)
(4) If the proposal is located in the Upland Conservation District.
Creation of, or substantial alteration to, a large-scale solar
photovoltaic installation. [Added 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 39]
(5)
A.
Exclusions. The following uses are excluded from development plan
review: [Added 5-21-2002 ATM, Art. 2143]
(1) Wind-generated energy facility.
B.
Submittals. The following materials shall be submitted for development
plan review, except any not germane to the specific case, as determined
by the Planning Board and communicated to the applicant in writing
prior to submittal:
Locus plan. A locus plan of the premises in question plus all land
within 300 feet of the property boundaries must be submitted,
showing streets, water bodies, property lines, property ownership,
zoning district boundaries and use of land and any buildings
(1)
C.
43.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsections B and C as Subsections C
and D, respectively.
§ 70-8.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-8.2
1:250
thereon. Information compiled from Williamstown Assessor's maps
is sufficient to satisfy this requirement. Abutters shall be notified
in accordance with the procedures and requirements of Section 11,
Chapter 40A, MGL for special permits, except for decision notice
requirements. [Amended 5-18-2004 ATM, Art. 29]
Site plan. A site plan prepared by a registered architect, landscape
architect, professional engineer or other design professional must
be submitted, showing the following:
Location and boundaries of the site and of any lots proposed,
and indication of each zoning district involved.
(a)
Use and ownership of adjacent premises, approximate location
of buildings within 50 feet of the site, and if the proposal
entails on-site sewage disposal, the approximate location of
any wells on or off the premises within 300 feet of the leaching
field or other discharge location.
(b)
Existing and proposed buildings, streets, ways, drives, walks,
service areas, parking spaces, loading areas, fences and
screening, utilities, waste storage and disposal facilities, wells
and drainage facilities.
(c)
Existing and proposed topography and vegetation, indicating
areas of retained vegetation and identifying the location of
any trees exceeding 24 inches trunk diameter 4 1/2 feet above
grade if proposed for removal, and identifying size and species
of trees and shrubs to be planted.
(d)
Indication of wetlands and other areas subject to control under
the Wetlands Protection Act, and the one-hundred-foot zone
surrounding such areas, identified through field survey
acceptable to the Conservation Commission; Floodplain and
Floodway boundaries; and analysis of potential impacts from
stormwater runoff and erosion, with corresponding control
measures. [Amended 5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 34]
(e)
Location of signs and exterior lighting, and accompanying
materials to describe those elements.
(f)
(2)
Building plans. Building floor plans and architectural elevations
must be submitted. These plans must be prepared by a registered
architect or engineer where so required by licensing law (generally
for buildings exceeding 35,000 cubic feet) and, at the applicant's
option, may be either schematic or construction drawings.
(3)
Documentation. Documentation must be submitted indicating that
all required submittals have been made to other agencies, such
as the Conservation Commission under the Wetlands Act, the
Williamstown Department of Public Works for utility connections,
the Massachusetts Department of Public Works for curb cut
(4)
§ 70-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-8.2
1:251
§ 70-8.3. Board of Appeals.
permits, the Board of Health or DEP for on-site disposal facilities
and an ENF to EOEA for MEPA review. [Amended 5-18-2004
ATM, Art. 31]
Additional requirements. Any additional studies or other materials
required under Article V, Development Standards, and elsewhere
in this chapter.
(5)
Review fee. A development plan review fee, as required under a
schedule of fees to be established and from time to time amended
by the Selectmen, based on the actual cost of review for
applications.
(6)
Procedure.
Initial review. Development plan materials shall be submitted to the
Planning Administrator, who shall forthwith make a determination
of whether those materials are complete, and if they are not, shall
so notify the applicant. The Planning Administrator shall distribute
copies of complete submittals to the DPW and Conservation
Commission for their review and comment, together with notice of
the date of the meeting at which the Planning Board will make its
review. Those agencies shall report their comments on compliance
to the Planning Board not later than the time of that meeting.
Notice of the proposals to be reviewed shall be published in a
local newspaper at least seven days prior to the date of review.
[Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38; 5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 30]
(1)
Determinations. The Planning Board shall determine whether or
not the development plan complies with the requirements of Article
V, Development Standards, and § 70-6.1, Off-street parking, and
shall notify the applicant, the Planning Administrator, and the
Building Commissioner of its determination within 45 days of the
time that complete materials have been received by the Planning
Administrator. Failure of the Planning Board to act within 45 days
shall be construed as determination of compliance, and the
Planning Board shall forthwith make such endorsement on the
submitted plans or, on its failure to do so, the Planning
Administrator shall issue a certificate of constructive approval.
[Amended 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38; 5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 30]
(2)
Notice to Building Commissioner. The Planning Administrator shall
notify the Building Commissioner of Planning Board action within
seven days of the Board's endorsement and in the case of Board
inaction, immediately following issuance of a certificate of
constructive approval. The Building Commissioner's actions on any
building permit application subject to these provisions shall be
substantially consistent with determinations by the Planning
Board. [Amended 5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 30]
(3)
D.
§ 70-8.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-8.3
1:252
§ 70-8.4. Special permits.
Establishment. There shall be a Board of Appeals of five members, and
three associate members, appointed as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 12.
[Amended 5-19-2009 ATM, Art. 34]
A.
Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
Deciding appeals. To hear and decide appeals taken by any person
aggrieved by inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action
from the Planning Administrator or by any person including an
officer or board of the Town of Williamstown or of an abutting Town
aggrieved by an order or decision of the Planning Administrator
in violation of any provision of MGL c. 40A, or this chapter, in
accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 8. [Amended 5-17-2016 ATM,
Art. 30]
(1)
Deciding petitions for variances. To hear and decide petitions for
variances for relief of hardship, in accordance with MGL C. 40A,
§ 10.
(2)
Deciding special permits. To hear and decide applications for
special permits as provided in this chapter in cases where the
Board of Appeals is designated as special permit granting authority.
(3)
Deciding comprehensive permits. To hear and decide applications
for comprehensive permits under the provisions of MGL C. 40B,
§§ 20 - 23.
(4)
B.
Exercising powers. In exercising the powers granted by Subsection B,
the Board of Appeals shall act in accordance with the provisions of MGL
C. 40A, §§ 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16, subject always to the rule
that it shall give due consideration to promoting public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare of the Town, and conserving property
values, and that it shall permit no building or use injurious, noxious,
offensive or detrimental to a neighborhood, and that it shall prescribe
appropriate safeguards and conditions in each case, and in general that
it shall act consistently with the purposes set out in Article I of this
chapter. [Amended 5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 35]
C.
Procedures. Procedures for matters before the Board of Appeals and
not specified in MGL C. 40A, shall be as set forth in regulations adopted
by the Board.
D.
Special permit granting authority. Unless specified otherwise by this
chapter, the Board of Appeals shall act as the special permit granting
authority (SPGA).
A.
Special permit duration. A special permit shall lapse within one year,
which shall not include such time required to pursue or await the
determination of an appeal from the grant thereof, if a substantial use
thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause or, in the case
B.
§ 70-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-8.4
1:253
of a permit for construction, if construction has not begun by such date
except for good cause.
Procedures and requirements.
When any body other than the Board of Appeals acts as a special
permit granting authority, it shall follow the procedures and
requirements of MGL C. 40A, § 9, as most recently amended.
(1)
At the time of application, the applicant shall submit
documentation as required in the regulations of the SPGA,
including documentation regarding each of the decision
considerations below which are germane. The special permit
granting authority shall refer such documentation to the Planning
Board, Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works or
other authorities, as appropriate, for technical review and
comment.
(2)
Special permits requiring development plan review. At the time
of the application, the applicant shall submit a development plan,
in accordance with § 70-8.2B, and documentation and submittals
regarding each of the special permit criteria below which are
germane. The special permit granting authority shall review the
special permit and development plan at the same hearing and
determine compliance with the special permit criteria and
development standards. Any special permit granted by the SPGA
under this section shall include a finding that the proposed
development plan complies with the applicable requirements of
Article V, Development Standards, and § 70-6.1, Off-street parking.
At least two weeks prior to the hearing, the special permit granting
authority shall refer submittals to the Planning Board,
Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works or other
authorities as appropriate, for technical review and comment.
[Added 5-18-2004 ATM, Art. 31; amended 5-17-2011 ATM,
Art. 35]
(3)
C.
Special permit criteria. The following shall be the basis for decisions on
special permits, except as may be more specifically provided elsewhere
in this chapter. Special permits shall be granted only if the special
permit granting authority determines that the proposal's benefits to the
Town will outweigh any adverse effects for the Town or the vicinity,
after consideration of the following, among other things:
Location.
Providing adequate water, sewerage and drainage for this
location should pose no unusual public problems, and
preferably would not result in utility extension past
undeveloped parcels.
(a)
The site should be able to accommodate the proposal without
substantial environmental damage due to wetland loss, habitat
(b)
(1)
D.
§ 70-8.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-8.4
1:254
disturbance, erosion, stormwater runoff, or damage to valuable
trees or other natural assets. [Amended 5-17-2011 ATM,
Art. 34]
The use and location proposed should result in minimal risk to
air, land or water resources because of planned processes or
unplanned contingencies.
(c)
If economically viable alternatives exist, the use should not
preempt land having special qualities suiting it for other uses,
such as agriculture on prime agricultural soils or industry at
rail-served locations.
(d)
Adjoining premises and the general neighborhood should not
be negatively affected by impacts, including those cited below.
(e)
Activity type and mix. Residential proposals should serve housing
needs of local residents, or broaden the diversity of housing
available within the Town.
(2)
Visual consequences.
Views from public ways and developed properties should be
considerately treated in the site arrangement and building
design.
(a)
Visibility of parking and service areas from nearby public
streets and, if located in a largely undeveloped context,
visibility of the entire development from more distant points,
should be minimized through site arrangement, use of tree
cover and other means.
(b)
Departure from the architectural scale of buildings on abutting
and nearby premises should be minimized, except where the
departure would serve some community design purpose.
(c)
(3)
Access.
Access to the location should increase existing traffic (average
daily, unless the Board of Appeals specifies otherwise) by no
more than 10% at any point, taking into consideration any
special access provisions committed (ride-sharing, etc.).
(a)
Pedestrian and vehicular movement to, from and within the
site should be safe and convenient, and arranged so as not to
disturb abutting properties.
(b)
(4)
Mitigation. Mitigation or, where that is inadequate, offsetting
compensatory actions, should be used to ameliorate negative
consequences for the vicinity or the Town.
(5)
Conditions, safeguards and limitations. Special permits may be
issued subject to such conditions, safeguards or limitations as the
(6)
§ 70-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-8.4
1:255
§ 70-8.5. Associate member of the Planning Board.
As authorized by MGL C. 40A, § 9, there shall be one associate member of
the Planning Board. Such associate shall act on special permit applications,
when the Planning Board is the special permit granting authority, when
designated to do so by the Planning Board Chairman, in case of absence,
inability to act or conflict of interest on the part of any member of the Board,
or in the event of a vacancy on the Board. The associate member shall be
appointed for a three-year term by a majority of the Board of Selectmen.
§ 70-8.6. Amendment.
This chapter may from time to time be changed as provided by MGL C. 40A,
§ 5, as amended.
special permit granting authority may impose for the protection of
neighboring uses or otherwise serving the purpose of this chapter.
Such conditions, safeguards or limitations may include, but are not
limited to, the following: [Amended 5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 35]
Front, side and rear yards greater than the minimum required
by this chapter; screening buffers of planting strips, fences or
walls as specified by the authority.
(a)
Limitations upon the size, number of occupants, method and
time of operation, time duration of the permit, or extent of
facilities.
(b)
Regulations of number and location of driveways, or other
traffic features, and off-street parking or loading, or other
special features beyond the minimum required by this chapter.
(c)
Master planned developments. A master plan for development of
premises comprising 10 or more acres may, at the owner's option, be
submitted for special permit approval as a major development, to be
acted on by the special permit granting authority otherwise having
jurisdiction for the uses proposed in the plan. Following approval of
such a plan, individual proposals on lots within those premises will not
be subject to review for special permits, regardless of relationship to
the floor area or dwelling unit thresholds of § 70-3, provided that the
Planning Board, in performing development plan review, determines
that the proposal is consistent with the approved master plan, which
means: [Amended 5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 35]
No departure by more than 10 feet from locations as shown on the
Master Plan;
(1)
No increase above maximum floor areas in any category of use
stipulated in the Master Plan; and
(2)
Off-site improvements being made as scheduled and financed as
proposed.
(3)
E.
§ 70-8.4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-8.7
1:256
§ 70-8.7. Validity.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 70-8.8. Effective date.
This chapter, or any amendment thereto, shall take effect on the date on
which such adoption or amendment is voted by the Town Meeting.
§ 70-8.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-8.8
1:257

ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 70-9.1. Word usage.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular
number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include
the singular number; and the word "land" includes the words "marsh" and
"water."
§ 70-9.2. Terms defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, abbreviations and
words shall be defined as follows, unless a contrary meaning is required in
the context or is specifically prescribed elsewhere in the Bylaw. Terms not
defined herein shall have the meaning given in definitions, if any, found in
the latest versions of these sources, in this order: Chapter 170, Subdivision
Rules and Regulations adopted by the Williamstown Planning Board, the
Massachusetts State Building Code and Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
AC — Acre(s).
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building devoted exclusively to an accessory
use as herein defined, and not attached to a principal building by any roofed
structure.
ACCESSORY USE — An activity incidental to and located on the same
premises as a principal use conducted by the same person or his agent. No
use (other than parking) shall be considered accessory unless functionally
dependent on and occupying less land area than the principal use to which
it is related and occupying less than 1/3 as much gross floor area as that
principal use, or such larger share as this chapter may specify for particular
uses.
ACT — The Telecommunications Act of 1996.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art.
25]
ADEQUATE COVERAGE — Coverage is considered to be "adequate" within
the area surrounding a base station where the predicted or measured
median field strength of the transmitted signal is greater than -95 dbm. It
is acceptable for there to be holes within the area of adequate coverage
where the signal is less than -95dbm, as long as the signal regains its
strength to greater than -95 dbm further away from the base station. For the
limited purpose of determining whether the use of a repeater is necessary
or desirable, there shall be deemed not to be adequate coverage within said
holes. The outer boundary of the area of adequate coverage, however, is
that location past which the signal does not regain a strength of greater
than -95 dbm.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
ADEQUATE CAPACITY — Capacity is considered to be "adequate" if the
grade of service is p.05 or better for at least 50% of the days in the
preceding month, prior to the date of application, as measured using direct
traffic measurement of the personal wireless service facility in question,
§ 70-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9.2
1:259
where the call blocking is due to frequency contention at the
antenna(s).[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
AIRPORT OR HELIPORT — A facility for the landing and takeoff of aircraft,
with or without incidental service, storage or sales, if having a level of
activity requiring it to have a certificate of approval from, or annual
registration with, the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission.
ANTENNA — A device which is attached to a tower or other structure
for transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves.[Added 5-19-1998
ATM, Art. 25]
ANTIQUE SHOP — A retail establishment which offers merchandise for
sale, at least 90% of which is over 50 years old.
AQUIFER — Geologic formation composed of rock, sand or gravel that
contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable water.
ASSISTED LIVING — Any residential development owned and operated by
an entity, whether conducted for profit or not for profit, which meets all of
the following criteria:
AVAILABLE SPACE — The space on a tower or structure to which antennas
of a personal wireless service provider are both structurally able and
electromagnetically able to be attached.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
BASE FLOOD LEVEL — The elevation of a flood having a one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year.
BASE STATION — The primary sending and receiving site in a wireless
telecommunications network. More than one base station and/or more than
one variety of personal wireless service provider can be located on a single
tower or structure.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE — A building or premises, other than
a tourist home, hotel or motel, where rooms (without kitchens) are let to
three or more persons by the week or longer, and meals may (or may not)
be regularly served to roomers by prearrangement for compensation.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof or cover supported by columns or
walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
A. Provides room and board; and
Provides directly, by employees of the entity, or through arrangements
with another organization which the entity may or may not control
or own, personal care services for three or more adults who are not
related by consanguinity or affinity to their care provider; and
B.
Collects payments or third-party reimbursements from or on behalf of
residents to pay for the provision of assistance with their daily living or
arranges for the same; and
C.
Is eligible for certification as an assisted living residence by the
Executive Office of Elder Affairs, pursuant to MGL C. 19D, and all other
applicable requirements.
D.
§ 70-9.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-9.2
1:260
BUILDING AREA — The area included within surrounding exterior walls.
Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included
in the building area if such areas are included within the horizontal
projection of the roof or floor above.[Added 5-17-2005 ATM, Art. 26]
BUILDING COMMISSIONER — That Town official designated by the Town
Manager to carry out the responsibilities as assigned by Section 3 of
Chapter 143 of the Massachusetts General Laws. The Building
Commissioner shall act as the Planning Administrator if no other official is
designated to that position.[Added 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38]
BUILDING- OR ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEM
— A solar photovoltaic panel or array, solar hot-air or hot-water panel
collector device, or other type of energy system which relies upon solar
radiation as a source for the generation of electricity or transfer of heat that
is mounted on a building or roof of a building.[Added 5-19-2015 ATM,
Art. 39]
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of lot area covered by building
roofs.
BUSINESS OFFICE — A building, or part thereof, used for the transaction
of business or the provision of services exclusive of the on-site sale of
merchandise; no medical or dental offices directly serving patients.[Added
5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 31]
CAFETERIA — Self-service facilities for sale of food and drink for
consumption on the premises.
CAMPER — A portable dwelling, eligible to be registered and insured for
highway use, designed to be used for travel, recreational and vacation
purposes, but not for permanent residence; includes equipment commonly
called fifth wheels, independent travel trailer, dependent travel trailer,
tent trailers, pickup campers, motor homes, converted buses and other
equipment, but not mobile homes.
CAMPGROUND — Any lot or tract of land upon which two or more plots are
available for campers.
CANOPY-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS — Canopymounted
solar photovoltaic installations are composed of solar photovoltaic
panels on mounting equipment and its supporting structures designed to be
installed over a parking lot or other access drives or vehicular maneuvering
area.[Added 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 39]
CHANNEL — The segment of the radiation spectrum from an antenna
which carries one signal. An antenna may radiate on many channels
simultaneously.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
CMR — Code of Massachusetts Regulations, as compiled and codified by the
Massachusetts Secretary of State.
COMMERCIAL POWER GENERATION — Generation of electric power,
other than by a public utility or as an accessory use, for sale to a public
utility.
§ 70-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9.2
1:261
COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT SHELTER — A structure located at a base
station designed principally to enclose equipment used in connection with
personal wireless service transmissions.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any facility operated on a regular basis whether
known as a day nursery, nursery school, kindergarten, child play school,
progressive school, child development center, or preschool, or known under
any other name, which receives children not of common parentage under
seven years of age, or under 16 years of age if such children have special
needs, for nonresidential custody and care during part or all of the day
separate from their parents. Day-care center shall not include any part of
a public school system; any part of a private, organized educational system
unless the services of such systems are primarily limited to kindergarten,
nursery or related preschool services; a Sunday School conducted by a
religious institution; a facility operated by a religious organization where
children are cared for during short periods of time while persons
responsible for such children are attending religious services; a family
day-care home; an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or
relatives; or the occasional care of children with or without compensation
therefor provided; in the last two instances, such arrangement or care shall
not be for more than five children including participating children living in
residence.
Db(A) — Decibel as measured on the "A" scale of a standard sound meter.
DBM — Unit of measure of the power level on an electromagnetic signal
expressed in decibels referenced to one milliwatt.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM,
Art. 25]
DEP — Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
DPW — Department of Public Works, Williamstown's if not otherwise
specified.
DWELLING — A building or part of a building used as the living quarters
for one or more families.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A structure containing three or more
dwelling units, including single-family attached units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached structure, other than a mobile
home, containing no more than one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached structure containing two dwelling
units.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion of a building intended as living
quarters for a single family, having a single kitchen not shared with any
other unit.
EARTH REMOVAL — The removal of earth, including soil, loam, sand,
gravel, clay, stone, quarried rock or other subsurface materials, except
water, for sale or for use on different premises than the place of extraction,
except where entirely incidental to or in connection with development on
the same premises for which a building permit is in force, or for the grading
§ 70-9.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-9.2
1:262
of a public street or any other street in accordance with an approved
definitive subdivision plan.
ELDERLY HOUSING — Housing reserved for occupancy by households
consisting of one or more persons at least half of whom are 62 years of age
or older.
ELECTROMAGNETICALLY ABLE — The determination that the new signal
from and to the proposed new antennas will not significantly interfere with
the existing signals from and to other facilities located on the same tower
or structure as determined by a qualified professional telecommunications
engineer. The use of available technologies to alleviate such interference
shall be considered when making this determination.[Added 5-19-1998
ATM, Art. 25]
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST — A request for a modification of an
existing tower or personal wireless service facility that involves co-location
of new transmission equipment, removal of transmission equipment, or
replacement of transmission equipment which does not substantially
change the physical dimensions of the tower or personal wireless service
facility.[Added 5-20-2014 ATM, Art. 36]
EMF — Electromagnetic frequency radiation.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM,
Art. 25]
ENF — Environmental notification form as required by MEPA for
determination of whether an environmental impact study will be required.
EOEA — Massachusetts Executive Office of Environmental Affairs.
EPA — United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FACILITY SITE — A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased
by one or more personal wireless service providers and upon which one
or more personal wireless service facility(ies) and required landscaping are
located.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit, plus no more than two domestic employees, boarders or
lodgers.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence which, on a regular
basis, receives, for temporary custody and care during part or all of the
day, children under seven years of age or children under 16 years of age
if such children have special needs; provided, however, in either case, that
the total number of children under 16 in a family day-care home shall not
exceed six, including participating children living in the residence. Family
day-care home shall not mean a private residence used for an informal
cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional
care of children with or without compensation therefor.
FARM OUTLET — Facilities for the sale of produce and wine and dairy
products, either seasonal or year round, where the majority of such
products for sale during June through September, based on either gross
§ 70-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9.2
1:263
sales dollars or volume, have been produced by the owner of the land on
which the outlet is located.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission; the government agency
responsible for regulating telecommunications in the United States.[Added
5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
FCC 96-326 — A report and order which sets new national standards
for emissions of radio frequency emissions from FCC-regulated
transmitters.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
FLOODPROOFED — Constructed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water; and with structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the design plan
specification and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for accomplishing that.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the horizontal areas of the several
floors of all buildings on the same lot, or where apt, the sum of such areas
in a specified use. Gross floor area is measured from the exterior face of
exterior walls (or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings or
portions of buildings), including elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor
and interior balconies and mezzanines, but not including interior vehicle
parking or loading areas, cellars with walls more than 50% below grade,
and areas having less than six feet floor-to-ceiling height.
FLOOR AREA, LEASABLE — The sum of the area on the several floors of a
building which is or could be leased, including leasable basements.
FRONT BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the street line touching that
part of the building facing the street which is farthest away from the street.
GARAGE, YARD OR TAG SALES — Outdoor or garage retail sale or offering
for sale, conducted by a resident of the premises, involving 10 or more items
of personal property, such as antiques, furniture, handicrafts, household
goods or clothing, on no more than two occasions in any calendar year, each
occasion lasting no more than 36 hours.
GHZ — Gigahertz: one billion hertz.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
GIFT SHOP — A retail establishment which offers merchandise for sale that
can normally be expected to be given as gifts. Gift shop does not include
furniture, bedding, appliances, shoes or similar items, but does include
handicrafts, pottery, art and similar merchandise.
GRADE OF SERVICE — A measure of the percentage of calls which are able
to connect to the base station, during the busiest hour of the day. Grade
of service is expressed as a number, such as p.05, which means that 95%
of callers will connect on their first try. A lower number (p.04) indicates a
better grade of service.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
§ 70-9.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-9.2
1:264
HERTZ — One hertz is the frequency of an electric or magnetic field
which reverses polarity once each second, or one cycle per second.[Added
5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
HOME OCCUPATION — An endeavor, business, profession, occupation,
or trade conducted by the occupant of a dwelling that is incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling unit as a residence.[Amended
5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 32]
HOTEL OR MOTEL — A building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings
on a single lot, providing transient sleeping accommodations to the general
public in guest units without kitchens, plus not more than a single accessory
dwelling unit, but not including a tourist home or boarding or rooming
house.
HUD — United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
IMPERVIOUS — Impenetrable by surface water, or having a percolation
rate longer than 30 minutes per inch.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Material or structure on, above or below the
ground that does not allow precipitation surface water to penetrate directly
into the soil.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A planned development of a tract of land designed
as a coordinated environment for a variety of industrial, office, research
and related activities. It has an enforceable master plan and/or covenants,
conditions and restrictions.44
KITCHEN — A place for preparation of meals, having a stove and either or
both a sink and a refrigerator.
LANE — A street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by 12 or
fewer dwelling units (120 trips or fewer, based on the ITE Trip Generation
Manual), which provides access to no abutting property either used or
zoned for business or industry, and which is capable of extension.
LIVESTOCK RAISING — Commercial raising or breeding of animals (other
than household pets) for sale, or poultry farms.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — An off-street space or berth, on the same
lot with the building it serves, for the temporary parking of vehicles while
loading or unloading merchandise or material, and which has access to a
street, alley or other appropriate means of ingress or egress.
LOCAL CRAFTS — Production, sale and distribution of products indigenous
to the Berkshires, to the arts or to handcraft industries (such as handloomed
fabrics, hand-blown glass, pottery, paintings) or specialty food products
(such as baked goods or candy), using no motors of more than five
horsepower.
44.Editor's Note: The definition of "Inspector of Buildings," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 38. See now the definitions of "Building
Commissioner" and "Planning Administrator."
§ 70-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9.2
1:265
LOT — A continuous parcel of land in the same ownership throughout, with
boundaries established through one or more recorded deeds or plans.
LOT AREA — The horizontal area of a lot exclusive of any area in a street
or recorded way open to public use. At least 90% of the lot area required
for compliance shall also be exclusive of areas subject to protection under
the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL C. 131, § 40, for reasons other than being
subject to flooding.
LOT, BUILDING — A lot as defined above which is available for building, in
that it meets dimensional and access requirements of this chapter and has
no restriction on it precluding its use for building.
LOT CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection.
LOT FRONTAGE — The boundary of a lot on land coinciding with a street
line if there are both rights of access and potential vehicular access across
that boundary to a potential building site, measured continuously along
one street line between side lot lines; in the case of corner lots, measured
between the side lot line and the midpoint of the corner radius on the
street designated as the frontage street by the owner or, failing that, by the
Planning Administrator.[Amended 5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 30]
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Major residential development as defined below,
or any use requiring a special permit under Article III, Use Regulations,
because of exceeding stipulated floor area thresholds, if any.
MAJOR MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING FACILITY — Any change or
proposed change to any existing tower or personal wireless service facility
that will result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of the
tower or personal wireless service facility.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art.
25; amended 5-20-2014 ATM, Art. 36]
MAJOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Either of the following from
or on a parcel or set of contiguous parcels in common ownership as of
the effective date of this provision:[Amended 5-18-2004 ATM, Art. 28;
5-16-2006 ATM, Art. 38]
MANUFACTURING — A mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or components into new products, including fabrication,
processing, finishing or packaging.
Land division (whether subdivision or not, as defined by MGL c. 41,
§ 81L) so as to increase the number of buildable lots by more than
seven. Lots which would otherwise be buildable, but have been
permanently restricted in order to prevent any residential use, shall not
be counted for these purposes.
A.
Issuance of building permits for the construction of more than eight
dwelling units on premises other than assisted living residence, or
in the Cable Mills Redevelopment District, or in the Village Business
District, Limited Business District, Planned Business District or land
division noted above. [Amended 5-15-2007 ATM, Art. 32;
5-19-2009 ATM, Art. 32; 11-14-2017 STM, Art. 6]
B.
§ 70-9.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-9.2
1:266
MARIJUANA PRODUCTION FACILITY — An entity licensed by the Cannabis
Control Commission or having received a final certificate of registration
from the Massachusetts Department of Public Health to cultivate and/
or obtain, manufacture, process and package marijuana and marijuana
products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana retail
establishments and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to other
marijuana retail establishments, but not to consumers, in accordance with
applicable Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 5-16-2017 ATM, Art. 36]
MARIJUANA RETAIL — An establishment licensed by the Cannabis Control
Commission or having received a final certificate of registration from the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health to purchase and deliver
marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana production facilities and
to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products
to other marijuana retail establishments and consumers, for recreational
or medicinal means in accordance with applicable Massachusetts General
Laws and state regulations.[Added 5-16-2017 ATM, Art. 36]
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — An entity licensed by the Cannabis
Control Commission or having received a final certificate of registration
from the Massachusetts Department of Public Health to test marijuana and
marijuana products, including certification for potency and the presence
of contaminants, in accordance with applicable Massachusetts General
Laws.[Added 5-16-2017 ATM, Art. 36]
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — For purposes of a stormwater
management plan (see § 70-5.3B), an applicant seeking to demonstrate
compliance with some or all of the standards set forth in the DEP
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook to the maximum extent practicable
shall demonstrate (i) that it has made all reasonable efforts to meet each
of the applicable standards, (ii) that it has made a complete evaluation of
all possible stormwater management measures, including environmentally
sensitive site design that minimizes land disturbance and impervious
surfaces, structural stormwater best management practices (BMPs),
pollution prevention, erosion and sedimentation control, and proper
operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs, and (iii) if full compliance
with the standards cannot be achieved, the applicant is implementing the
highest practicable level of stormwater management.[Added 5-17-2011
ATM, Art. 34]
MEDICAL OFFICE — A building or portion thereof where patients are
seen for examination and/or treatment by one or more physicians, dentists
or other medical personnel, psychologists, or social workers.[Added
5-17-2016 ATM, Art. 31]
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A private organization, building or grounds, to
include specifically country clubs and fraternities and other organizations
to which membership is limited or controlled.
MEPA — Massachusetts Environmental Protection Act.
MGL — Massachusetts General Laws, as most recently amended.
MHFA — Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency.
§ 70-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9.2
1:267
MHZ — Megahertz: one million hertz.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
MINING — The removal or relocation of geologic materials, such as topsoil,
sand, gravel, metallic ores or bedrock.
MINOR LANE — A lane which provides frontage and access for not more
than three lots for single-family use and approved by the Planning Board
under § 70-7.1J of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit built on a chassis and containing
complete electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities and designed to be
installed on a temporary or permanent foundation for permanent living
quarters, as defined in the Regulations Governing Mobile Home Parks
adopted by the Board of Selectmen, acting as the Board of Health.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any lot or tract of land upon which two or more
mobile homes occupied for dwelling purposes are located, including any
buildings, structures, fixtures and equipment used in connection with said
mobile homes, as defined in the Regulations Governing Mobile Home parks
adopted by the Board of Selectmen as the Board of Health.
MONITORING — The measurement, by the use of instruments in the field,
of the radiation from a site as a whole, or from individual personal wireless
service facilities, towers, antennas or repeaters.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM,
Art. 25]
MONITORING PROTOCOL — The testing protocol, initially the Cobbs
Protocol, which is to be used to monitor the emissions from existing and new
personal wireless service facilities upon adoption of § 70-7.2F. The SPGA
may, as the technology changes, require, by written regulation, the use of
other testing protocols. A copy of the monitoring protocol shall be on file
with the Board of Selectmen and the Town Clerk.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM,
Art. 25]
MONOPOLE — A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy-wire
anchors, consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal, or a wooden
pole with below grade foundations.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
MUNICIPAL USE — Any use of land or structures by the Town of
Williamstown in accordance with statutory laws governing municipal
powers and functions.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure lawfully in existence or
begun before the first publication of notice of the public hearing for a zoning
dimensional or other building regulation to which it does not conform.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot lawfully created before the first date
of applicability for presently applicable lot area and/or lot frontage
requirements of this chapter to which it does not conform.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building, structure or land lawfully
in existence or begun before the first publication of notice of the public
hearing for a zoning use regulation to which it does not conform.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
§ 70-9.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-9.2
1:268
PERSON — A corporation, company, association, society, firm, partnership,
joint-stock company, cooperative or condominium association, as well as an
individual, a state and any political subdivision of a state or any agency or
instrumentality thereof.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access
services. These services include cellular services, personal communications
services (PC5), specialized mobile radio services and paging
services.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — All equipment (including
any repeaters) with which a personal wireless service provider broadcasts
and receives the radio frequency waves which carry their services and all
locations of said equipment or any part thereof. This facility may be sited on
one or more towers or structure(s) owned and permitted by another owner
or entity.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER — An entity, licensed by the
FCC to provide personal wireless services to individuals or
institutions.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
PLANNING ADMINISTRATOR — The Director of the Community
Development Department or other Town official designated by the Town
Manager to carry out the duties assigned to that position in this chapter.
The Planning Administrator shall act as the Zoning Enforcement Officer and
is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.[Added 5-19-2015 ATM,
Art. 38]
PPM — Parts per million.45
PUBLIC LANDFILL — A site authorized under 310 CMR 19 where solid
waste from off the premises is disposed through burial.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Facilities used for public utility purposes owned or
operated by any company regulated by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Utilities.
RADIATION PROPAGATION STUDIES or RADIAL PLOTS — Computergenerated
estimates of the radiation emanating from antennas or repeaters
sited on a specific tower or structure. The height above ground, power input
and output, frequency output, type of antenna, antenna gain, topography of
the site and its surroundings are determining whether a site will provide
adequate coverage for the personal wireless telecommunications service
facility proposed for that site.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
RECHARGE AREAS — Areas that collect precipitation or surface water and
carry it to aquifers. Recharge areas may include areas designated as Zone
I, Zone II or Zone III.
45.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “professional office,” which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 5-17-2016, Art. 31. See now the definitions of “business
office” and “medical office.”
§ 70-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9.2
1:269
REPEATER — A small receiver/relay transmitter of not more than 20 watts
output designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive
adequate coverage directly from a base station.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM,
Art. 25]
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Research and development facilities
are those used primarily for research, development and/or testing of
innovative information, concepts, methods, processes, materials, or
products. This can include the design, development, and testing of
biological, chemical, electrical, magnetic, mechanical, and/or optical
components in advance of product manufacturing.[Added 5-18-2010
ATM, Art. 32]
RENEWABLE ENERGY — Any energy resource that is naturally regenerated
over a short time scale and derived directly from the sun (such as thermal,
photochemical, and photoelectric), indirectly from the sun (such as wind,
hydropower, and photosynthetic energy stored in biomass), or from other
natural movements and mechanisms of the environment (such as
geothermal and tidal energy). Renewable energy does not include energy
resources derived from fossil fuels, waste products from fossil sources, or
waste products from inorganic sources.[Added 5-18-2010 ATM, Art. 32]
RESPONSIBLE PARTIES — Owner(s), persons with financial responsibility,
and persons with operational responsibility for a stormwater management
system.[Added 5-17-2011 ATM, Art. 34]
RESTAURANT — A facility primarily for the preparation and sale of food
and drink in individual portions ready for consumption without further
processing, whether or not for consumption on the premises, except where
such sales are clearly incidental to other activities on the premises.
SCS — United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
SELF STORAGE — A building containing. separate storage spaces, which
may be of various sizes, leased or rented on an individual basis. The storage
spaces may be accessed either internally or externally and shall be
secured.[Added 5-20-2014 ATM, Art. 35]
SF — Square feet.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure, device, letter, word model,
banner, pennant, insignia, symbol, trade flag or representation used as, or
which is in the nature of, an advertisement, announcement or direction,
or is designed to attract the eye, either by its presence or by intermittent
or repeated motion or illumination, which is on a public way or on private
property within public view of a public way, public park or reservation.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS (LARGE-SCALE) — Large-scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations are composed of solar
photovoltaic panels on ground-based mounting systems (poles or racks)
where the combined total area of the solar panels is greater than 20,000
square feet.[Added 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 39]
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS (MEDIUM-SCALE) — Mediumscale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations are composed of solar
§ 70-9.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-9.2
1:270
photovoltaic panels on ground-based mounting systems (poles or racks)
where the combined total area of the solar panels is greater than 1,000
square feet and 20,000 square feet or less.[Added 5-19-2015 ATM, Art.
39]
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS (SMALL-SCALE) — Small-scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations are composed of solar
photovoltaic panels on ground-based mounting systems (poles or racks)
where the combined total area of the solar panels is 1,000 square feet or
less.[Added 5-19-2015 ATM, Art. 39]
SPECIAL PERMIT — A permit which the special permit granting authority
(the Planning Board or the Board of Appeals, as designated in this chapter)
is authorized to grant upon its finding that the criteria for approval have
been satisfied.
SPGA — Special permit granting authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be special permit granting authority for § 70-7.2F.[Amended
5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which handles average daily traffic
equivalent to that generated by 50 homes or more (500 trips or more, based
on ITE Trip Generation Manual).
STREET, DEAD-END — A street, extension of a street or system of streets
connected to other streets only at a single point.
STREET, NONRESIDENTIAL — A street that serves as access for land in a
nonresidential district.
STREET, MINOR — A street which cannot qualify as a lane, but which can
be expected to handle less traffic than a collector street.
STORAGE YARD — Premises for outside storage of materials, such as sand
or lumber, or of fabricated subassemblies or equipment.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or, if there be no floor above
it, then the space between such floor and ceiling next above it. Any portion
of a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional
story for each 14 feet or fraction thereof. "One-half story" means any story
or space situated wholly or partly in the roof, so designed, arranged or built
to be used for storage or habitation.
STREET — A public way or a private way either shown on a plan approved
in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law46 or otherwise qualifying a
lot for frontage on a street under the Subdivision Control Law.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a street and a lot and, in the
case of public way, the street line established by the public authority laying
out the way upon which the lot abuts.47
46.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 41, §§ 81A through 81-GG.
47.Editor’s Note: The definition of "structurally able," added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25, which
immediately followed this definition, was deleted 5-18-2010 ATM, Art. 28.
§ 70-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9.2
1:271
STRUCTURE — Any building or other construction, erection, assemblage or
other combination of materials upon the land necessitating piling, footings
or a foundation for attachment to the land, including swimming pools
24 or more inches deep or having a surface of 75 or more square feet
and including all swimming pools permanently equipped with a water
circulating system.
TELEPORT — A facility utilizing satellite dishes of greater than 2.0 meters
in diameter designed to uplink to communications satellites for transmitting
in the C-Band (46 – GHz) spectrum.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
TITLE V — Title V of the State Environmental Code, 310 CMR 15.00,
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage.
TOURIST HOME — An establishment in a dwelling with transient
accommodations for more than two and fewer than 10 overnight fee-paying
guests, or any dwelling rented or leased for periods of fewer than 35
days more than twice in a year; includes establishments called "bed-andbreakfasts."
If having more accommodations or not in a dwelling, such
establishments are categorized as "hotel or motel".
TOWER — A lattice structure or framework, or monopole, that is designed
to support personal wireless service transmission, receiving and/or relaying
antennas and/or equipment.[Added 5-19-1998 ATM, Art. 25]
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of physical
or chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual or
potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human health if such
substance or mixture were discharged to land or water of the Town of
Williamstown. Toxic or hazardous materials may include, without limitation,
synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive
or infectious wastes, acids or alkalis and all substances defined as toxic or
hazardous under MGL C. 21C and 21E and 310 CMR 30.00, and 40.00, and
also include such products as solvents and thinners in quantities greater
than normal household use.
USC — United States Code.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WIND FACILITY — All equipment, machinery and structures utilized in
connection with commercial wind-generated energy production and
generation, including related transmission, distribution, collection, storage
or supply systems whether underground, on the surface or overhead, and
other equipment or byproducts in connection therewith and the sale of the
energy produced thereby, including, but not limited to, wind turbine (rotor,
electrical generator and tower), anemometers (wind measuring equipment),
transformers, substation, power lines, control and maintenance facilities,
sue access and service roads. For purposes of this definition, the term
"commercial" shall mean those facilities which have less than 50% of their
electrical output used on site.[Added 5-21-2002 ATM, Art. 21]
WIND TURBINE — Equipment used in wind-generated energy production.
Wind turbines capture the kinetic energy of the wind and convert it into
§ 70-9.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-9.2
1:272
electricity. Primary components are the rotor (blade assembly), electrical
generator, and tower. Wind turbines are mounted on lattice or tubular steel
towers.[Added 5-21-2002 ATM, Art. 21]
YARD — An open space located between a street or other property line and
any structure or element thereof other than a fence, wall, other customary
yard accessory or projection allowed by the State Building Code to encroach
on a court or yard.
YARD, FRONT — A yard or yards abutting the street line on each street
the lot adjoins, extending across the full width of the lot, measured
perpendicular to the street line.
YARD REAR — A yard abutting a rear property line, extending across the
full width of the lot, measured perpendicular to the rear lot line. The rear lot
line is typically a line or set of lines approximately parallel to the street line,
separating lots whose frontage is established on different streets. Yards on
irregularly shaped lots where "side" versus "rear" is indeterminate shall be
construed as rear yards.
YARD, SIDE — A yard other than a front or rear yard, measured
perpendicular to the lot line it abuts. Corner lots typically have two side
yards and no rear yard.
ZONE II — The area of an aquifer which contributes water to a well under
the most severe pumping and recharge conditions that can be realistically
anticipated (180 days of pumping at safe yield with no recharge from
precipitation), as defined in 310 CMR 22.00.
§ 70-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9.2
1:273
Chapter 78
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open containers of alcoholic beverages — See
Ch. 7.
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 103.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 148.
§ 70-9.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 70-9.2
1:274
ARTICLE I
One-Day Wine and Malt Licenses
[Adopted 7-14-1975]
§ 78-1. Consideration of applications.
The Williamstown Board of Selectmen will accept and consider applications
for one-day wine and malt licenses at their regularly scheduled meetings.
All applications and payment of fees must be in the hands of the Town
Clerk no later than 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding the meeting. It
is strongly suggested that all applicants be familiar with Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 138, and the Regulations of the Alcoholic Beverages
Control Commission.
§ 78-2. Regulations and requirements.
The fee, payable to the Town of Williamstown, will be as set periodically
by the Board of Selectmen. [Amended 12-26-1989; 3-23-1998]
A.
All license applications must be signed by an active officer of the
organization.
B.
The applicant must be represented at the Board meeting before the
application will be considered.
C.
Licenses to be exercised on property other than that of the applicant
must have written permission to serve on the premises by the property
owner accompanying the application. In the case of the academic
institutions in the community, permission to serve on the premises
should come from the appropriate area of the administration.
D.
All license applications must first be approved by the Williamstown
Chief of Police, who shall make a recommendation to the Selectmen
on any restrictions or qualifications with regard to the granting of said
license.
E.
Retail dealers of wine and beer must comply with certain requirements
of federal laws and regulations. These regulations are outlined in a
publication from the Department of the Treasury which is available in
the Board of Selectmen's office. The law defines the retail dealer as a
person who sells to any person other than a dealer. Every retail dealer
is required to obtain a special tax stamp before commencing business.
In the case of the holder of a license for a one-day wine and beer sale,
the tax stamp costs $4.50, application for which may be filed with the
Internal Revenue Service, 310 Lowell Street, Andover, Massachusetts
01812. Failure to comply with federal requirements carries severe
penalties and renders the dealer liable to criminal prosecution.
F.
Anyone granted this license is required to file a sales tax registration
with the State Sales Tax Division, with a filing fee of $1, and the
licensee must later file a return with them and pay a sales tax of 8%.
G.
§ 78-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-2
1:275
§ 78-3. Conformance required; confirmation of compliance.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Williamstown requires that the
applicant conform to the foregoing and may require confirmation that such
compliance has been met by the applicant.
License holders are reminded of the severe penalties under MGL C.
138, § 34, regarding the handling or selling of alcoholic beverages to
any person under 21 years of age. Said action shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $200 or imprisonment for not more than six
months, or both. [Amended 3-23-1998]
H.
§ 78-2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 78-3
1:276
ARTICLE II
Sunday Sales
[Adopted 10-13-1992]
§ 78-4. Sale permitted on Sunday. [Amended 3-23-1998]
The sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays is permitted in the Town of
Williamstown.
§ 78-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-4
1:277
Chapter 86
CEMETERY REGULATIONS
§ 86-1. Definitions.
The term "lot" as referred to in these regulations shall be defined as either
single or multiple grave sites, unless otherwise specified.
§ 86-2. Purchase of cemetery lots and graves.
Persons desiring to purchase a lot in Williamstown cemeteries are
referred to the Cemetery Foreman at his office in Eastlawn Cemetery.
The Cemetery Foreman will have available suitable plots showing
location, size and price and such other information as may be required.
A.
Residents. Individuals must be domiciled in Williamstown at the time
of purchase. Lot purchases are limited to the number of members in a
given family at the time of purchase, i.e., husband, wife, children, etc.,
at home.
B.
Nonresident. All requests for purchases from out-of-town persons are
to be in letter form addressed to the Board of Selectmen (Cemetery
Commissioners) and must contain a valid reason for the application.
Purchases are restricted to no more than two lots. If more lots are
desired, an appeal must be made to the Cemetery Commissioners. Valid
reasons must include long-term family ties to Williamstown.
C.
Ownership and title of lots and graves.
The term "lot owner," "grave owner" or ownership shall be
interpreted to mean the right to use a lot, part a lot or single grave,
as purchased from the town for a fee, for burial purposes only and
under the rules and regulations as prescribed by the town for such
use.
(1)
Upon full payment of the purchase price, the town will issue a
cemetery deed under its seal, and such deed will be recorded in the
records of the Town Clerk, as evidence of ownership of the lot.
(2)
All burial rights in a cemetery lot purchased from the town occupy
the same position as real estate at the death of the owner or
owners. Only such persons as names appear on the cemetery
records of the town will be recognized as owners or part owners of
the lots. In case of the death of a lot owner, when the cemetery lot
is disposed of by will, a certified letter from the executor of the will
must be delivered to the Town Clerk's office before the town will
recognize the change in ownership.
(3)
The title to a cemetery lot invests in the owner the right to use
such lot for burial purposes only, for themselves, their heirs or for
any such person as they may choose to admit, provided that such
(4)
D.
§ 78-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 86-2
1:278
§ 86-3. Cemetery lot fees.
The Board of Selectmen, acting as Cemetery Commissioners, periodically
sets the sale of cemetery grave sites and interment fees for the town's three
cemeteries.
§ 86-4. Collection of fees.
§ 86-5. Monuments, headstones and markers.
admission is free of charge and in accordance with the cemetery
rules and regulations.
Lots.
Before the first burial can be made in a cemetery lot, the owner
must have paid for at least one grave site.
(1)
Anyone purchasing a cemetery lot must complete payment therefor
within one year from the date of purchase.
(2)
Any lot on which payment has not been completed within one year
will be made available to the Cemetery Foreman for resale.
(3)
No monument or foundation may be erected on a lot until the cost
of the lot has been paid in full.
(4)
(5) Deeds are to be issued following full payment of all lots or graves.
A.
Interments.
Fees for interments handled by local undertakers are to be paid by
the undertaker within three months of interment.
(1)
Fees for interments handled by out-of-town undertakers are to be
paid by the undertaker, in full, prior to burial.
(2)
B.
All additional fees shall be paid directly to the Town of Williamstown
prior to burial.
C.
Lots containing two graves or more shall have only one memorial
projecting above the grade. Individual graves within a lot may be
indicated by flush-type markers only. On single-grave lots, flush
markers or monuments are permitted, but not both. Owners of lots
purchased prior to 1960 have the option of erecting either flush or
aboveground markers.
A.
Owners of lots purchased since 1960, having aboveground markers
installed after 1960 but prior to July 10, 1967, may continue to erect
aboveground markers or may change to flush markers.
B.
§ 86-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-5
1:279
§ 86-6. Other structures.
No curbing, fencing, steps or any other type of structure, except
conventional memorials, may be placed on any lot.
§ 86-7. Foundations.
Foundations for memorials projecting above grade must be of the same
length and width as the base of the memorial and shall have a six-inch
border four inches thick on top of the foundation, and the foundation shall
be at least five feet in depth from finish grade whenever possible. The
border must be flush with the existing grade of the lot. In those areas where
lots are not level, the Cemetery Foreman will determine the finish grade
of the foundation. The mixture for foundations shall be a minimum of 5
to 1. The town reserves the right to have a designated inspector at each
foundation installation.
§ 86-8. Work performed by others.
All contractors and outside workmen doing work of any type within the
cemeteries will be under the direct inspection of the Cemetery Foreman.
All work must be performed during regular working hours of the Cemetery
Department, unless prior permission has been received from the Cemetery
Foreman.
§ 86-9. Flowers, shrubs and decorations.
All lots sold after July 10, 1967, are limited to one family monument,
and all headstones are to be flush-type markers (i.e., level with the
grave of the lot).
C.
The town assumes no responsibility for flowers or decorations of any
type placed on the graves. As soon as flowers, wreaths, emblems,
etc., used at funerals, or placed on graves at other times, become
unsightly and faded, they will be removed, and no responsibility for
their protection or maintenance is assumed.
A.
The planting of flowers and shrubs within the town's cemeteries shall
be subject to approval of the Cemetery Foreman.
B.
C. Planting of trees on lots is prohibited.
Planting of flowers or shrubs will be confined to either or both ends
of the monument. Glass containers for flowers and plants are not
permitted, due to the danger to the workmen.
D.
If any tree or shrub situated on any lot shall by means of their roots or
branches become detrimental to or encroach upon adjacent lots, roads
or paths, or become unsightly, the Cemetery Foreman shall have the
right to enter the lot and remove the tree or shrub, or any parts thereof,
as shall be determined to be detrimental or unsightly, of which prior
notice shall be given to the owner.
E.
§ 86-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 86-9
1:280
§ 86-10. Perpetual care of lots.
The term "perpetual care" shall be construed to mean the obligation which
the town assumes to each year expend the net annual income from the
perpetual care endowment set aside in furnishing such care for the lot as
mowing grass, raking and cleaning lot and adjacent walkways, filling of
sunken graves, and in the care and maintenance of roads, walkways, fences,
buildings and grounds in general. It is understood that all expenditures of
perpetual care moneys shall be made as part of the annual operating budget
for the Cemetery Department.
§ 86-11. Advice about lot improvements; rights of town to perform
duties; liability for damages.
§ 86-12. Rules for visitors.
§ 86-13. Interments.
F. There shall be no plantings or markers around headstones.
Each lot in the cemetery will, prior to its sale, be suitably marked by
the town with cast-iron markers, placed on each lot corner and set level
with the ground. All landscaping, care of lots and other work in the
cemetery will be done by the town, but it is desired that each lot owner
feel free to consult with those in charge of the cemetery at all times.
Their advice and assistance will be cheerfully given (without charge)
and may be of great value to those contemplating lot improvements.
A.
The town reserves the right for its workmen and those necessary
persons to the performance of normal cemetery operations to enter
upon or cross over any lot in the cemetery in the performance of such
duties.
B.
The town, in the performance of its normal operations, assumes no
liability for damages from any cause whatsoever, including vandalism
or other acts.
C.
The cemetery will be open to visitors at all times between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and sunset. Permission to enter the cemetery at any other
time must be obtained from the Cemetery Foreman.
A.
B. Dogs will not be allowed in the cemetery.
Firearms will be allowed in the cemetery only at military funerals.
Hunting on cemetery property is strictly prohibited.
C.
The teaching of student automobile drivers within the cemetery is
prohibited.
D.
Visitors are forbidden to pick any flowers, either wild or cultivated, or
injure any shrub, tree or plant, or mark or deface any monument, stone
or structure in the cemetery.
E.
§ 86-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-13
1:281
All interments shall be restricted to the owner and his heirs and his
assignees. Permission in writing from a lot owner or his heirs must
accompany all requests for the burial of any other person in the family
lot.
A.
All interments or removals, and all work incidental thereto, except the
installation of vaults or crypts, will be done only by employees of the
town under the direction of the Cemetery Foreman.
B.
No interments shall be made in or removals made from the cemetery
until the Cemetery Foreman has been furnished with such permits as
required by state and local law, and also with an interment or removal
order properly signed by the lot owner or his legal representative.
C.
The lot owner or funeral director shall designate the location of the
grave on the lot to the Cemetery Foreman, and any change of location
made after the opening of the grave has begun shall be at the expense
of the lot owner.
D.
All orders for an interment shall be given to the Cemetery Department
36 hours in advance when possible, and no interments will be permitted
on Saturday afternoons, Sundays or the following holidays: New Year's
Day, Memorial Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
E.
The interment of two bodies in one grave will not be allowed, except in
case of mother and infant or twin children.
F.
The Cemetery Foreman, or representative, will attend each funeral and
will be in complete charge of the funeral. They will be expected to
see that rules, regulations and strict proprieties of the cemeteries are
enforced and will cooperate fully with the Funeral Director.
G.
The Cemetery Department does not provide artificial grass, lowering
devices, tents or vaults. There is no charge for use of the Sherman
Memorial Chapel for burials in one of Williamstown's three cemeteries.
H.
A permanent type of outside container shall be required. The following
are approved permanent outside containers: reinforced concrete,
copper bearing or galvanized steel, sectional reinforced concrete, slate,
marble, brick or any other type of permanent material.
I.
J. A second burial will not be permitted in a lot that is not paid for.
For sanitary reasons, except for official investigation, graves will not be
reopened for inspection.
K.
Removals of bodies from one grave to another, in the same cemetery,
will be subject to the charges as prescribed in these rules and
regulations.
L.
§ 86-13 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 86-13
1:282
Chapter 92
FUEL STORAGE TANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 29.
§ 92-1. Intent.
Installation of underground storage of gasoline and diesel tanks in town
will not be discouraged during the energy crisis because the total storage
capacity from all sources is a most important factor to the community in a
petroleum-short economy. The greater the capacity to store, the greater the
community ability to adjust to interrupted or delayed deliveries.
§ 92-2. Governing statutes; sketch required.
Regarding the Board's powers and power to delegate responsibilities
through the office of the Town Manager, the following is governing:
§ 92-3. Aboveground storage tanks prohibited.
The Board will not approve any aboveground storage during the energy
crisis and thereafter. Such tanks are subject to upset, flood, wind,
vandalism, impact rupture, etc. Dangers to neighbors' homes and property
are a concern.
§ 92-4. Tank license expiration.
The Board will set expiration dates for licensed tanks (except fiber glass).
That is, all licenses will expire after 15 years from the time of issuance,
together with the stipulation that the tank is to be removed at expiration.
(Tanks of 500 United States gallon size are required to be constructed of
a minimum of 12 USS garage steel, and the normal life expectancy of 20
years should be reduced to 15 years in order to provide a safety factor of
25% regarding pollution concern. Licenses for fiberglass tanks need have
no end term; they should outlast world petroleum supplies. However, in all
MGL C. 148, §§ 13 and 14: These are the major and controlling statutes
governing application for such storage and guiding all town officials on
necessary details of administration.
A.
Application forms as presently used should be reprinted to provide a
sketch or diagram on the reverse side showing:
(1) Location of closest private and/or public water supply.
Notation by the Inspector of Buildings as to the tank's proposed
location in relationship to aquifer recharge areas.
(2)
B.
§ 86-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-4
1:283
cases, the gauge steel should meet State of Massachusetts specifications for
underground storage.)
§ 92-5. Fiberglass tanks.
The Board will encourage the policy that all tanks of 4,000 United States
gallons or greater be of fiberglass construction.
§ 92-6. Referral of applications to Fire Chief and Inspector of
Buildings.
Applications for underground storage shall be referred to the Fire Chief
and the Inspector of Buildings for approval or disapproval before being
submitted to the Selectmen.
Chapter 97
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
One-day wine and malt beverage
licenses — See Ch.78, Art. I.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 34.
§ 97-1. Consideration of applications at regularly scheduled
meetings; payment of fees.
The Williamstown Board of Selectmen will accept and consider applications
for all licenses and permits covered by these guidelines at their regularly
scheduled meetings. All applications and payment of fees must be in the
hands of the Town Clerk no later than 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding
the meeting.
§ 97-2. Fees. [Amended 11-24-1975; 12-26-1989; 3-23-1998]
The fee, payable to the Town of Williamstown, will be as listed in
Subsection C below. Except in those cases where it is clearly shown or
implied that the license or permit is for a specific event or for a limited
period of time, the fees listed are considered to be annual fees.
A.
In cases where licenses of permits are annual ones, and the applicant
requests the license or permit for less than a year, the fee will be
computed as follows:
In cases where the fee is established by state statute (e.g. pinball,
taxi, local auctioneer), there will be no prorating except as
provided in the law.
(1)
B.
§ 92-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 97-2
1:284
If the license or permit is requested for a period of more than three
months but less than six months, the fee will be 1/2 of the annual
fee.
(2)
If the license or permit is requested for a period of less than three
months, the fee will be 1/4 of the annual fee.
(3)
If the license or permit is requested for a period of six months or
more, the fee will be the full annual fee.
(4)
(5) In no case will a prorated fee be less than $5.
The following is a list of licenses and permits currently being issued by
the Williamstown Board of Selectmen. The fees for these licenses and
permits are set periodically by the Board of Selectmen.
All alcoholic licenses:
(a) Restaurant, innholder and tavern.
(b) Package stores.
(c) Club, seasonal (May 1 to November 30).
(d) Veterans' organizations.
(e) Seasonal package store (May 1 to November 30).
(f) Drug stores.
(1)
Wine and malt licenses:48
(a) Common victualer, restaurant, innholder and tavern.
(b) Package stores.
(c) Package stores, seasonal (December 1 to March 1).
(d) Seasonal license.
(2)
Miscellaneous:
(a) Common victualer.
(b) Innholder.
Automobile:
[1] Class 1, new cars.
[2] Class 2, used cars.
[3] Class 3, auto repair (annual hearing required).
(c)
(d) Gasoline storage tanks.49
(3)
C.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Art. I.
§ 97-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-2
1:285
§ 97-3. Signing of applications.
All license or permit applications must be signed by an active officer of the
organization.
§ 97-4. Representation or appearance at Board meetings for
consideration of applications.
For all newly-issued applications, the applicant must be represented at the
Board meeting before the application will be considered. In renewal or
continuing applications, the applicant need appear at the Board meeting
only if requested to do so.
(e) Taxi.50
(f) Pinball machines.
(g) Pool tables.
Auctioneer:
[1] Local.
[2] Out of area.
(h)
(i) Fireworks display.
(j) Amusement rides.
Hawker or peddler:
[1] One day.
[2] Annual.
(k)
Permits.
(a) Raffle.
(b) Loudspeaker.
Live music for restaurants, juke boxes, radio, background
music, orchestra, band (annual January 1 to December 31).
(c)
(4)
Sunday entertainment licenses.
(a) Movie theaters.
(5)
Licenses and permits not listed in the foregoing may be added as
necessary, and fees will be established at the time of issuance.
D.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 97, Fuel Storage Tanks.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Taxicabs.
§ 97-2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 97-5
1:286
§ 97-5. Written permission of property owner required; academic
institutions.
Licenses or permits to be exercised on property other than that of the
applicant must have written permission of the property owner
accompanying the application. In the cases of the academic institutions in
the community, permission should come from the appropriate area of the
administration.
§ 97-6. Approval of applications by Inspector of Buildings and Chief
of Police.
All license and permit applications must first be approved by the
Williamstown Inspector of Buildings, who shall certify that the proposed
activity is in conformity with Chapter 70, Zoning, and by the Williamstown
Chief of Police, who shall make a recommendation to the Selectmen on any
restrictions or qualifications with regard to the granting of said licenses.
§ 97-7. Compliance with town and state regulations.
In granting any application, it should be understood that the Selectmen are
not waiving any applicable town or state regulations governing the activity,
nor do they assume any responsibility for the applicant's conforming to
them. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ascertain the applicable
regulations and to conform to them.
§ 97-8. One-day wine and malt licenses.
One-day wine and malt licenses are not included in these guidelines, but
are subject to the guidelines for them included in Chapter 78, Alcoholic
Beverages, Article I.
§ 97-9. Waiver of provisions and adjustment of fees.
The Board of Selectmen may waive any provision of these guidelines or
adjust any fees if special conditions warrant.
§ 97-10. Precedence of other laws.
If any of the foregoing provisions or fees conflict with applicable town, state
or federal laws, the laws shall take precedence and shall be followed.
§ 97-11. Confirmation of compliance.
The Board of Selectmen requires that each applicant conform to the
foregoing and may require confirmation that such compliance has been met
by the applicant.
§ 97-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-11
1:287
Chapter 103
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open containers of alcoholic beverages — See
Ch. 7, Art. I.
Dogs at large — See Ch. 10, Art. II.
§ 103-1. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Destroy, misuse or abuse park property, or to injure trees, lawns, shrubs
or plants in any park, playground, beach or other area under the
jurisdiction of the Park Commissioners. No tree cutting shall be
permitted except when authorized by the Park Commissioners.
A.
Deface, remove or destroy any sign or notice or protective device
placed in any park, playground or beach under the jurisdiction of the
Park Commissioners.
B.
Annoy other persons or to disturb the animals, birds or fish, or commit
any act of nuisance in any park, playground or beach area under the
jurisdiction of the Park Commissioners.
C.
Throw or deposit or leave any litter or rubbish in any park, playground
or beach areas under the jurisdiction of the Park Commissioners, except
in containers placed for such purposes.
D.
Throw balls or play active games in any park under the jurisdiction of
the Park Commissioners, except on areas set aside for such games.
E.
Play golf or practice same with putter or other club or stick of any
kind upon or within any public park, playground or beach under the
jurisdiction of the Park Commissioners, except in those areas purposely
set aside for this activity or in conjunction with an organized town
recreation program.
F.
Take any animal into any park, playground or beach under the
jurisdiction of the Park Commissioners, except on a proper leash. There
shall be no animals taken to areas where specifically prohibited.
G.
Sell or offer for sale any goods or wares; to do any advertising of any
nature without a permit from the park Commissioners; to play any
game of chance for money or other item of value.
H.
Operate any authorized motorized vehicle or boat in any park,
playground or beach under the jurisdiction of the Park Commissioners,
except on regular vehicle roads, ways or ponds authorized by the Park
Commissioners.
I.
§ 97-11 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 103-1
1:288
§ 103-2. Closing hours.
Except as otherwise specifically authorized by the Park Commissioners, all
parks, playgrounds and beaches under their jurisdiction are closed from one
hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise.
§ 103-3. Waiver of rules.
The Park Commissioners reserve the right to waive and/or limit these rules
at any time if in the best interest of the Town of Williamstown.
§ 103-4. Violations and penalties.
Where any violation herein is also a violation of a state law or town bylaw,
the penalty for such violation shall be as provided in such state law or town
bylaw. Other violations herein shall be punishable as provided in MGL, C.
45, § 24, by a fine not exceeding $200.
Discharge or have any firearms, bows and arrows or fireworks in any
park, playground or beach under the jurisdiction of the Park
Commissioners, except at those areas specifically authorized by the
Park Commissioners in keeping with the permit issued for same.
J.
Commit any trespass in any public parks, playgrounds or beaches under
the jurisdiction of the Park Commissioners. A trespass shall be any
unauthorized entry in, upon or across such property.
K.
Give instructions to any person in driving an automobile in any park or
to learn to drive an automobile in any park, or to operate any vehicle at
a rate of speed exceeding 10 miles per hour in any park.
L.
Erect a booth, tent, stall or other structure or to use a sleeping bag or
to camp or lodge in any park, playground or beach without the written
permission of the Park Commissioners. No permanent wharves, piers or
jetties are to be constructed.
M.
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages as defined in MGL C.
138, § 1, while on, in or upon any building or property under the
jurisdiction of the Park Commissioners, without their consent.
N.
Make any fire in any park, playground or beach under the jurisdiction of
the Park Commissioners without permission of the Park Commissioners.
O.
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-4
1:289
Chapter 106
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Chapter 113
ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
60, Art. I.
Road acceptances — See Ch. 60, Art. II.
Procedure for acceptance of public
ways — See Ch. 121. Art. II.
Subdivision rules and regulations — See Ch.
170.
§ 103-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 103-4
1:290
ARTICLE I
General
§ 113-1. Intent.
It is the intent that no street or way through private property shall be
accepted by the Town of Williamstown (from here on referred to as the
"town") unless the same be previously constructed and completed in
accordance with Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, and the
specifications and details in this chapter known as "Road Construction
Standards."
§ 113-2. Conformity with state standards.
Unless otherwise specified, all the materials used and work to be done
shall conform to the requirements of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Department of Public Works, Standard Specifications for Highways and
Bridges, most recent edition, as amended, and hereinafter referred to as
the "MDPW Standard Specifications," and to the special provisions included
hereinafter. Appropriate illustrations are found in Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, Department of Public Works, Construction Standards, 1977,
as amended.
§ 113-3. Supplemental specifications.
Supplementing the aforesaid MDPW Standard Specifications, certain
specifications or special provisions shall apply particularly to the work
to be done hereunder. References in the following specifications, unless
otherwise stated, are to the aforesaid MDPW Standard Specifications,
amendments or addenda. These specifications and special provisions shall
take precedence and shall govern when they are stricter.
§ 113-4. References to MDPW Standard Specifications.
To facilitate reference, each paragraph in these specifications, where
appropriate, is noted with the paragraph number of the particular section,
as contained in the MDPW Standard Specifications.
§ 113-5. Definitions.
Whenever in the MDPW Standard Specifications, or other contractual
documents, the following terms, or pronouns in place of them, are used, the
intent and meaning shall be interpreted by substitution, as follows:
COMMONWEALTH — Town of Williamstown.
DEPARTMENT — Department of Public Works, Town of Williamstown.
ENGINEER — Director of Public Works, or his designee, Town of
Williamstown.
§ 113-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-6
1:291
§ 113-6. Approval of each construction operation required.
As each construction operation is completed, it shall be approved by the
appropriate town authority prior to starting work on the succeeding
operation.
§ 113-7. As-built plans; digital format.
The developer shall have the original plans and profiles that were submitted
to the Williamstown Department of Public Works (WDPW) and that are on
file in the WDPW office, corrected and sealed by his engineer to show the
actual as-built locations and grade of all utilities and roadway profiles. In
addition, as-built plans shall be submitted in digital format, if available,
for integration into the WDPW Digital Mapping System. Current digital
requirements and formats should be obtained from the WDPW.
§ 113-6 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-7
1:292
ARTICLE II
Specifications
§ 113-8. Roadways.
Design.
The width of the pavement shall be as specified under Chapter 170,
Subdivision Rules and Regulations. The depth of gravel shall be
a minimum of 12 inches for lanes or minor streets and 18 inches
for collector streets and all streets in nonresidential subdivisions
but shall be designed using AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement
Structures to take into account roadbed soils, structural and
dimensional factors of the pavement component layers, traffic
loading, etc. Sufficient on-site soils investigations shall be
performed to adequately identify the roadbed soil conditions which
will be encountered throughout the site. Roads shall have a design
period or minimum performance period of 20 years. The gravel
base shall extend one foot beyond the binder course on each side
for curbed roads. For uncurbed roads the gravel base shall extend
a minimum of two feet beyond the edge of the pavement to provide
a shoulder base. The gravel shoulder shall then be covered with
three to four inches of loam and seeded with the specified seed
mixture. To provide positive road drainage, uncurbed road
shoulders shall be one inch below the paved edge and shall be
sloped to the road side swales or down-gradient areas at a slope
not exceeding one vertical to five horizontal. For uncurbed roads
without a closed drainage system the road side swales shall extend
six inches below the gravel base to prevent saturated gravel
conditions. The road cross section shall be crowned with slopes of
3/8 of an inch per foot. Where roadbed soil conditions are such that
the use of geotextiles will provide an advantage in the road design,
the AASHTO design method variables can be modified to take into
account the geotextile properties; however, the WDPW reserves the
right to review and approve roadbed geotextiles.
(1)
The minimum bituminous concrete pavement thickness shall
consist of a binder course three inches compacted thickness and a
top course 1 1/2 inches compacted thickness. For collector streets
and all streets in nonresidential subdivisions, a total minimum
compacted pavement thickness of 6 1/2 inches shall be installed
which shall consist of 2 1/2 inches of base course, 2 1/2 inches of
binder course and 1 1 /2 inches of top course.
(2)
All driveway aprons installed for lots at the time of construction
shall have a twelve-inch minimum gravel base and a three-inch
minimum pavement thickness.
(3)
Gravel roads which fall under the Williamstown Planning Board
minor lane residential development status51 shall be designed
using AASHTO Guide for the Design of Pavement Structures
(4)
A.
§ 113-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-8
1:293
following the criteria for aggregate-surfaced roads. The surface
coarse for gravel roads shall be a six-inch minimum thickness of
dense graded crushed stone. Where shoulders are required, the
gravel base shall extend out to the full width of the shoulder. Gravel
roads shall be graded to provide a cross section crown slope of 1/
2 inch per foot. Gravel roads shall have a full width paved apron
at the intersection of the paved public access roads extending, as a
minimum, from the paved road edge out to the right-of-way of the
paved road.
Gravel roads requiring a surface treatment with a chip seal or oil
and stone surface shall have a two-coat application meeting the
MDPW Standard Specifications - Peastone Cover for Bituminous
Concrete Paved Shoulders, Section 468. The aggregate material
shall meet the requirements of M2.01.0 and M2.01.6. As a
substitution and preferred product, an aggregate material meeting
the New York Highway Specification for 1st and 1A Stone Chips
may be used.
(5)
Materials.
Gravel borrow.
Gravel borrow shall be free-draining, nonmoisture sensitive
and shall conform to the MDPW Standard Specification
M1.03.0 Type A, as specified herein.
(a)
Gravel borrow shall consist of inert material that is hard,
durable stone and coarse sand, free from loam and clay,
surface coatings and deleterious materials.
(b)
(c) Maximum size of stone in Type A gravel shall be six inches.
Gradation requirements for gravel shall be determined by
AASHTO, T11 and T27, and shall conform to the following:
Sieve Designation Percent Passing
1/2-inch 50 to 85
No. 4 40 to 75
No. 50 8 to 28
No. 200 0 to 10
(d)
The contractor shall be required to furnish a representative
sample and a sieve analysis certifying that the material meets
the specifications.
(e)
(1)
(2) Dense-graded crushed stone.
B.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, § 170-3.4.
§ 113-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-8
1:294
Dense-graded crushed stone shall serve as a surface course
for gravel roads and shall meet the requirements of MDPW
Standard Specifications M2.01.7 covering the quality and
gradation requirements for material combining crusher-run
coarse aggregates of crushed stone and fine aggregates of
natural sand or stone screenings uniformly premixed with a
predetermined quantity of water.
(a)
Coarse aggregate shall consist of hard, durable particles of
fragments of stone. Materials that break up when alternatively
frozen and thawed or wetted and dried shall not be used.
Coarse aggregate shall have a percentage of wear (Los
Angeles Test) of not more than 45.
(b)
Fine aggregate shall consist of natural or crushed sand. The
composite material shall be free from clay, loam or other
plastic material, and shall conform to the following grading
requirements:
Sieve Designation
Percentage by Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieves
2-inch 100
1-1/2-inch 70 to 100
3/4-inch 50 to 85
No. 4 30 to 55
No. 50 8 to 24
No. 200 3 to 10
(c)
Sampling and testing shall be in accordance with the following
AASHTO methods:
Sieve analysis T27
Passing No. 200 sieve T11
(d)
Geotextile fabric.
The fabric shall meet, or exceed, MDPW Standard
Specifications M9.50.0 Type III, as described below.
(a)
The geotextile fabric shall be a woven or nonwoven fabric
consisting only of long chain polymeric filaments or yarns,
such as polypropylene, polyethylene, polyester, polyamide or
polyvinylidene-chloride, formed into a stable network such that
the filaments of yarns retain their relative position to each
other. The fabric shall be inert to commonly encountered
chemicals and free of defects or flaws which significantly affect
its physical and/or filtering properties.
(b)
(3)
§ 113-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-8
1:295
The fabric shall be formed in widths of at least six feet. Sheets
of fabric may be sewn together at the point of manufacture, or
other approved locations.
(c)
The geotextile manufacturer is responsible for establishing
and maintaining a quality control program so as to assure
compliance with the requirements of this specification.
(d)
During all periods of shipment and storage, the fabric shall
be wrapped in a heavy-duty protective covering to protect
the fabric from direct sunlight, ultraviolet rays, temperatures
greater than 140°, mud, dirt, dust and debris.
(e)
The fabric furnished may be either woven or nonwoven, at the
contractor's option. The fabric shall meet the requirements of
Table III, as specified for subgrade stabilization.
TABLE III
Type III Fabric Subgrade or Embankment Stabilization
Property Minimum Value1 Test Method
Grab strength
(pounds)
180 ASTM D4632
Elongation (5) N/A ASTM D4632
Sewn seam
strength2 (pounds)
160 ASTM D4632
Puncture strength
(pounds)
75 ASTM D3787
Burst strength
(pounds)
290 ASTM D3786
Trapezoid tear
(pounds)
50 ASTM D4533
Apparent opening
size
Hole size = or <
US Standard No.
40 (.425mm)
Corps of Engineers
CW02215
Permeability (cm/
second)
0.005 AASHTO M288
Flow rate 20 AASHTO M288
NOTES:
1Minimum: Use value in weaker principal direction. All
numerical any sample roll in a lot shall meet, or exceed, the
minimum values in the table. State values are for noncritical,
nonsevere applications.
2Values apply to both filed and manufactured seams.
(f)
§ 113-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-8
1:296
Bituminous concrete. Pavement shall conform to the requirements
of MDPW Standard Specifications, Section M 3.11 for Class I
Bituminous Concrete. Due to the length of the Specification, refer
to Section M3.11 of MDPW Standard Specifications for details.
(4)
Construction.
Clearing and grubbing of the road right-of-way shall be performed
to remove all stumps, all trees not intended for preservation, brush,
roots, boulders and like material which may exist upon the surface
within the limits of construction.
(1)
Roadway earth excavation shall remove all materials encountered
down to the true surface of the subgrade, or to suitable material
in areas where unsuitable material exists, in preparation for
foundation of roadway, sidewalks, driveways and curbs. Approved
materials obtained from the excavation may be used in fills as
required, if in the opinion of the DPW they are suitable.
(2)
The contractor shall obtain additional material from other sources
when, in the opinion of the DPW, suitable material is not available
within the limits of the street location to form the subgrade or
subbase.
(3)
The subgrade surface shall be prepared to the lines, grades and
cross sections given and properly rolled. All soft or spongy material
below the subgrade surface shall be removed to a depth
determined by the Department and the space made shall be filled
with suitable material or gravel borrow, as previously specified.
(4)
After all underground utility lines and sleeves have been installed
and fine grading and compaction of the subgrade, the contractor
shall roll out the geotextile fabric, if used, onto the subgrade,
keeping it as taunt and free of wrinkles as possible. Some
stretching and staking may be required until the gravel borrow is
placed over the fabric. All joints shall be overlapped by three feet.
To prevent damage to the fabric and subgrade, no construction
equipment shall be allowed to operate on the uncovered fabric. If
the fabric is damaged, the contractor will be required to cut out the
damaged section and place a patch of fabric over it, allowing for a
three-foot overlap.
(5)
After installation of the geotextile construction fabric, the gravel
borrow shall be spread and compacted to a minimum 95%
maximum dry density, as determined by the modified Proctor Test
(ASTM D-1557).
(6)
Any stone with a dimension greater than six inches shall be
removed from the subbase before the gravel is compacted.
Compaction shall continue until the surface is even and true to the
proposed lines and grades within a tolerance of 3/8 inch above or
below the required cross-sectional elevations and to a maximum
(7)
C.
§ 113-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-8
1:297
irregularity not exceeding 3/8 inch under a ten-foot line
longitudinally. Any specific area of gravel base which, after being
rolled, does not form a satisfactory, solid stable foundation shall be
removed, replaced and recompacted by the contractor.
After completion of the subbase, the bituminous concrete binder
and top course shall be installed in conformance with the
requirements of Section 460 of MDPW Standard Specifications.
(8)
It is important that in heavy soils the gravel base be permitted
to drain and prevent water from becoming trapped. In closed
drainage systems, subdrains or weep holes in drainage structures
should be used. In open drainage conditions, roadside swales or
ditches should have inverts below the gravel base elevation. The
installation of subdrains to lower the groundwater table may be
required by the Department once construction has commenced if
unanticipated subsurface conditions are evident.
(9)
Where bituminous concrete curbing is to be provided the
bituminous concrete binder course shall be paved one foot wider
than the final pavement width to serve as a foundation for the curb.
Where granite curb is to be provided, the curbing shall be installed
and properly supported and backfilled. Concrete fill shall be used
on the front face up to the bottom of the binder course. Binder shall
be used to patch over the concrete fill to bring it up to grade prior
to laying of the top course.
(10)
The bituminous concrete top course shall be placed after the
bituminous concrete curb has been installed. Where driveway
aprons are to be installed, the three-inch minimum thickness
bituminous concrete pavement shall be installed over at least 12
inches of gravel base.
(11)
Radius curbing returns shall be supported on the pavement their
full length. The apron top course shall be installed after the road
top course is in place. Aprons shall extend 1 1/2 inches above the
road top course at the curbline.
(12)
Embankments outside the right-of-way shall be evenly graded and
pitched at a slope of not greater than two horizontal to one vertical
in cut or fill. Where cuts are made in ledge, other slopes may be
determined with the approval of the Department. Where terrain
necessitates greater slopes, retaining walls, terracing, fencing or
riprap may be used whether alone or in combination to provide
safety and freedom from maintenance, but must be done in
accordance with plans filed with, and approved by, the Planning
Board and/or the Department. Whenever embankments are built
in such a way as to require approval by the Planning Board, the
developer must furnish to the town duly recorded access
easements free of encumbrances for maintenance of the slopes,
terraces or retaining walls. All such slopes shall be grassed in
(13)
§ 113-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-8
1:298
§ 113-9. Curbing.
accordance with the specifications for the area between the
roadway and sidewalk, or roadway and boundary of the right-ofway.
Design. The requirement for the use and type of curbing for new
roads shall be determined by the Street Standard Class, as designated
in Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations. Granite curb or
bituminous concrete curb, MDPW Type 2, shall be provided along
each side of the roadway where curbing is required by Chapter 170,
Subdivision Rules and Regulations. A granite curb inlet shall be
installed at each catch basin along the curbline, and granite curbs shall
be required at road intersections where the pavement edge radius is
less than 75 feet.
A.
Materials.
Bituminous concrete curb. Bituminous concrete curb shall consist
of Class I bituminous concrete, Type I-1. The materials to be
incorporated in the mix and the composition of the mix shall
conform to the relative requirements of Section M3.11 of MDPW
Standard Specifications for dense mix.
(1)
Granite curb.
Granite curb shall conform to Section M9.04.1 of MDPW
Standard Specifications, Type VA4.
(a)
All granite curb shall be basically light gray in color, free
from seams and other structural imperfections or flaws which
would impair its structural integrity, and of a smooth splitting
appearance. Natural color variation characteristic of the
deposit from which the curbing is obtained will be permitted.
(b)
Whenever curbing is sawed, all surfaces that are to be exposed
shall be thoroughly cleaned and any iron rust or iron particles
removed by sand blasting or other approved methods. Any saw
marks in excess of 1/8 of an inch shall be removed.
(c)
Granite curbs shall be Type VA4 with the following dimensions:
Type
Length
Minimum
Top
(inches)
Width at
(inches)
Depth
(inches)
Minimum
Width at
Bottom
(inches)
V4 6 6 17-19 4 (for 2/3
length)
(d)
(2)
B.
§ 113-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-9
1:299
Except for the following conditions, 10% of the length of each
curb installed on the project may consist of stones no more
than six inches shorter than the length specified:
Stones used in making closures may be as much as 1/3
shorter than specified in the table, except that the closure
piece shall have a minimum length of four feet.
[1]
On curves with radii greater than 100 feet but less than
500 feet, Type VA stones may be four feet to not more than
six feet in length.
[2]
(e)
Type VA stones to be set on a radius of 100 feet or less shall be
cut to the required curvature unless otherwise directed and,
except for making closures, shall be of minimum length, as
follows:
Radius Minimum Length
50 feet to 100 feet 6 feet
25 feet to less than 50 feet 4 feet 6 inches
less than 25 feet 3 feet
(f)
(g) The ends of all curved stone shall be cut on radial lines.
The finish and surface dimensions for the several types of
curb shall conform to the following requirements: This type
of curbstone shall have a top surface free from wind, shall be
peen hammered or sawed to an approximately true plane and
shall have no projections or depressions greater than 1/8 inch.
The front and back arris lines shall be pitched straight and
true, and there shall be no projection on the back surface for
three inches down from the top which would exceed a batter of
four inches in one foot.
(h)
The front face shall be at right angles to the plane of the
top and ends and shall be smooth quarry split, free from drill
holes and with no projection of more than one inch and no
depression more than 1/2 inch measured from the vertical plan
of the face through the arris or pitch line for a distance down
from the top of eight inches. For the remaining distance there
shall be no projection or depression greater than one inch
measured in the same manner.
(i)
The ends of all stones shall be square with the plane of the
top and face so that when the stones are placed end to end
as closely as possible no space shall show in the joint at the
top and face of more than 1/2 inch for the full width of the
top and for eight inches down on the face, after which the end
may break back not over eight inches from the plane of the
joint. The arris formed by the intersection of the plane of the
joint with the planes of the top and exposed faces shall have no
(j)
§ 113-9 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-9
1:300
variation from the plane of the top and exposed faces greater
than 1/8 inch.
Granite curb inlet.
Granite curb inlets shall conform to Section M9.04.5 of the
MDPW Standard Specifications.
(a)
The granite for curb inlets shall have a horizontal bed, and
the top shall be free from wind. The stone shall be sawn or
peen hammered on top, and the front and back edges shall
be pitched true to line. The back face for a distance of three
inches down from the top shall have no projection greater than
one inch. The front face shall be straight split, free from drill
holes, and it shall have no projection greater than one inch or
depression greater than 1/2 inch for a distance of 10 inches
down from the top, and for the remaining distance there shall
be no depression or projection greater than one inch. The ends
shall be squared with the top for the depth of the face finish
and so cut that the curb inlet can be set with joints of not more
than 1/2 inch. The granite curb inlet shall be six feet in length,
plus or minus 1/2 inch, from 17 to 19 inches in depth, six inches
wide at the top and at least six inches wide at the bottom.
(b)
Curb inlets to be set on a radius of 160 feet or less shall be
cut to the curve required, unless otherwise directed by the
Department. The joints of all curved curb inlets shall be cut on
radial lines. A gutter mouth at least three inches in depth and
at least two feet in length shall be cut in the front face of the
stone.
(c)
(d) Granite curb inlets shall match the adjacent curbing in color.
(3)
Construction.
Bituminous concrete curb.
The bituminous concrete curb shall be placed and compacted
with a machine acceptable and approved by the Department
for an eight-inch high curb similar to the MDPW Construction
Standards, Type 2 curb. The curb shall be placed after
completion of the bituminous concrete binder course. All curb
ends shall be protected by rounding the curb end to a radius
of five feet or less and backfilling behind the curb with
bituminous concrete.
(a)
The finished curb shall be a true and uniform horizontal and
vertical alignment in harmony with its surroundings, free of
surface cracks and imperfections.
(b)
(1)
(2) Granite curb and curb inlet.
C.
§ 113-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-9
1:301
§ 113-10. Sidewalks.
The trench for the curb shall be excavated to a width of 18
inches. The subgrade of the trench shall be a depth below the
proposed finished grade of the curb equal to six inches plus
the depth of the curbstone. Granite curb shall be set after
placement of the binder course.
(a)
The gravel foundation for the curb shall consist of gravel
spread upon the subgrade and, after being thoroughly
compacted by tamping, shall be six inches in depth. The gravel
foundation for edging shall be shown on the plans and shall be
thoroughly rammed, or tamped, until firm and unyielding.
(b)
The foundation for the curb inlet shall consist of a full bed
of Portland cement mortar on the supporting back wall of the
catch basin or gutter inlet and sufficient gravel on each side
to support the overhang. The trench for the gravel foundation
shall be at least six inches in depth and 18 inches in width.
This trench shall be filled with gravel thoroughly tamped to the
required grade.
(c)
Curbing, or curb corners, shall be set on additional gravel
spread upon the foundation. All spaces under the curb, curb
corners or edging shall be supported throughout their length.
The curb shall be set at the line and grade required and shown
on the plans unless otherwise directed.
(d)
Concrete shall be used as fill in front of the curb up to the
bottom of the bituminous concrete binder course, as well as
under, and behind, the joints of adjacent curb sections,
creating a concrete collar to secure the granite. Bituminous
concrete shall then be used to bring the backing to the top of
the binder course. The back of the curb shall be backfilled to
give full support with suitable on-site material or gravel.
(e)
Design.
Where required, concrete sidewalks shall be constructed within
the subdivision separated from the pavement area by a grass plot.
The sidewalk shall extend the full length of each side of the street
and shall be a minimum width of five feet. Concrete shall be a
minimum of five inches thick for all sidewalks. Wheelchair ramps
shall be required at each intersection and shall conform to MDPW
Construction Standards 107.1.0. Transitions at driveways shall also
conform to MDPW Construction Standards 107.1.0 (attached).
(1)
Where approved by the Planning Board, the use of bituminous
concrete sidewalks will be permitted.
(2)
A.
B. Materials.
§ 113-9 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-10
1:302
Processed gravel.
Processed gravel shall conform to MDPW Standard
Specifications M1.03.1. Gravel shall consist of inert material
that is hard, durable stone and coarse sand, free from loam and
clay, surface coatings and deleterious materials.
(a)
The approved source of bank-run gravel material shall be
processed by mechanical means. The equipment for producing
crushed gravel shall be of adequate size and with sufficient
adjustments to produce the desired materials. The processed
material shall be stockpiled in such a manner to minimize
segregation of particle sizes. All processed gravel shall come
from approved stockpiles. The gradation shall meet the
following requirements:
Sieve Designation Percent Passing
3-inch 100
1-1/2-inch 70 to 100
1/4-inch 50 to 85
No. 4 30 to 60
No. 200 0 to 10
(b)
(1)
Stone. Aggregate shall consist of clean and durable gravel stone,
crushed stone or crushed slag. It shall be uniformly graded in
accordance with Sections M2.01.2 or M2.01.4 of MDPW Standard
Specifications with the following gradation requirements:
Sieve Designation Percent Passing
M2.01.2 1- to 1/
2-Inch Stone
M2.01.4 3/4-Inch
Stone
2-inch 100 —
1- to 1/2-inch 95 to 100 —
1-inch 35 to 70 100
3/4-inch 0 to 25 90 to 100
1/2-inch — 10 to 50
3/8-inch — 0 to 20
No. 4 — 0 to 5
(2)
Reinforcing mesh. Reinforcing mesh shall be welded woven wire,
six-inch square mesh of number four wire.
(3)
Expansion joint. Premolded filler, 1/2 inch in thickness, shall be
provided for expansion joints and shall be of the nominal concrete
depth, with the top of the filler about 1/4 inch below the finished
surface.
(4)
§ 113-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-10
1:303
Concrete. Concrete shall meet MDPW Standard Specifications
M4.02 for air-entrained Class D concrete except that the minimum
twenty-eight-day compressive strength shall be 4,000 pounds per
square inch, and the cement shall be Type II. Refer to MDPW
Standard Specifications M4.02 for details.
(5)
Bituminous concrete. Pavement shall conform to the requirements
of MDPW Standard Specifications, Section M3.11 for Class I
Bituminous Concrete.
(6)
Construction.
The subgrade for sidewalks shall be shaped parallel to the
proposed surface of the walks and thoroughly compacted. All
impressions occurring shall be filled with suitable material and
again compacted until the surface is smooth and hard.
(1)
After preparation of the subgrade, the gravel or stone base shall
be spread and compacted to a minimum thickness of eight inches.
Gravel shall be compacted to a minimum 95% maximum dry
density, as determined by the modified Proctor Test (ASTM
D-1557).
(2)
Any specific area of base which, after being rolled, does not form
a satisfactory, solid, stable foundation shall be removed, replaced
and recompacted.
(3)
Side forms and transverse forms for sidewalks shall be smooth, free
from warp, of sufficient strength to resist springing out of shape, of
a depth to conform to the thickness of the proposed walk.
(4)
All mortar or dirt shall be completely removed from forms that
have been previously used. The forms shall be well staked and
thoroughly braced and set to the established lines with their upper
edge conforming to the grade of the finished walk, which shall have
a slope of 1/4 of an inch per foot to the roadside edge of the walk
to provide for surface drainage.
(5)
Reinforcing mesh shall be placed continuously between expansion
joints. All forms shall be oiled before placing concrete.
(6)
The concrete sidewalks shall be placed in alternate slabs 24 feet
in length for six-foot-wide sidewalks and 25 feet in length for fivefoot-
wide sidewalks. The slabs for sidewalks shall be separated by
transverse preformed expansion joint filler 1/2 inch in thickness.
(7)
Preformed expansion joint filler shall be placed adjacent to, or
around, existing structures, as directed.
(8)
On the foundation, as specified above, the concrete shall be placed
in such quantity that after being thoroughly consolidated in place,
it shall be five inches in depth. At driveways, concrete sidewalks
shall have a gradual transition down to the bituminous concrete
(9)
C.
§ 113-10 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-10
1:304
edge on driveway aprons. Concrete shall be placed at a slump not
to exceed four inches. No finishing operation shall be performed
while free water is present. Finishing operations shall be delayed
until all bled water and water shed has left the surface and the
concrete has started to stiffen. After water shed has disappeared,
edging operations, where required, shall be completed. After
edging and jointing operations, the surface shall be floated with an
aluminum or magnesium float.
Immediately following floating, the surface shall be steel-troweled.
If necessary, tooled joints and edges shall be rerun before and
after troweling to maintain uniformity. After troweling, the surface
shall be brushed by drawing a soft bristled push broom with a
long handle over the surface of the concrete to produce a nonslip
surface.
(10)
In conveying the concrete from the place of mixing to the place of
deposit, the operation shall be conducted in such a manner that
no mortar will be lost, and the concrete shall be so handled that
the concrete will be of uniform composition throughout, showing
neither excess nor lack of mortar in any one place.
(11)
The surface of all concrete sidewalks shall be uniformly scored into
block units equal to the width of the sidewalk. The depth of the
scoring shall be at least 1/4 of the thickness of the sidewalk.
(12)
The application of neat cement to surfaces in order to hasten
hardening is prohibited.
(13)
Concrete shall be kept moist and protected from traffic and
weather during curing for at least three days in accordance with
the applicable provisions of MDPW Construction Standards,
Specifications Subsection 476.74.
(14)
Bituminous concrete sidewalks also must meet the subgrade and
gravel base requirements, as described above. The bituminous
concrete walk surface shall be laid in two courses to a depth after
rolling of three inches. The bottom course shall be 1 1/2 inches in
thickness, and its surface after rolling shall be 1 1/2 inches below
and parallel to the proposed grade of the finished surfaces. The top
course shall be 1 1/2 inches in thickness after rolling.
(15)
Where walls, curbing and other suitable permanent supports are
not present, or where an approved mechanical spreader is not
used, satisfactory forms shall be installed to assist in securing
proper alignment and adequate compaction of the base and surface
courses.
(16)
Unless otherwise directed, the surface shall have a pitch of 1/4 of
an inch per foot of width to provide for proper drainage.
(17)
§ 113-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-10
1:305
§ 113-11. Grassed areas.
The surface shall be rolled with a self-propelled tandem roller
weighing not less than 1 1/2 tons and not more than five tons.
(18)
In places inaccessible to a power roller, compaction shall be
obtained by means of mechanical rammers or by hand tampers
weighing not less than 50 pounds and having a tamping face not
exceeding 100 square inches.
(19)
Design.
Grassed areas shall be provided on each side of the roadway
between the pavement and the right-of-way exclusive of any
sidewalks. The size and slope of the grass areas on each side of the
road shall not exceed one vertical to five horizontal within the road
shoulder areas.
(1)
Streetlight stanchions, streetlights and street shade trees may be
located in the grass plot, but shall not be nearer than 25 feet from
the intersection of two streets, measured from the intersection of
the tangents of the intersecting street curblines.
(2)
A.
Materials.
Loam. Loam shall be fertile, natural soil, typical of the locality,
free from large stones, roots, sticks, clay, peat, weeds and sod
and obtained from naturally well-drained areas. It shall not be
excessively acid or alkaline, nor contain toxic material harmful to
plant growth.
(1)
Fertilizer. Fertilizer shall be a complete commercial fertilizer,
10-10-10 grade. It shall be delivered to the site in the original
unopened containers each showing the manufacturers guaranteed
analysis. Store fertilizer so that when used it shall be dry and free
flowing.
(2)
Lime. Lime shall be ground limestone containing not less than 85%
calcium and magnesium carbonates.
(3)
Seed.
Seed shall be from the same, or previous, year's crop. Each
variety of seed shall have a percentage of germination not less
than 90%, a percentage of purity of not less than 85 and shall
have not more than 1% weed content. Type A lawn surface
shall consist of seed proportioned by weight, as follows:
[1] Canadian creeping red fescue: 55%.
[2] Kentucky bluegrass: 25%.
[3] Red top: 5%.
(a)
(4)
B.
§ 113-10 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-11
1:306
§ 113-12. Monuments.
[4] Domestic rye grass: 15%.
Seed shall be delivered in sealed containers bearing the
dealers guaranteed analysis.
(b)
(5) Mulch. Mulch shall be clean straw.
Construction.
The subgrade of all areas to be loamed and seeded shall be raked,
and all rubbish, sticks, roots and stones larger than 1 1/2 inches
shall be removed. Loam shall be spread and lightly compacted to
finished grade. Compacted loam shall be less than four inches. No
loam shall be spread in water, or while frozen or muddy. After
the loam is placed, and before it is raked to true lines and rolled,
limestone shall be spread evenly over loam surface and thoroughly
incorporated with loam by heavy raking to at least 1/2 the depth of
loam.
(1)
Lime shall be applied at the rate of 40 pounds per 1,000 square
feet.
(2)
Fertilizer shall be uniformly spread and immediately mixed with the
upper two inches of topsoil. Fertilizer shall be applied at the rate of
20 pounds per 1,000 square feet.
(3)
Immediately following this preparation the seed shall be uniformly
applied and lightly raked into the surface. Lightly roll the surface
and water with a fine spray. Seed shall be sown in a favorable
season.
(4)
Seed shall be applied at the rate of five pounds per 1,000 square
feet.
(5)
Straw mulch shall be spread uniformly over all seeded areas at a
rate of two bales per 1,000 square feet. All seeded areas shall be
watered and in good condition, reseeding if and when necessary
until a good, healthy, uniform growth is established over the entire
area seeded, and shall maintain these areas in an approved
condition until final acceptance.
(6)
The grassed areas shall be maintained in a neat manner by
watering, mowing, raking clippings and leaves, and appurtenances
until the project is accepted.
(7)
C.
Design.
Monuments shall be installed on street lines at all points of
curvature, and at all points of change in direction.
(1)
A.
§ 113-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-12
1:307
Monuments shall be installed at each point where the lot line
intersects the street right-of-way and at any other points, where,
in the opinion of the Planning Board, permanent monuments are
necessary.
(2)
Materials. Monuments shall be a standard permanent granite or
reinforced concrete marker of not less than five feet in length and not
less than six inches in width and breadth, and shall have a 3/8-inch drill
hole in the center of the top surface.
B.
Construction.
Monuments shall be installed at the time of final grading with the
top flush with the top final graded surface. A circular lead plug
shall be cast in the top of the round and an escutcheon pin driven
into the plug at the desire point, or a drill hole cast in the center of
the round and the round set in the point.
(1)
The placement and accurate location of these markers shall be
certified by a registered land surveyor, and properly located on the
street acceptance plans.
(2)
C.
§ 113-12 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-12
1:308
ARTICLE III
Utilities
§ 113-13. Underground placement required.
All utilities shall be placed underground at the time of initial construction of
the subdivision.
§ 113-14. Drainage and storm sewers.
Where there are curbed streets, or other conditions which require
closed drainage systems, the structures and piping shall be of the
catch-basin and manhole configuration. Collection structures, such as
catch basins, drop inlets, gutter inlets, etc., shall have sumps prior to
connection to the drainage system at a manhole. The street drainage
system shall be designed for a minimum ten-year design frequency with
the system not exceeding full pipe flow conditions (no surcharging or
pressure flow conditions). Large diameter culverts (greater than 48
inches) shall be designed for a minimum twenty-five-year frequency.
The design of box culverts or bridges with spans greater than eight feet
shall follow MDPW Bridge Division Requirements.
A.
In all cases the drainage system shall remain functional, streets shall
remain passable and drainage may not enter buildings for frequencies
up to the one-hundred-year storm event. Drainage pipe and structures
shall be designed to adequately withstand abrasion and forces
throughout the design life, especially where velocities exceed 15 feet
per second (fps).
B.
In general, the calculations of the stormwater peak rates of runoff
volume shall be used within the constraints of SCS Method TR 55,
unless otherwise approved by the Department. Should the designer
choose to use another method, the Department may require the
calculations by the SCS method for comparison. Where the use of the
SCS method is not appropriate, the Department will reserve the right
to request that two appropriate methods be used for comparison and
verification.
C.
Design.
Catch basins shall be installed on both sides of the roadway at
intervals not to exceed 300 feet and at such other places as deemed
necessary by the Department to assure adequate drainage of all
low points and to provide proper runoff of stormwater. In no
instances shall catch basins be located along a driveway cut. Each
catch basin shall have a sump a minimum of two feet and six inches
below the invert of the lowest drain.
(1)
Manholes shall be constructed to the required depth at each
junction point with a maximum spacing of 300 feet. All lines shall
be straight between manholes both as to line and grade.
(2)
D.
§ 113-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-14
1:309
All drains, including catch basin laterals, shall be at least 12 inches
in diameter.
(3)
The minimum cover shall be two feet six inches for the drainage
system, one foot for driveway culverts.
(4)
All lots upgradient of the road drainage system shall be provided
with an individual connection to the storm sewer or drainage
facilities for footing drain and/or sump pump connections unless an
alternate method is available. Pipe size shall be a minimum of four
inches.
(5)
The movement, or piping, of groundwater through pipe bedding
material shall be taken into account during design, especially in
areas where roads are constructed in heavier soils, on steep road
grades or where groundwater may be present. The use of clay
trench dams downgradient of drainage structures with weep holes,
the use of subdrains or other appropriate methods shall be
employed.
(6)
Water velocities shall be between two and 15 feet per second in the
pipes, not over five feet per second in grass swales and not over 12
feet per second in lined swales, where such are allowed.
(7)
Materials.
Pipe.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe shall be PVC gravity sewer pipe
with a smooth interior and meeting the material requirements
of ASTM D3034 for SDR 35 or ASTM F679, or for ribbed
exterior pipe, ASTM F794. All pipe shall have a minimum pipe
stiffness at 5% deflection of 46 pounds per square inch, as
tested by ASTM D2412. Joints shall be gasketted bell and
spigot meeting ASTM D3212.
(a)
High-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe shall consist of an
exterior corrugated wall and smooth wall interior polyethylene
tubing, with gasketted couplings and fittings. Materials,
dimensions, physical properties and fabrication shall be in
conformance with AASHTO M294.
(b)
Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) shall conform to ASTM C76,
Class IV, with bell-and-spigot-type joints conforming to ASTM
C443.
(c)
Storm sewers and culverts up to 36 inches in diameter shall
be RCP, PVC or HDPE meeting MDPW Standard Specifications
requirements.
(d)
All storm sewers greater than 36 inches in diameter shall
be RCP unless otherwise approved by the Department. All
culverts greater than 36 inches shall be RCP or precast
(e)
(1)
E.
§ 113-14 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-14
1:310
concrete box culverts, meeting the requirements of AASTHO,
Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, 1989. The
use of corrugated metal pipe (CMP) or pipe arch culverts
may be appropriate in some instances, and the Department
will review and approve on a case-by-case basis. Corrugated
metal pipes and pipe arches shall conform to MDPW Standard
Specification M5.03.0.
Perforated six-inch PVC or corrugated HDPE pipe shall be used
for subdrains. All culverts shall be designated with adequate
inlet and outlet protection taking into account the design flow,
velocity and soil conditions. Concrete headwalls, flared-end
sections, riprap or other appropriate methods shall be used to
protect the culvert, road, embankment and drainage course.
(f)
Catch basins and manholes.
All materials shall conform to MDPW Standard Specifications,
as follows:
Description Material Specification
Clay brick M4.05.2
Cement concrete brick M4.05.0
Cement concrete block M4.05.1
Cement mortar M4.02.15
Gravel borrow M1.03.0, Type A
Precast units M4.02.14
(a)
The standard frame and grate to be supplied for catch basins
shall be LeBaron, Catalog Number LF248-2, or approved
equal.
(b)
The frame and cover to be supplied for manholes shall be
LeBaron, Catalog Number LF268-3, with three-inch lettering
to read "Drain," or approved equal.
(c)
(2)
Gravel and stone. Screened gravel shall conform to MDPW
Standard Specifications, M1.03.0, Type C. The Type C gravel
borrow shall conform to the gradation requirements, as previously
described in § 113-8B(1) but shall have a maximum stone size in
the largest dimension of two inches and shall conform to MDPW
Standard Specifications, M1.03.0, Type A. Crushed stone shall
conform to MDPW Standard Specifications, M2.01.4., as previously
described in § 113-10B(2).
(3)
Construction.
PVC and HDPE pipe shall be jointed in accordance with the
recommendations of the latest ASTM standards and detailed
(1)
F.
§ 113-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-14
1:311
instructions of the manufacturer. No single piece of pipe shall be
laid unless it is generally straight.
All pipe shall be sound and clean before laying. As soon as the
excavation is complete to normal grade of the bottom of the trench,
screened gravel or crushed stone bedding shall be placed,
compacted and graded to provide firm, uniform and continuous
support for the pipe. Bell holes shall be excavated so that only
the barrel of the pipe bears upon the bedding. The pipe shall be
laid accurately to the lines and grades indicated on the design
drawings. Blocking under the pipe will not be permitted.
(2)
Screened gravel, or crushed stone, shall be placed evenly on each
side of the pipe to mid-diameter and hand tools shall be used to
force the bedding under the haunches of the pipe and into the
bell holes to give firm continuous support for the pipe. Screened
gravel, or crushed stone, shall be placed to a minimum of 12 inches
above the top of the pipe. The initial three feet of backfill above
the screened gravel, or crushed stone, backfill shall be placed in
one-foot layers and carefully compacted. Generally, the compaction
shall be done evenly on each side of the pipe, and compaction
equipment shall not be operated directly over the pipe until
sufficient backfill has been placed to ensure that compaction
equipment will not have a damaging effect on the pipe.
(3)
Each length of PVC pipe shall be shoved home against the pipe
previously laid and held securely until enough backfill has been
placed to hold the pipe in place. Joints shall not be pulled or
cramped.
(4)
Before any joint is made, the pipe shall be checked to assure that
a close joint with the next adjoining pipe has been maintained and
that the inverts are matched and conform to the required grade.
The pipe shall not be driven down to grade by striking it.
(5)
Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) shall be installed in accordance
with MDPW Standard Specifications, Section 230.
(6)
Excavation and backfilling shall conform to MDPW Standard
Specifications, Sections 120.60, 150.60 and 150.64.
(7)
Basins, manholes and inlets shall be built to the lines, grades,
dimensions and design shown on the plans and as directed, with
the necessary frames, gratings, covers, etc., and in accordance
with these specifications.
(8)
Brick and concrete blocks shall be soaked in water before laying.
All joints in the brick structures shall be thoroughly flushed full
of mortar, and no joint on the inside face shall be greater than
1/4 inch. After the bricks are laid, the joints shall be pointed on
the inside. As brick walls are laid up, the outside of the structure
shall be plastered with one-half-inch thick mortar coat. As circular
(9)
§ 113-14 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-14
1:312
§ 113-15. Sanitary sewers.
concrete block walls are laid up, the horizontal joints and keyways
shall be flushed full with mortar. As rectangular blocks are laid up,
all horizontal and vertical joints shall be flushed full with mortar.
Plastering of the outside of block structures will not be required.
The joints in precast units shall be wetted and completely mortared
immediately prior to setting a section. No structure shall be
backfilled until all mortar has completely set. When the floors of
structures are made of concrete sectional plates the opening in the
floor shall be filled with brick chips and mortar or cement concrete.
(10)
Frame castings for basins and manholes shall be set in full mortar
beds true to the lines and grades, as directed.
(11)
Where directed, the castings shall be temporarily set at such
grades as to provide drainage during the construction.
(12)
The castings of structures located within the pavement area shall
not be completely set to the established grade until the bottom
course of pavement has been laid.
(13)
The final setting of all other castings shall be performed at the
proper stage of construction, as directed.
(14)
Cement concrete collars shall be placed around the castings after
the final setting, as shown on the plans, and as directed.
(15)
Unless otherwise directed, two weep holes shall be built into the
walls of all new basins and precast units, as shown on the plans.
Each weep hole shall consist of a section of four-inch pipe, or
equivalent opening, to carry water through the wall of the
structure.
(16)
The ends of the pipe, if used, shall be saw cut and left flush with
the walls of the structure.
(17)
The outside end of the pipe or opening shall be covered with a
one-fourth-inch mesh galvanized wire screen 23 gage satisfactorily
fastened against the wall. The drain to the weep hole shall be
excavated and backfilled with two cubic feet of crushed stone
conforming to MDPW Standard Specifications, M2.01.4. The stone
shall be placed against, and over, the end of the pipe or opening to
prevent the entrance of the finer filling material. Only one type of
weep hole shall be used throughout the project.
(18)
(19)The structure shall be backfilled with gravel borrow and compact.
Design.
Minimum size sewer shall be eight inches. Minimum size house
service shall be four inches. In general, sewers shall be designed
(1)
A.
§ 113-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-15
1:313
deep enough to drain basement fixtures of all houses to be
connected to the sewer, but in no case shall the depth of cover be
less than five feet, unless written approval from the Department is
obtained.
The sanitary sewer shall be located in the center of the street, or
as close thereto as possible when the street is curved.
(2)
All sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed in straight
lines between manholes. The sewer lines shall be designed for a
minimum flow velocity of two feet per second (fps).
(3)
All manholes shall be precast concrete and be spaced at a
maximum of 300 feet on straight runs, and at every intersection,
change in grade and/or alignment, change in size and at the end of
each line.
(4)
Where a gravity sewer is not feasible, a pressure sewer shall be
installed.
(5)
The pressure system may be designed with individual grinder pump
units or a duplex pump station. Individual grinder pump units shall
be maintained by the individual property owner. The duplex pump
station shall be designed so that the wet well is separate from the
pumps and controls. The design shall meet the requirements of the
Williamstown DPW.
(6)
Materials.
Gravity sewer pipe and fittings.
Pipe and fittings shall be PVC gravity sewer pipe with a smooth
interior meeting the material requirements of ASTM D1784.
The pipe shall also meet the requirements of ASTM D3034 for
SDR 35 or ASTM F679, or for ribbed exterior pipe ASTM F794.
All pipe shall have a minimum pipe stiffness of five-percent
deflection of 46 pounds per square inch, as tested by ASTM
D2412. Saddle wyes will not be allowed.
(a)
PVC pipe and fittings shall have bell-and-spigot push-on joints,
meeting ASTM D3212. The bell shall consist of an integral wall
section with a solid cross-section elastomeric gasket securely
locked in place to prevent displacement during assembly.
Elastomeric gaskets shall conform to ASTM F477.
(b)
All fittings and accessories shall have bell-and/or-spigot
configurations compatible with the pipe.
(c)
(1)
Precast manholes. Precast concrete barrel sections and transition
top sections shall conform to Specifications for Precast Reinforced
Concrete Manhole Sections, ASTM C478, and meet the following
requirements:
(2)
B.
§ 113-15 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-15
1:314
The wall thickness shall not be less than five inches for fortyeight-
inch diameter reinforced barrel sections.
(a)
Top sections shall be eccentric, except that flat concentric top
sections shall be used where shallow cover requires a top
section less than four feet, as shown on drawings.
(b)
Barrel sections shall have tongue-and-groove joints with
approved round rubber O-ring gaskets, or a preformed flexible
joint sealant.
(c)
All sections shall be cured by an approved method and shall
not be shipped, nor subjected to loading, until the concrete
compressive strength has attained 3,000 pounds per square
inch, and not before five days after fabrication, whichever is
longer.
(d)
Precast concrete barrel sections with precast top slabs and
precast concrete transition sections shall be designed for a
minimum of H-20 loading, plus the weight of the soil above.
(e)
The date of manufacture and the name and trademark of the
manufacturer shall be clearly marked on the inside of each
precast section.
(f)
Precast concrete bases shall be constructed and installed, as
shown on the drawings. The thickness of the bottom slab of
the precast bases shall not be less than the manhole barrel
sections or top slab, whichever is greater.
(g)
(h) Type II cement shall be used except as otherwise approved.
All exterior surfaces of sanitary manholes shall be given two
coats of waterproof coating.
(i)
Sanitary sewer drop connection manholes shall be of the
internal drop connection type, as shown in the details.52 The
minimum size manhole will be five feet internal diameter.
(j)
Brick masonry.
The bricks shall be good, sound, hard and uniformly burned,
regular and uniform in shape and size, of compact texture and
satisfactory to the Department. Underburned or salmon brick
will not be acceptable, and only whole brick shall be used
unless otherwise permitted. In case bricks are rejected by the
Department, they shall be immediately removed from the site
of the work and satisfactory bricks substituted therefor.
(a)
Bricks for the channels and shelves shall comply with the latest
specifications for ASTM C32 for Sewer Brick, Grade SS (from
(b)
(3)
52.Editor's Note: Details are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 113-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-15
1:315
clay to shale), except that the mean of five tests for absorption
shall not exceed 8%, and no individual brick shall exceed 11%.
Bricks for building up and leveling manhole frames shall
conform to ASTM C62.
(c)
Mortar used in the brickwork shall be composed of one part
Type II portland cement conforming to ASTM C150 to two
parts sand to which a small amount of hydrated lime, not to
exceed 10 pounds to each bag of cement, shall be added.
(d)
The sand used shall be washed, cleaned, screened, sharp and
well graded as to different sizes and with no grain larger than
that which will pass a No. 4 sieve. It shall be free of organic
matter, loam, organic or other materials of such nature or of
such quantity as to render it unsatisfactory.
(e)
(f) The hydrated lime shall also conform to ASTM C207, Type S.
Manhole frame and cover.
Manhole frames and covers shall be of good quality, strong,
tough, even-grained cast iron which is smooth, free from scale,
lumps, blisters, sand holes and defects of any kind which
render them unfit for the service for which they are intended.
Manhole covers and frame seats shall be machined to a true
surface. Castings shall be thoroughly cleaned and subject to
hammer inspection. Before shipment from the foundry,
castings shall be given one coat of coal tar pitch varnish which
shall present a casting that is smooth and tough, but not
brittle. Cast iron shall conform to ASTM A48, Class 30.
(a)
Manhole covers shall have a diamond pattern, pick holes and
the word "sewer" centered on the cover in three-inch letters.
(b)
Standard manhole frames and covers for all applications shall
provide a twenty-four-inch clear opening. Manhole frames and
covers shall be LeBaron Foundry No. LB-268-1, or approved
equal.
(c)
(4)
Precast manhole section joints.
Tongue-and-groove joints of precast manhole sections shall be
sealed with either a round rubber O-ring gasket or a preformed
flexible joint sealant.
(a)
If round rubber O-ring gaskets are used, they shall conform to
ASTM C443. They shall be designed and manufactured so that
the completed joint will withstand an internal water pressure
in excess of 15 pounds per square inch without showing any
leakage by the gasket or displacement of it.
(b)
(5)
§ 113-15 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-15
1:316
The contractor shall provide facilities for testing the
effectiveness of the joints against leakage. Such tests shall be
made by an internal pressure against the joint of at least 15
pounds per square inch.
(c)
Manhole rungs.
Manhole rungs shall be steel reinforced copolymer
polypropylene plastic. Rungs shall be 14 inches wide.
(a)
Copolymer polypropylene shall be Type II, Grade 16906,
meeting ASTM Specification 2146. Steel reinforcing shall be
three-eights-inch in diameter, Grade 60, conforming to ASTM
Specification A615 and shall be continuous throughout the
rung. The portion of the legs to be embedded in the precast
section shall have fins and be tapered to ensure a secure bond.
(b)
(6)
Pipe connections to manholes. Manhole pipe connections may be
accomplished in the following ways:
The "Lock Joint Flexible Manhole Sleeve" shall be cast in the
precast manhole base. The stainless steel strap and exposed
sleeve shall be protected from corrosion with a bituminous
coat.
(a)
"A-Lok" shall be a rubber-like gasket cast in the precast
manhole base. The rubber gasket shall be cast into a formed
opening in the manhole.
(b)
"KOR-N-SEAL" joint shall be installed as recommended by the
manufacturer. The stainless steel clamp shall be protected
from corrosion with a bituminous coat.
(c)
"Res-Seal" shall be a rubber-like O-ring set in a formed opening
in the manhole. Once the pipe is in place, the O-ring and pipe
shall be secured in place by means of a cast-iron follower or
compression flange. All exposed metal shall be protected from
corrosion with a bituminous coat.
(d)
(7)
Pump station. Duplex pump stations shall be constructed of
reinforced concrete, precast or cast-in-place, and shall be supplied
with nonclog pump controls, wiring, shut-off valves, access hatches
and other required appurtenances.
(8)
Nonclog submersible pump.
Type: single-speed, submersible centrifugal nonclog sewage
pump; solids handling capacity, three inch sphere minimum.
(a)
Casing: cast iron with corrosion protective coating with oilfilled
motor chamber; all exposed hardware shall be corrosion
resistant stainless steel.
(b)
(9)
§ 113-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-15
1:317
Pump: centrifugal type, impeller shall be cast iron or enameled
cast iron, fully enclosed, keyed to stainless steel shaft.
(c)
Seals: two mechanical seals with carbon and ceramic faces, oil
lubricated, with oil-filled seal chamber between seals.
(d)
Motor: close-coupled, constant speed motor, preferably three
phases.
(e)
Overload protection: automatic reset type thermal overload
thermostat incorporated into the pump motor.
(f)
Motor controls: duplex control panel with weatherproof NEMA
4 outer enclosure with dead front panel; all components
mounted within inner NEMA 1 enclosure; main disconnect
switch and starter with overload and short circuit protection
for each pump; control circuit main switch with short circuit
and adjustable thermal trip protection; hand-off automatic
switch for each pump; transformer 230 V.-110 V.-24 V.; relay for
automatic alternation of pumps; control fuses; green running
light for each pump; all necessary terminal strips; control
relays, panel powered for high wet well level alarm switch;
one-hundred-ten-volt red high wet well level alarm light in
weatherproof enclosure; 110 V. yellow lead pump off alarm
light in weatherproof enclosure; one elapsed-time meter for
each pump; hermostatically controlled space heater;
convenience outlet, duplex receptacle for auxiliary power with
manual transfer switch mounted within the enclosure; control
panel shall be UL approved.
(g)
Level controls: mercury switch level sensors with corrosion
and shock-resistant casing with firmly bonded electrical cable;
cable shall be permanently bonded to metal enclosed mercury
switch with entire assembly encapsulated for water and
impact-resistant unit; switch shall be weighted and designed
to actuate but not float; level controls system shall include
support brackets to allow the suspension of the switches at the
proper levels in the wet well; duplex stations shall have level
controls for high-level alarm, low-level alarm, lead pump on,
lag pump on and all pumps off;
(h)
Cables: electric and control cables shall be of the size and
type applicable to the pump motor and control system
requirements. Junction boxes shall be located within the pump
station.
(i)
Screened gravel: Screened gravel shall conform to MDPW
Standard Specifications M1.03.0, Type C, as previously described
in § 113-8B(1).
(10)
Crushed stone. Crushed stone shall conform to MDPW Standard
Specifications M2.01.4, as previously described in § 113-10B(2).
(11)
§ 113-15 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-15
1:318
Construction.
Pipe installation.
Care shall be taken in shipping, handling and laying to avoid
damaging the pipe and fittings. Extra care will be necessary
during cold weather construction.
(a)
Any pipe or fitting showing a crack or which has received a
blow that may have caused an incipient fracture, even though
no such fracture can be seen, shall be marked as rejected and
removed at once from the work area.
(b)
(c) All pipe ends shall be square after cutting.
While stored, pipe shall be adequately supported from below
at not more than three-foot intervals to prevent deformation.
Pipe shall not be stacked higher than six feet. Pipe and fittings
shall be stored in a manner which will keep them at ambient
outdoor temperatures.
(d)
Temporary shading, as required, to meet this requirement shall
be provided. Simple covering of the pipe and fittings which
allows temperature buildup when exposed to direct sunlight
will not be permitted.
(e)
PVC sewer pipe and fittings shall be jointed in accordance
with the recommendations of the latest ASTM standards and
detailed instructions of the manufacturer.
(f)
All manhole connections shall be equipped with an integral Oring
or other sealant such that a positive watertight seal is
established.
(g)
No single piece of pipe shall be laid unless it is generally
straight.
(h)
The centerline of the pipe shall not deviate from a straight
line drawn between the centers of the openings at the ends
of the pipe by more than 1/16 of an inch per foot of length.
If a piece of pipe fails to meet this requirement check for
straightness, it shall be rejected and removed from the site.
Laying instructions of the manufacturer shall be explicitly
followed.
(i)
Any pipe or fitting discovered to be defective after laying shall
be removed and replaced with a sound piece.
(j)
The Engineer may examine each bell-and-spigot end to
determine whether any preformed joint has been damaged
prior to installation.
(k)
(1)
C.
§ 113-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-15
1:319
Any pipe having defective joint surfaces shall be rejected,
marked as such and immediately removed from the job site.
(l)
All pipe shall be sound and clean before laying. When laying is
not in progress, including lunch time, the open ends of the pipe
shall be closed by watertight plugs or other approved means.
Good alignment shall be preserved in laying.
(m)
Pipe and fittings shall be installed in accordance with the
instructions of the manufacturer, ASTM D2321, and as
specified herein.
(n)
As soon as the excavation is complete to normal grade of
the bottom of the trench, screened gravel or crushed stone
bedding shall be placed, compacted and graded to provide
firm, uniform and continuous support for the pipe. Bell holes
shall be excavated so that only the barrel of the pipe bears
upon the bedding. The pipe shall be laid accurately to the lines
and grades indicated on the definitive plan. Blocking under
the pipe will not be permitted. Bedding shall be placed evenly
on each side of the pipe to mid-diameter, and hand tools shall
be used to force the bedding material under the haunches
of the pipe and into the bell holes to give firm continuous
support for the pipe. The bedding material shall be placed a
minimum of 12 inches above the top of the pipe and carefully
compacted. The initial three feet of backfill above the bedding
material backfill shall be placed in one-foot layers and carefully
compacted. Generally, the compaction shall be done evenly on
each side of the pipe, and compaction equipment shall not be
operated directly over the pipe until sufficient backfill has been
placed to ensure that such compaction equipment will not have
a damaging effect on the pipe.
(o)
Each length of the pipe shall be shoved home against the pipe
previously laid and held securely until enough backfill has been
placed to hold the pipe in place. Joints shall not be pulled or
cramped.
(p)
Before any joint is made, the pipe shall be checked to assure
that a close joint with the next adjoining pipe has been
maintained and that the inverts are matched and conform to
the required grade. The pipe shall not be driven down to grade
by striking it.
(q)
Precautions shall be taken to prevent flotation of the pipe in
the trench.
(r)
When movable trench bracing, such as trench boxes, movable
sheeting, shoring or plates, is used to support the sides of
the trench, care shall be taken in placing and moving the
boxes or supporting bracing to prevent movement of the pipe,
or disturbances of the pipe bedding and the screened gravel
(s)
§ 113-15 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-15
1:320
backfill. Trench boxes, movable sheeting, shoring or plates
shall not be allowed to extend below mid-diameter of the pipe.
As trench boxes, movable sheeting, shoring or plates are
moved, screened gravel shall be placed to fill any voids
created, and the screened gravel and backfill shall be
recompacted to provide uniform side support for the pipe.
All fittings shall be furnished by the same manufacturer that
furnishes the pipe.
(t)
Wye branches shall be furnished and installed and capped for
all lots. Service connections shall be installed at a minimum
slope of 2% to the edge of the right-of-way. In each case the
end shall be capped and backed with a four-inch by four-inch
wood post extending to the finished ground surface.
(u)
All wye branches and capped ends shall have their exact
locations documented and include tie dimensions on as-built
plans.
(v)
PVC manhole drops shall be installed as internal drop
connection manholes, as shown on the details.
(w)
Pipe stubs for manhole connections shall not exceed four feet
in length unless directed otherwise by the Engineer. Install
caps where required.
(x)
Testing and cleaning of pipe.
For making low-pressure air tests, the developer shall use
equipment specifically designed and manufactured for the
purpose of testing sewer pipelines using low-pressure air. The
equipment shall be provided with an air regulator valve or
air safety valves so set that the internal air pressure in the
pipeline cannot exceed nine pounds per square inch gauge.
The leakage test using low-pressure air shall be made on each
manhole-to-manhole section of pipeline. Pneumatic plugs shall
have a sealing length equal to, or greater than, the diameter of
the pipe to be tested. Pneumatic plugs shall resist internal test
pressure without requiring external bracing or blocking.
(a)
(b) All air used shall pass through a single control panel.
Low-pressure air shall be introduced into the sealed line until
the internal air pressure reaches four pounds per square inch
gauge greater than the maximum pressure exerted by
groundwater that may be above the invert of the pipe at the
time of the test. However, the internal air pressure in the
sealed line shall not be allowed to exceed nine pounds per
square inch gauge. When the maximum pressure exerted by
the groundwater exceeds five pounds per square inch gauge,
the developer shall conduct only an infiltration test. At least
(c)
(2)
§ 113-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-15
1:321
two minutes shall be allowed for the air pressure to stabilize
in the section under test. After the stabilization period, the
low-pressure air supply hose shall be quickly disconnected
from the control panel. The time required in minutes for the
pressure in the section under test to decrease from 3.5 to
2.5 pounds per square inch gauge (greater than the maximum
pressure exerted by groundwater that may be above the invert
of the pipe) shall not be less than that calculated using the test
time equation below as found in the Recommended Practice for
Low-pressure Air Testing of Installed Sewer Pipe, UNI-B-6-90,
Uni-Bell PVC Pipe Association's latest revision.
T = 0.085 (DK/Q)
Where:
T = Shortest time, in seconds, allowed for the air
pressure to drop to 1.0 pounds per square inch
gauge
K = 0.000419 DL, but not less than 1.0
Q = 0.0015 cubic feet/minute/square feet of internal
surface
D = Normal pipe diameter in inches
L = Length of pipe being tested in feet
If the pipe section does not pass the air test, sectionalize the
section tested to determine the location of the leak. Once the
leak has been located, repair and retest.
(d)
A Mandril Test shall be performed on the sewer system. Pipe
segments exceeding the allowable deflection limits shall be
located, repaired and retested.
(e)
Manhole installation.
Manholes shall be constructed to the dimensions as specified
in these Road Construction Standards. All work shall be
protected against flooding and flotation.
(a)
The precast bases of manholes shall be placed on a bed of
twelve-inch screened gravel or crushed stone. The manhole
shall be set at a grade to assure that a maximum of eight-inch
thickness of brickwork will bring the manhole frame and cover
to final grade.
(b)
Precast concrete barrel sections shall be set so as to be vertical
and with sections in true alignment with a one-fourth-inch
maximum tolerance to be allowed. The joints of precast barrel
sections shall be sealed with either a rubber O-ring set in a
recess or the preformed flexible joint sealant used in sufficient
quantity to fill 75% of the joint cavity. The outside and inside
(c)
(3)
§ 113-15 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-15
1:322
joint shall be filled with nonshrink mortar and finished flush
with the adjoining surfaces.
Allow joints to set for 24 hours before backfilling. Backfilling
shall be done in a careful manner, bringing the fill up evenly
on all sides. If any leaks appear in the manholes, the inside
joints shall be caulked with lead wool, or another method that
is satisfactory to the Engineer. The developer shall install the
precast sections in a manner that will result in a watertight
joint.
(d)
Holes in the concrete barrel sections required for handling or
other purposes shall be plugged with nonshrinking grout or
nonshrinking grout in combination with concrete plugs, and
finished flush on the inside.
(e)
Where holes must be cut in the precast sections to
accommodate pipes, cutting shall be done prior to setting
manhole sections in place to prevent any subsequent jarring
which may loosen the mortar joints.
(f)
Manhole pipe connections shall be accomplished in the ways
specified hereinbefore. Pipe stubs for future extensions shall
also be connected and the stub end closed by a suitable
watertight cap.
(g)
Steel reinforced polypropylene plastic manhole rungs shall be
driven into tapered holes in the precast riser and cone sections
during the manufacture of the sections. Holes for rungs shall
be performed during the casting of the sections and shall
not be drilled out after casting. The preformed holes shall be
a minimum of 3 1/2 inches deep and shall taper from 1 1/8
inches to 1 3/8 inches diameter. Precast sections having rungs
which are mortared or grouted in place shall not be accepted.
(h)
Mortar shall be mixed only in such quantity as required for
immediate use and shall be used before the initial set has taken
place. Mortar shall not be retained for more than 1 1/2 hours
and shall be constantly worked over with hoe and shovel until
used. Antifreeze mixtures will not be allowed in the mortar.
(i)
No masonry shall be laid when the outside temperature is
below 40° F., unless provisions are made to protect the mortar,
bricks and finished work from frost by heating and enclosing
the work with tarpaulins or other suitable material. The
Department's decision as to the adequacy of protection against
freezing shall be final.
(j)
Channels and shelves shall be constructed of brick and
concrete.
(k)
§ 113-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-15
1:323
The brick-line channels shall correspond in shape with the
lower half of the pipe. The top of the shelf shall be set at the
elevation of the crown of the highest pipe and shall be sloped
one inch per foot to drain toward the channel. Brick surfaces
exposed to sewage flow shall be constructed with the nominal
two-inch by eight-inch face exposed (i.e., bricks on edge).
(l)
Manhole covers and frames shall be set in a full mortar bed
and bricks, a maximum of eight inches thick, and shall be
utilized to assure frame and cover are set to final grade prior
to placement of permanent paving.
(m)
All new manholes shall be thoroughly cleaned of all silt, debris
and foreign matter of any kind, prior to final inspection.
(n)
Pump station installation.
Excavate soil in accordance with lines and levels required for
installation of the pump station.
(a)
Pump station shall be set on a properly compacted twelve-inch
bedding of screened gravel or crushed stone.
(b)
Suitable backfill material shall be placed and compacted in
layers not to exceed eight inches.
(c)
Install pump station effluent gravity sewer connection and
provide for pressure sewer discharge pipe, as specified.
(d)
(e) Install exterior electrical wiring for pump station, as specified.
Pump tests.
Each unit installed shall be subjected to field pump tests,
as described below, after determination that:
[a] Proper service voltage is supplied.
[b] Proper rotation of pump has been established.
[1]
During the pump test, no cooling of the unit by forced or
circulated air shall be allowed.
[2]
The following field pump tests shall be performed:
Dry run test of the unit in which no liquid is to be
allowed to enter the inlet of the pump. The pump
exterior shall begin dry and remain dry during the
test.
[a]
Dry pumping test of the unit in which liquid shall be at
a level sufficient to keep the pump volute submerged
to its center line during the test. The pump shall be
operated at the system design point.
[b]
[3]
(f)
(4)
§ 113-15 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-15
1:324
§ 113-16. Water.
Snore test, in which "snore" is defined as that state
when the pump is alternately pumping liquid and air,
would occur when the pump pumps the liquid down
to expose the inlet. The unit under test shall be
submerged with just enough liquid to accomplish
"snore" and allowed to run for the stated time.
[c]
Design.
In general, all water mains shall be sized to adequately deliver both
maximum daily consumption and fire flow requirements. In sizing
mains, due consideration shall be given to the location of the mains
in regard to the distribution system so that pressure losses are held
to a minimum. The minimum size for any main shall be eight inches,
however, the sizes of all water mains shall meet with the approval
of the Williamstown DPW.
(1)
(2) The minimum size for house services shall be 3/4 of an inch.
All water mains shall be adequately valved at all street
intersections.
(3)
Hydrants shall be spaced a maximum of 500 feet. Hydrant laterals
shall be six inches in diameter and each shall be provided with
a gate valve. Between intersections all mains shall be valved at
intervals not greater than 1,000 feet. These valves shall preferably
be spaced between hydrant locations so that not more than two
hydrants will be taken out of service at one time.
(4)
A.
Materials.
Pipe.
Ductile iron pipe shall be cement lined and shall conform
to ANSI A21.51 and AWWA C151, Class 52. The pipe shall
be supplied in lengths not in excess of 20 feet. Pipe shall
be standard mechanical joint or push-on type pipe, as
manufactured by the American Cast Iron Pipe Company, or US
Pipe and Foundry Company, Clow Corp., or approved equal.
Fittings shall be mechanical joint ductile iron Class D. Fittings
shall meet the requirements of ANSI, NEWWA and AWWA
specifications, as applicable. Rubber gasket joints shall be
Super Bell-Type, Tyton or MJ push-on joints conforming to
ANSI A21.11. To provide electrical conductivity across the
pipe joints, cable bond conductors or serrated bronze wedges
gaskets shall be used, as manufactured by the pipe supplier.
Bolts shall be Ductile Durabolts and shall meet the
requirements of ANSI C-111 and AWWA A211-80. All pipe and
fittings shall have a cement mortar lining on the inside and a
coal tar enamel coat on the outside, in accordance with ANSI
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 113-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-16
1:325
A21.4, except that cement mortar lining shall be 1/8 inch in
thickness for pipe two inches to 12 inches in diameter, with
a plus tolerance of 1/8 inch. Each pipe and fitting shall have
cast on it, or stamped into the metal, the initials of the maker's
name and the year cast. Cast iron or ductile iron fittings shall
conform to ANSI Specifications A21.10 for mechanical joints.
Solid sleeves, plugs and caps shall conform to AWWA
Specification C110, Class D.
All fittings shall have restrained joints. Bends, reducers, tees,
valves, dead ends and hydrants are among the places where
thrust forces create unbalanced forces in the piping and where
the pipe and fittings shall be restrained. The minimum length
of pipe to be restrained on either side of the joint shall be as
shown in the table below:
Fitting
Number of Joints to Restrain on
Either Side of Fitting
(based on 18 feet of pipe length)
90 bend 2
45 bend 1
22.5 bend 1
Tee:
Branch 2
Run 2
(b)
No restraining is required in the direction of an existing pipe if
only a short length of it is exposed in the trench for making a
new connection.
(c)
Concrete thrust blocks, instead of restrained joints, shall be
used at locations where no sufficient length of pipe is available
for restraining.
(d)
Gate valves. Valves shall be rated for 200 pounds per square inch
minimum working pressure and a minimum 400 pounds per square
inch test pressure. Valves shall be mechanical joint, have a castiron
body, nonrising bronze stem, O-ring seals and be of the
resilient seal seat type gate valve meeting the requirements of
AWWA C509. For standardization purposes, all gate valves shall
be waterous resilient wedge valves. The operating nut shall be
standard AMA two-inch square. Gate valves shall open left or
counterclockwise.
(2)
Tapping sleeves and gate valves. Tapping valves shall meet the
requirements of AWWA C500. The valves shall be flanged by
mechanical joint outlet with nonrising stem, designed for vertical
burial and shall be the O-ring type. Operating nut shall be AWWA
(3)
§ 113-16 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-16
1:326
standard two-inch square. The valve shall be provided with an
overload seat to permit the use of full size cutters. Gaskets shall
cover the entire area of flange surfaces. Tapping sleeves shall
be 200 pounds per square inch minimum working pressure with
cadmium-plated cast-iron nuts and bolts. Sleeves shall be
mechanical joint for ductile iron and/or cast-iron pipe. Tapping
sleeves and valves shall be manufactured by Mueller.
Valve boxes.
Each gate valve shall be accompanied by a valve box of the
adjustable type, of heavy pattern, constructed of cast iron and
provided with cast-iron cover.
(a)
The upper section of each box shall have a flange at the top,
having sufficient bearing area to prevent settling. The bottom
of the lower section shall enclose the operating nut of the
valve and be base belled and have a forty-eight-inch base in
length and a twenty-six-inch or thirty-six-inch top section with
no bottom flange.
(b)
The box top will be the sliding type. Boxes shall be of lengths
consistent with the pipe depths. In general, all pipe installed
will have five feet minimum of cover. Covers shall have the
word "water" cast in the top.
(c)
(4)
Hydrants. Hydrants shall be Mueller Centurian, and shall conform
to the Standard Specifications for Fire Hydrants for Ordinary Water
Works Service, AWWA C502, and, in addition, shall meet the
specific requirements and exceptions which follow:
Hydrants shall be according to manufacturers standard
pattern and of standard size and shall have one four-and-onehalf-
inch pumper nozzle and two two-and-one-half-inch hose
nozzles.
(a)
Hydrant inlet connections shall have mechanical joints for sixinch
ductile iron pipe.
(b)
Hydrant valve opening shall have an area at least equal to that
area of five-and-one-fourth-inch minimum diameter circle and
be obstructed only by the valve rod. Each hydrant shall be able
to deliver 500 gallons minimum through its two two-and-onehalf-
inch hose nozzles when opened together with loss of not
more than two pounds per square inch in the hydrants.
(c)
Each hydrant shall be designed for installation in a trench
that will provide five feet of cover. Hydrant extensions shall be
manufactured by the company furnishing the hydrants and of
a style appropriate for the hydrants finish.
(d)
(5)
§ 113-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-16
1:327
Hydrants shall be hydrostatically tested, as specified in AWWA
C502.
(e)
(f) All nozzle threads shall be National Standard Thread.
Each nozzle cap shall be provided with a Buna N rubber
washer.
(g)
Hydrants shall be so arranged that the direction of outlets may
be turned 90° without interference with the drip mechanism
and without the mechanism obstructing the discharge from
any outlet.
(h)
Hydrants must be capable of being extended without removing
any operating parts.
(i)
A bronze nut and check nut shall be provided to hold the main
hydrant valve on its stem.
(j)
Hydrants must open by turning operating nut to the left
(counterclockwise) and must be marked with an arrow and
word "open" to indicate the direction to turn stem to open
hydrant.
(k)
All iron work to be set below ground, after being thoroughly
cleaned, shall be painted with two coats of asphalt varnish
specified in AWWA C502 and iron work to be left above ground
shall be shop painted with two coats of paint of quality and
color to correspond with the present standard of the owner.
(l)
Each hydrant shall be designed such that the hydrant valve
closes with line pressure preventing loss of water and
consequent flooding in the event of traffic damage.
(m)
Each hydrant shall be furnished with a steel chain holder,
double steel cap chain, steel pumper cap chain and any other
hooks and/or appurtenances required for proper use.
(n)
(o) Drain rings on each hydrant shall be plugged.
Service connections.
Corporation stops will be Mueller 110 compression connection,
or a Mueller flared connection.
(a)
Curb stops will be Mueller Oriseal Full Flow 110 conductive
compression or floated fitting without drain.
(b)
Curb valve boxes will be for 3/4 inch service connections, Erie
type extension, or Minneapolis pattern, sixty-six-inch length;
one inch pipe screw cap.
(c)
Valve boxes will be for one- to two-inch inside diameter, cast
iron construction.
(d)
(6)
§ 113-16 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-16
1:328
Copper tubing shall be Type K, soft temper, conforming to
ASTM B88. The name or trademark of the manufacturer and
type shall be stamped at intervals along the pipe.
(e)
(f) Water services shall be minimum of 3/4 inch diameter.
Construction.
Pipe and fittings.
Care shall be taken in loading, transporting and unloading to
prevent injury to the pipe or coatings. Pipe or fittings shall not
be dropped. All pipe or fittings shall be examined before laying,
and no piece shall be installed which is found to be defective.
Any damage to the pipe coatings shall be repaired, as directed
by the Engineer.
(a)
If any defective pipe is discovered after it has been laid, it
shall be removed and replaced with a sound pipe. All pipe
and fittings shall be thoroughly cleaned before laying, shall be
kept clean until they are used in the work and when laid, shall
conform to the lines and grades required. Ductile iron pipe
and fittings shall be installed in accordance with requirements
of AWWA Standard Specification C600 except as otherwise
provided herein. A firm, even bearing throughout the length of
the pipe shall be constructed by tamping select material at the
sides of the pipe up to one foot over the top of the pipe.
(b)
(c) Blocking will not be permitted.
All pipe shall be sound and clean before laying. When laying is
not in progress, including lunch time, the open ends of the pipe
shall be closed by a watertight plug or other approved means.
Good alignment shall be preserved in laying. The deflection at
joints shall not exceed that recommended by the manufacturer.
Fittings, in addition to those shown on the plans, shall be
provided, if required, in crossing utilities which may be
encountered upon opening the trench. Solid sleeves shall be
used only where approved by the Engineer.
(d)
When cutting pipe is required, the cutting shall be done by
machine, leaving a smooth cut at right angles to the axis of the
pipe.
(e)
Cut ends of pipe to be used with a Tyton bell shall be beveled to
conform to the manufactured spigot end. Cement lining shall
be undamaged.
(f)
Mechanical joints shall be in accordance with the Notes on
Method of Installation under ANSI Specification A 21.11 and
the instructions of the manufacturer. To assemble the joints
in the field, the contractor shall thoroughly clean the joint
(g)
(1)
C.
§ 113-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-16
1:329
surfaces and rubber gasket with soapy water before tightening
the bolts.
Bolts shall be tight ended to the specified torque with a torque
wrench.
(h)
Under no condition shall extension wrenches or pipe over
handle or ordinary ratchet wrench be used to secure greater
leverage.
(i)
The water mains shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure
of 250 pounds per square inch for the pressure test, and this
pressure shall be maintained for at least two hours. The
leakage test shall be conducted concurrently with the pressure
test at a pressure of 250 pounds per square inch, and this
pressure shall be maintained for at least two hours. New
hydrant branch gate valves shall remain open and tapping
sleeve gate valves closed during the testing.
(j)
The amount of leakage permitted shall be in accordance with
AWWA Specification C600, current edition. If any leaks occur
during either test, they shall be repaired to the satisfaction of
the Engineer.
(k)
The developer shall make any taps and furnish all necessary
caps, plugs, etc., as required in conjunction with testing the
pipe. He shall also furnish a test pump, gages and any other
equipment required in conjunction with carrying on the
hydrostatic tests. He shall at all times protect the new water
mains and the existing water mains against the introduction of
polluting material.
(l)
Before being placed in service, all new water pipelines shall
be chlorinated in accordance with AWWA C601, Starting
Procedure for Disinfecting Water Mains. The procedure shall
be approved by the Engineer, in advance.
(m)
The location of the chlorination and sampling points will be
determined by the Engineer in the field. Taps for chlorination
and sampling shall be installed by the developer. The developer
shall uncover and backfill the taps, as required.
(n)
The general procedure for chlorination shall be first to flush
all dirty or discolored water from the lines, and then introduce
chlorine in approved dosages through a tap at one end, while
water is being withdrawn at the other end of the line. The
chlorine solution shall remain in the pipeline for about 24
hours.
(o)
Following the chlorination period, all treated water shall be
flushed from the lines at their extremities and replaced with
water from the distribution system. Bacteriological sampling
(p)
§ 113-16 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-16
1:330
and analysis of the replacement water may then be made
by the Engineer in full accordance with AWWA Specification
C601. The developer will be required to rechlorinate, if
necessary, and the line shall not be placed in service until the
requirements of the Massachusetts Public Health Department
are met.
Special disinfecting procedures shall be used in connections
to existing mains, and where the method outlined above is not
practical.
(q)
Gate valves. Gate valves and boxes shall be set with the operating
stem vertically aligned in the center of the valve box. Valves shall
be set on a firm foundation and supported by tamping selected
excavated material under and at the sides of the valve. Gate valves
shall be tied to the pipe with a mechanical joint anchoring tee of 3/
4 inch diameter tie rods and clamps.
(2)
Tapping sleeves and valves.
Installation shall be made under pressure and the flow of water
through the existing main shall be maintained at all times. The
diameter of the tap shall be a minimum of 1/4 inch less than
the inside diameter of the branch line.
(a)
The entire operation shall be conducted by workmen
thoroughly experienced in the installation of tapping sleeves
and valves.
(b)
The developer shall determine the location of the existing main
to be tapped to confirm the fact that the proposed position for
the tapping sleeve will be satisfactory and no interference will
be encountered, such as the presence of existing utilities or of
a joint or fitting at the location proposed for the connection. No
tap will be made closer than three feet from a pipe joint.
(c)
Tapping valves shall be set in vertical position and be supplied
with a two-inch square operation nut.
(d)
Tapping sleeves and valves with boxes shall be set vertically
and squarely centered on the main to be tapped. Adequate
support shall be provided under the sleeve and valve during
the tapping operation. Sleeves shall be no closer than three
feet from water main joints. Thrust blocks shall be provided
behind all tapping sleeves.
(e)
Proper tamping of supporting earth around and under the
valve and sleeve is mandatory. After completing the tap, the
valve will be flushed to ensure that the valve seat is clean.
(f)
(3)
Valve boxes. Valve boxes shall be installed vertically, centered over
the operating nut, and the elevation of the tap shall be adjusted
(4)
§ 113-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-16
1:331
§ 113-17. Streetlights.
§ 113-18. Other utilities.
to conform with the finished surface of roadway or other surface
at the completion of the contract. Boxes shall be adequately
supported during backfilling to maintain vertical alignment.
Hydrants.
Hydrants shall be set at the location designated by the
Engineer and as shown on the definitive plan, and shall be
bedded on a firm foundation. Each hydrant shall be set in true
vertical alignment and shall be properly braced. Each hydrant
shall be restrained with three-fourths-inch tie rods back to the
hydrant gate valve/hydrant tee assembly.
(a)
The hydrant gate valve shall be restrained using a mechanical
joint hydrant anchoring tee, or equal. Hydrants shall be
touched up with matching paint, as required after installation.
(b)
(5)
Service connection.
At the time the new water main is being installed, new
corporation stops, copper tubing, curb stops and curb boxes
shall also be installed, as specified. Protection shall be
provided for the threads of corporation stops. The new
corporation stops shall remain closed until the copper tubing
and curb stop is installed.
(a)
(b) Service connections shall be installed for each lot, as required.
Curb stops shall be installed two feet beyond the right-of-way
property line. In each case the end shall be capped and backed
with a four-inch by four-inch wood post extending to four feet
below the finished surface.
(c)
The developer shall be careful to obtain the exact location
of each connection and record the tie dimensions on as-built
plans before it is covered.
(d)
(6)
Design. Streetlights shall be installed as specified by the Williamstown
Fire District.
A.
Materials. Streetlights shall conform to the type and style in general
use in the Town of Williamstown unless otherwise specified by the
Williamstown Planning Board and Williamstown Fire District.
B.
Construction. Streetlight stanchions shall be located at such intervals
as required by the Williamstown Planning Board in the grass plot, and
shall be installed in accordance with the procedure required by the
Williamstown Planning Board and utility company.
C.
§ 113-16 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-18
1:332
§ 113-19. Shade trees.
A. Other utilities include natural gas, electrical, CATV and telephone lines.
Design.
Gas mains may be installed if gas connection is available. Electric,
CATV and telephone lines shall be installed in underground
conduits, or direct burial.
(1)
Transformers, switches and other such equipment shall be placed
in approved aboveground locations outside the right-of-way. Gas
mains, electric, CATV and telephone lines shall be installed outside
of the paved road surface, generally as shown on the road crosssection
details.
(2)
All road crossings shall be installed in sleeves prior to installation
of the gravel road base. Transformers, pedestals, termination
boxes, etc., shall be located outside of the right-of-way.
(3)
B.
C. Materials. Materials shall be specified by the respective utility.
Construction. Construction methods shall be as specified by the
respective utility.
D.
Design. Shade trees shall be installed as specified by the Town of
Williamstown Planning Board.
A.
Materials. Materials shall be specified by the Town of Williamstown
Planning Board or Tree Warden.
B.
Construction. Installation of shade trees shall be specified by the
Williamstown Tree Warden and as located on the typical road cross
section.
C.
§ 113-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-19
1:333
Chapter 117
SEWERS
§ 113-19 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 113-19
1:334
Part 1
[Adopted 3-27U-1s9e7 O2f, CAommemndoend STehwreorusgh 7-22-1996]
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 117-1. Definitions and word usage.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in these rules and regulations shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm-, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
A.
§ 117-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-1
1:335
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together
with such ground-, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds,
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — A sewer which carries stormand
surface waters and drainage, but excluded sewage and industrial
wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Sewer Department
of the Town of Williamstown, or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. Word usage. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
§ 117-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 117-1
1:336
ARTICLE II
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 117-2. Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any corrections with or
opening into, use alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 117-3. Classes of permits; fee.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and
commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the town. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit and inspection
fee of $2 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and $5 for
an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the town at the time of
the application is filed.
§ 117-4. Cost to be borne by owner; indemnification of town.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the sewer lateral from the building to the public sewer shall
be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or
damages that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of
the new building sewer.
§ 117-5. Separate building sewer required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
§ 117-6. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to
meet all requirements of these rules and regulations.
§ 117-7. Conformance to codes, rules and regulations.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavation, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the State Sanitary Code and of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the town. In the absence of the code
§ 117-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-7
1:337
provisions or in amplification thereof the materials and procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No.
9 shall apply.
§ 117-8. Location of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 117-9. Discharge of surface runoff into sewer prohibited.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 117-10. Connection of building sewer into public sewer.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the State Sanitary Code and of the Building and
Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the town or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
§ 117-11. Notification for inspection purposes.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his representative.
§ 117-12. Guarding of excavations; restoration of disturbed
property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
§ 117-13. Flood damage related to sewer devices installed
underground.
The Williamstown Sewer Department will not be responsible for any
flooding damage related to all sewer devices installed below ground level
in all buildings connected to the public sewer system. This will include any
§ 117-7 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 117-13
1:338
sewer caps unscrewed from the cleanouts leaving the sewer line open and
subject to spill from backups.
§ 117-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-13
1:339

ARTICLE III
Use of Public Sewers
§ 117-14. Certain discharges prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
§ 117-15. Discharge of unpolluted drainage or process waters.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
§ 117-16. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
§ 117-17. Additional prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute
a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
A.
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant.
B.
Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
C.
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, ungrounded garbage, dishes, cups, milk containers,
etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
D.
§ 117-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-17
1:341
the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities
of materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors.
The substances prohibited are:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.).
B.
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent.
C.
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
D.
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials.
E.
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal
or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
F.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
G.
H. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but
not limited to fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residue) or of
dissolved solids (such as but not limited to sodium, chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(1)
Excessive discolorations (such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(2)
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
(3)
I.
§ 117-17 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 117-17
1:342
§ 117-18. Power of Superintendent.
§ 117-19. Grease, oil and sand interceptor.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall
be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 117-20. Maintenance of treatment and flow-equalizing facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs"as defined herein.
(4)
Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed,
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
J.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 117-17 of this article and
which, in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(2)
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of § 117-23 of this article.
(4)
A.
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, bylaws and laws.
B.
§ 117-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-21
1:343
§ 117-21. Manhole required.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer, to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 117-22. Measurements, test and analyses; sampling; monitoring.
§ 117-23. Special agreements or arrangements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the town and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength of character may
be accepted by the town for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern.
All measurements, test and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in these rules and regulations
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by
the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at
the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
A.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The
particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a
grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always,
BOD and suspended solids analysis are obtained from twenty-four-hour
composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
B.
All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring of their discharges as the Superintendent and/or other duly
authorized employees of the town may reasonably require, including
installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping
records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the
Superintendent. Such records shall be made available upon request
by the Superintendent to either agencies having jurisdiction over
discharges to the receiving waters.
C.
§ 117-21 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 117-23
1:344
ARTICLE IV
Protection from Damage
§ 117-24. Destruction or tampering with structures and equipment.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 117-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-24
1:345

ARTICLE V
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 117-25. Right of entry.
§ 117-26. Observance of safety rules; indemnification of company by
town.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
§ 117-25 above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death
to the town employees, and the town shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by town employees against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except
as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions as required in § 117-21.
The Superintendent and any other duly authorized employees of the
town and the Hoosac Water Quality District and its duly authorized
employees bearing proper credentials and other identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties, of any person or entity who causes
or permits the contribution of wastewater into the town's sewer system
or Hoosac Water Quality District treatment works, for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing and records
examination to determine compliance with provisions of these rules and
regulations of the Hoosac Water Quality District.
A.
Persons, entities or occupants of premises where wastewater is created
or discharged shall allow employees of the town and/or Hoosac Water
Quality District or their representatives ready access at all reasonable
times to all parts of the premises in performance of any of their duties
as required in these rules and regulations and the rules and regulations
of the Hoosac Water Quality District.
B.
The Town of Williamstown, the Hoosac Water Quality District and the
Environmental Protection Agency acting through their employees or
representatives shall have the right to set upon any property subject
to these rules and regulations and the rules and regulations of the
Hoosac Water Quality District such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling inspection, compliance monitoring or metering operations.
Where property of any person, entity or occupant has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into their premises, the person, entity or
occupant of the property shall make necessary arrangements with their
security guard so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the town, the Hoosac Water Quality District or the
Environmental Protection Agency will be permitted to enter without
delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.
C.
§ 117-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-27
1:347
§ 117-27. Right of entry on easements.
The Superintendent and any other duly authorized employees of the town
and the Hoosac Water Quality District and its duly authorized employees
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 117-27 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 117-27
1:348
ARTICLE VI
Cold Spring Road Sanitary Sewer District
§ 117-28. Purpose.
The Cold Spring Road Sanitary Sewer District, hereafter called the District,
is hereby established for the purpose of securing the health and safety of
the inhabitants from the dangers of disease, pollution and contamination
of the soil and water through the provision of sanitary sewer services. Its
further purpose shall be to provide for an ordered development process
within the District, relating development to be served by the sewer to the
intent and design capacity of the sewer; and to provide for fiscal stability
through the planned and orderly use of community services which have
limited capacity to support additional growth and development.
§ 117-29. District defined.
§ 117-30. Connection to the sewer.
Only these properties within the District shall be granted a permit to
make connection to the Cold Spring Road sanitary sewer. A separate and
independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except as
may be approved by the Sewer Commission.
§ 117-31. Special restrictions.
Special restrictions and requirements shall be applicable to the District as
follows:
The District shall consist of all properties abutting on Cold Spring Road
lying between the origin of the sewer at Mt. Greylock High School and
its terminus at Bee Hill Road. Properties on both sides of the road shall
be included.
A.
In cases in which new lots are created through legal subdivision of
land, only those lots actually abutting on Cold Spring Road so created
shall be deemed as being within the District. Properties in the vicinity
of the District but not served by the District shall be unaffected by
its creation, having no special fees nor requirements and remaining
subject to the normal requirements of on-site disposal of sanitary
wastes. Owners of premises located within the District must dispose of
their sanitary wastes via the Cold Spring Road sanitary sewer subject
to all special and general provisions contained within these rules and
regulations unless specifically exempted in writing by the Health
Inspector for reasons of excessive distance from the sewer or other
hardship or community benefit. The reasons for such exemption shall
be included in the written exemption provided by the Health Inspector.
B.
Any sewage discharged into this sewer shall be required to have
preliminary treatment by one of the following means:
A.
§ 117-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-31
1:349
§ 117-32. Fees.
Owners of premises served by the Cold Spring Road sanitary sewer shall be
liable for a sewer surcharge as approved by the Board of Selectmen.
Removal of solids in a septic tank of approved size for the amount
of sewage to be discharged.
(1)
Reduction of size of sewage solids by means of a grinder pump
facility.
(2)
At locations where the sanitary sewer is a pressure grinder pump,
installation with a pressure discharge shall be required.
B.
Owners requiring a simplex or duplex grinder pump installation shall
purchase the pump station from the Town of Williamstown at the town's
cost.
C.
The owner of any premises served by the Cold Spring Road sanitary
sewer shall grant the Town of Williamstown an easement for sewer
service maintenance.
D.
All connections to the sanitary sewer shall be submitted to the
Superintendent for approval and shall carry the seal of a registered
professional engineer.
E.
An as-built plan sealed by a registered professional engineer shall be
provided to the Superintendent.
F.
All premises where septic tanks are used for pretreatment shall have
their septic tanks pumped at a frequency established by the
Superintendent. The owner of the premises shall notify the
Superintendent by regular mail when septic tanks are cleaned.
G.
All premises where grinder pumps are used for pretreatment shall
maintain normal, commercially available electrical power to their
grinder pump station at all times and shall pay the cost of required
electric power usage.
H.
The owner or occupant of any premises served by a grinder pump
station shall report any failure or malfunction of such station
immediately to the Superintendent.
I.
§ 117-31 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 117-32
1:350
ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
§ 117-33. Service of notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating any provision of these rules and
regulations, except Article IV, shall be served by the town with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
§ 117-34. Penalties.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in § 117-33 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof,
shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $20 for each violation. Each
day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
§ 117-35. Liability for damage and loss.
Any person violating any of the provisions of theses rules and regulations
shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned
the town by reason of such violation.
§ 117-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-35
1:351

ARTICLE VIII
Repealer; Severability
§ 117-36. Repealer.
All rules and regulations or parts of rules and regulations in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 117-37. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provisions of these rules
and regulations shall not affect the validity of any other parts of these rules
and regulations which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 117-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-37
1:353

ARTICLE IX
When Effective; Adoption
§ 117-38. When effective.
These rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after
their passage and publication as provided by law.
§ 117-39. Adoption.
These rules and regulations were passed and adopted by the Board of
Selectmen of the Town of Williamstown, in the County of Berkshire, and
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, on the 27th day of March 1972.
§ 117-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-39
1:355

Part 2
A[Addmoipntiesdtra3t-i1v2e- 1P9o6li2c]y
ARTICLE X
Sewer Service Charge
§ 117-40. Adoption of policy.
The following administrative policy has been adopted to supplement the
policies adopted at town meeting for handling the sewer service charges.
§ 117-41. Property subject to sewer service charges.
Sewer service charges shall be levied on all property in which there is a
sewer connected directly or indirectly with a town sewerage system. This
means all properties connected to a town sewer will be charged regardless
of whether or not that particular town sewer is tied in with the interceptor
and the sewage treatment plant.
§ 117-42. Commencement of charges.
The sewer service charge shall commence when the private lateral or
private sewer line is connected to the town's sewerage system or two
years after the sewer is available, whichever is earlier. Those properties
where a town sewer was available on February 20, 1961, the date of the
town meeting accepting Chapter 63 of the Acts of 1961, will be charged
beginning two years from the date of the acceptance of the Act.
§ 117-43. Reduction of charges.
§ 117-44. Water from sources other than town.
Any sewer customer who discharges sewage into the town's system from
a water source other than the town's shall pay on the same basis as if the
Any water customer who uses water in such a manner that it is not
discharged into the town's sewerage system may be granted a
reduction in his sewer service charge in proportion to the water not
so discharged into the system. In order to receive such consideration,
the owner shall, at his expense, purchase and install a water meter to
measure said water. The Water Department will read this meter and
report the same to the Sewer Department.
A.
The Superintendent of the Sewer and Water Departments is authorized,
with the approval of the Town Manager, to estimate the amount of
water that is either discharged or not discharged into the town's
sewerage system and compute the sewer service charge accordingly.
Such a procedure shall be followed only when the amount of water can
be definitely computed or where the amount of water discharged into
the town system is so small that it would be under the consumption
permitted under a minimum water bill.
B.
§ 117-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-44
1:357
water was purchased from the town. Here the responsibility for determining
the amount of water so discharged is the town's, whether by estimate or by
water meter.53
53.Editor's Note: Original Sections 5 and 6 of this policy, which immediately followed this
section and dealt with minimum sewer service charges, were repealed 3-30-1998.
§ 117-44 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 117-44
1:358
Chapter 121
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 117-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-44
1:359

ARTICLE I
Acceptance of Public Ways
[Adopted 10-18-1993]
§ 121-1. Submittals.
Persons requesting acceptance of a street by Town Meeting shall submit
the following materials to the Selectmen for review for each street to be
accepted:
§ 121-2. Initial review.
§ 121-3. Public hearing.
A definitive subdivision plan, conforming to the requirements of
§ 170-3.5B of Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, showing
as-built conditions.
A.
Street plans and profiles, as described at § 170-3.5C of Chapter 170,
Subdivision Rules and Regulations, showing as-built conditions.
B.
Construction details and specifications, and typical as-built road cross
sections.
C.
Drainage plans, showing all as-built drainage structures, and
calculations documenting the adequacy of the drainage design.
D.
E. A legal (metes and bounds) description of the street.
A list of waivers requested from Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and
Regulations, and Chapter 113, Road Construction Standards, if any.
F.
A written statement of intent to convey to the town, as a gift, any and
all necessary easements for public travel and utility work as well as, if
appropriate, conveyance of existing utility lines.
G.
The Selectmen shall refer the complete submittals to the Planning
Board, which shall review them for compliance with the requirements
and standards set forth in § 60-6A and B of Chapter 60, Streets and
Sidewalks, Article II, Road Acceptances. In making its determination,
the Planning Board may grant waivers from those standards when, in
its opinion, such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent
with the purpose and intent of the Subdivision Control Law. The
Planning Board shall report its findings to the Selectmen within 45 days
from the date of referral.
A.
The Selectmen shall also distribute copies of complete submittals to
the Department of Public Works and Fire District for their review
and comment. Those agencies shall submit their comments to the
Selectmen no later than the time of the public hearing.
B.
§ 121-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-3
1:361
§ 121-4. Report to Town Clerk.
If the Selectmen determine the street to comply with the required design
and construction standards of this article, they shall approve the layout of
the street as a public way and notify the Town Clerk of its action. A metesand-
bounds description of the layout shall be filed with the Town Clerk
along with the notice of the Selectmen's action.
§ 121-5. Town Meeting approval.
Not less than seven days nor more than six months after the filing of the
Selectmen's vote approving the layout has been filed with the Town Clerk,
the street acceptance petition shall be voted upon by the Town Meeting.
Failure of the Town Meeting to act within this time period will result in
a lapse of approval under this article, and the review process must be
repeated.
§ 121-6. Description of layout to Town Clerk.
After Town Meeting accepts the street as a public way, a description of
the location and the metes and bounds of the accepted way must be filed
with the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall, within 10 days, record this
description in a book kept for this purpose.
The Selectmen shall hold a public hearing and determine whether the
street complies with the requirements of Chapter 170, Subdivision
Rules and Regulations, and Chapter 113, Road Construction Standards,
in effect at the time of proposed acceptance, in accordance with § 60-6A
and B of Chapter 60, Streets and Sidewalks, Article II, Road
Acceptances.
A.
Waivers from Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, design
requirements require approval by the Planning Board with the written
concurrence of the Board of Selectmen. Waivers from Chapter 113,
Road Construction Standards, require approval by the Planning Board
with the written concurrence of both the Board of Selectmen and the
DPW Director.
B.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a local newspaper and
posted in the Municipal Building. All property owners abutting on the
street proposed for acceptance shall be sent notice of the hearing at
least seven days prior to the hearing date.
C.
The notice shall contain the following:
A description by metes and bounds of the proposed layout and land
proposed for easements.
(1)
(2) The date, time and place of the meeting.
D.
§ 121-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 121-7
1:362
§ 121-7. Accept and record easements.
Within 120 days from the date on which the Town Meeting votes to accept
the street as a public way, the applicant shall convey to the town, as a
gift, an easement in the way for public travel, together with all appurtenant
drainage and utility easements, in a form approved by the Board of
Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen, upon acceptance of said gift, shall
cause the easement(s) to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
§ 121-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-7
1:363

ARTICLE II
Spring Street Pedestrian Safety
[Adopted 6-12-1995]
§ 121-8. Adoption of recommendations.
The following recommendations of the Spring Street Safety Committee are
hereby enacted:
Prohibition against roller blades, bicycles and skateboards on the
sidewalk.
A.
B. Improved signage for the parking lot.
§ 121-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-8
1:365
Chapter 125
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 130. Smoking — See Ch. 158.
§ 125-1. Posting of notices in taxicab; size. [Amended 3-23-1998]
Every owner of a taxicab licensed by the Town of Williamstown shall file
with the Board of Selectmen, and post on the back of the front seat of every
taxicab operated by him where it will be clearly visible to passengers, a copy
of these regulations and a schedule of hours of operation and the rates and
charges. Hours of operation, rates and charges shall be approved annually
by the Board of Selectmen as the licensing authority. The name and address
of said operator shall also be posted in a like manner. Notices in the taxicab
shall be not less than twelve-point bold type.
§ 125-2. Filing of information with Selectmen and Town Clerk.
Every such owner shall file with the Selectmen at the time of filing his
application for such licenses or renewal thereof, or at any other time
requested by the said Selectmen, any other information requested by them
concerning the operation of the business conducted, or to be conducted,
under such license. At the time of such filing every owner shall in writing
file with the Town Clerk, rates, charges and a schedule of the hours of such
operation. Any changes thereafter, the Clerk shall be notified forthwith in
writing. The name, address and date of birth of all operators employed by
said owner shall be submitted to the Town Clerk for a character check to
be made by the Chief of Police. All operators must be of good character and
reputation.
§ 125-3. Responsibility of operators for acts of drivers.
All operators of taxicabs shall be deemed responsible for the acts of their
drivers.
§ 125-4. Discharge and pickup of passengers; double parking
prohibited.
Every such owner, or driver operating his taxicab, shall endeavor at all
times to discharge, or receive passengers on the side of the taxicab closest
to the nearest curb or edge of road. No operator will leave his/her taxicab
double parked and unattended for the purpose of delivering or picking up
materials or merchandise.
§ 121-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 125-5
1:366
§ 125-5. Cruising prohibited.
No person shall drive a taxicab through the town streets in search of a
passenger or passengers.
§ 125-6. Soliciting of passengers at taxi stands.
No person shall solicit a passenger or passengers at a taxi stand or in the
vicinity of a taxi stand, other than the one designated to said person by the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 125-7. Picking up passengers hailing taxicabs.
Nothing in these rules shall be interpreted to prevent a driver of a taxicab
from picking up a passenger or passengers while driving to and from a
business call when hailed by said passenger or passengers.
§ 125-8. Consent required to pick up additional passengers.
No driver shall take on any passenger or passengers after the vehicle is
already occupied except with the consent of such occupant or occupants.
§ 125-9. Irregular route common carriers.
Operators of taxicabs who have been granted a certificate as an irregular
route common carrier by the Department of Public Utilities may deliver
medicines or telegrams only.
§ 125-10. Drunk and disorderly passengers.
No driver shall refuse to carry any person asking to be carried as a
passenger unless such person is drunk or disorderly or is affected with a
contagious disease, or unless the taxicab already contains a passenger.
§ 125-11. Carrying of diseased bodies.
No driver shall receive or permit to be placed in his vehicle any person sick
with any contagious disease or the body of any person deceased from such
disease except by permission of the Board of Health.
§ 125-12. Disposition of articles left by passengers.
Any driver who finds in his vehicle any article presumably belonging to a
passenger shall forthwith deliver the same to the owner thereof, if known,
otherwise he shall report the finding thereof to the officer in charge of
the police station and deliver the same to him. The Chief of Police shall
undertake to find the owner thereof. If at the end of 60 days the article has
not been claimed by the owner, it shall be returned to the driver.
§ 125-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-13
1:367
§ 125-13. Requiring passengers to wait prohibited.
No driver shall require an occupant to wait until additional passengers are
procured by him/her.
§ 125-14. Revocation or suspension of license.
Failure to abide by the laws of the commonwealth, the town bylaws, these
rules and regulations or the terms and conditions under which the license
is granted may result in suspension or revocation of an operator's license or
driver's license after a hearing, following notice to the licensee, before the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 125-15. Denial of applications. [Added 1-22-1996]
The Board may deny the application of any person for a license, if, in its
discretion, it determines that:
Such application has made a material false statement or concealed
a material fact in connection with the application;
(1)
Such applicant, any officer, director, stockholder or partner, or any
other person directly or indirectly interested in the business which
was the former holder, or was an officer, director, stockholder
or partner in a corporation or partnership which was the former
holder of a taxi license in the Town of Williamstown which was
revoked or suspended by the Board; [Amended 3-23-1998]
(2)
Such applicant, any officer, director, stockholder or partner,
employee or any other person directly or indirectly interested in
the business has been convicted of a felony, or of any crime
involving violence, dishonesty, deceit or indecency, degeneracy or
moral turpitude;
(3)
Such applicant has failed to furnish satisfactory evidence of good
character, reputation and fitness; or
(4)
(5) Such applicant is not the true owner of the taxicab.
A.
The Board may suspend or revoke a license or refuse to issue a renewal
thereof for any of the following causes:
The conviction of a licensee or any partner, officer, agent or
employee of such licensee of a felony, or of any crime involving
violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy or moral
turpitude;
(1)
Where the licensee has made a material false statement or
concealed a material fact in connection with the application for the
license or a renewal thereof;
(2)
B.
§ 125-13 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 125-15
1:368
§ 125-16. Smoking.54
§ 125-17. Complaints.
Any complaints brought against a taxicab owner or operator must be
submitted to the Town Manager in writing, and upon receipt of the same,
the Board of Selectmen shall review the subject matter of said complaint
with such owner and the persons making the complaint, either at the same
or separate times. If the Board of Selectmen finds the complaint justified,
it may take whatever action necessary to correct the situation described
in said complaint, including appropriate disciplinary action against such
owner even to the extent of revoking the license of such owner
§ 125-18. Insurance.
Where the licensee has failed to comply with any of the provisions
of this section or any of the rules and regulations of the Board made
pursuant thereto;
(3)
Where the licensee or any partner, officer, agent or employee of
such licensee has been guilty of fraud or fraudulent practices in
relation to the business conducted under the license, or guilty of
inducing another to resort to fraud or fraudulent practices; or
(4)
(5) For any other cause.
Except where a refusal to issue a a license or renewal, or revocation
or suspension, is based solely on a court conviction or convictions,
a licensee or applicant shall have an opportunity to be heard, such
hearing to be held at such time and place as the Board shall prescribe.
C.
No person driving a taxicab shall have in his possession a lighted
cigarette, cigar or pipe while any passenger is being carried therein.
A.
No passenger shall smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe in
a vehicle operated as a taxicab.
B.
All licensed taxicabs operating in the Town of Williamstown are
required to have proper commercial motor vehicle insurance, providing
a minimum coverage of $50,000/$100,000 for personal injury and a
minimum of $10,000 for collision insurance for damages done to
property of other persons.
A.
Prior to obtaining a license, the taxicab operator shall submit evidence
to the Selectmen that such insurance is in effect by a licensed insurance
carrier in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
B.
Should for any reason the operator's insurance be canceled during a
year, such revocation shall be sufficient reason for revocation of the
license.
C.
54.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 158, Smoking.
§ 125-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-19
1:369
§ 125-19. Inspection of taxicabs.
Before a license is granted to operate a vehicle as a taxicab, such vehicle
shall be thoroughly inspected and examined by a certified Massachusetts
inspection station in Williamstown. The town shall provide the standards
for inspections, and all inspections will be at the expense of the owner/
operator. The inspection station shall provide certification of the condition
of the vehicle to the town, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same
is in a safe condition for the transportation of passengers, is clean and of
good appearance. All taxicabs, licensed under this article shall be inspected
semiannually to meet the above requirements.
Chapter 130
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles — See Ch. 64.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 125.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 103.
§ 125-19 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 125-19
1:370
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 130-1. Adoption of Rules and Orders.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Williamstown acting by virtue of
the power given to it by MGL c. 40, § 22, and by virtue of any other
power it hereto enabling, hereby adopts and makes the rules and orders
for the regulation of carriages and vehicles used in the said Town for
regulating traffic upon the streets and highways of said Town which are
hereto annexed, the same to be known as the "Traffic Rules and Orders of
the Town of Williamstown." Insofar as the said rules and orders or any of
them are the same as the regulations, rules and orders now in force, they
shall be deemed to be a continuation thereof.
§ 130-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of these rules and orders, the words and phrases used
herein have the following meanings, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUS STOP — An area in the roadway set aside for the boarding of or
alighting from and the parking of buses.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections,
or at any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines on the road surface or by other marking or signs.
CURB MARKING, OFFICIAL — That portion of a curbing, the painting of
which has been authorized by the Board of Selectmen, and which has the
written approval of the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department (Fire Patrol),
police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state and
municipal departments or public service corporations when the latter are
responding to an emergency in relation to the Police or Fire Department.
FUNERAL — Any procession of mourners properly identified as such
accompanying the remains of a human body.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the extensions of the lateral
curblines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of intersecting ways as
defined in MGL C. 90, § 1, including divided ways. The rules and regulations
herein contained governing and restricting the movement of vehicles at and
near intersecting ways shall apply at any place along any way at which
drivers are to be controlled by traffic control signals whether or not such
place is an intersection as herein defined.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width
to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-2
1:371
OFFICER — Any officer of the Town of Williamstown Police Department or
any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for the
violation of traffic regulations.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading, or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals, or while
making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being
made to move such vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by
human muscular power, except bicycles or tricycles, as defined in MGL C.
90, § 18A.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and
intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
ROTARY TRAFFIC — The counterclockwise operation of a vehicle around an
object or structure.
SCHOOL ZONE — As referred to in MGL c. 90, § 17, shall be defined as
any area of roadway which is posted and marked in accordance with the
standards prescribed by the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, and these regulations to indicate the applicability of the
statutory speed limit of 20 miles per hour (MPH) for all vehicles within the
zone.[Added 3-14-2005]
SERVICE ZONE — An area in the roadway set aside for the accommodation
of commercial and transient vehicular traffic.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every
way open to the use of the public for purposes of travel.
STREET MARKING, OFFICIAL — Any painted line, legend, marking or
marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports
to direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the Board of
Selectmen and which has the written approval of the Department of Public
Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
TAXICAB STANDS — An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are
authorized and required to park while waiting to be engaged.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars
or other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or
highway for the purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL AREA — Any area along any way, other than an
intersecting way, at which drivers are to be controlled by traffic control
signals.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights which
conforms to the standards as prescribed by the Department of Public Works
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, whether manually, electrically or
§ 130-2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-2
1:372
mechanically operated, by which traffic may be alternately directed to stop
and to proceed.
TRAFFIC ISLAND — Any area or space set aside within a roadway, which is
not intended for use by vehicular traffic.
TRAFFIC SIGNS, OFFICIAL — All signs, markings and devices, other than
signals, not inconsistent with these rules and orders, and which conform
to the standards prescribed by the Department of Public Works of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding,
directing, warning or regulating traffic.
TRAFFIC SIGNALS, OFFICIAL — All signals, conforming to the standards
as prescribed by the Department of Public Works of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, not inconsistent with these rules and orders, placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the
purpose of directing or warning traffic.
U-TURN — The turning of a vehicle whereby the direction of such vehicle is
reversed.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including bicycles when the
provision of these rules are applicable to them, except other devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and
devices which derive their power for operation from stationary overhead
wires.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL — Any vehicle being used in the transportation of
goods, wares or merchandise for commercial purposes.
VEHICLE, HEAVY COMMERCIAL — Any commercial vehicle of 2 1/2 tons
capacity or over.
§ 130-3. Reporting of accidents.
Every person operating a motor vehicle which is in any manner involved in
an accident in which any person is killed or injured or, in which there is
damage in excess of $1,000 to any one vehicle or other property, shall report
such accident within five days to the Registrar and to the Police Department
in accordance with provisions of MGL C. 90, § 26.
§ 130-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of any rule, regulation or order
regulating the parking of motor vehicles made by any body authorized
to make the same shall be dealt with as provided in MGL, c. 90, § 20A,
or any acts in amendment thereof, or in addition thereto, and any
person violating any of the rules and regulations applicable to state
highways made by the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, under authority of MGL C. 85, § 2, and acts in
amendment thereof, and in addition thereto shall be subject to the
penalty provided in said rules and regulations.
A.
§ 130-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-4
1:373
§ 130-5. Independent nature of individual sections.
These rules are adopted with the intent that each of them shall have force
and effect separately and independently of every other except insofar as by
express reference or necessary implication any rule or any part of a rule is
made dependent upon another rule or part thereof.
§ 130-6. Repealer.
All official signs, lights, markings, signal systems or devices erected or
installed under prior rules or regulations and necessary to the enforcement
of these regulations shall be deemed to have been lawfully erected or
installed hereunder, provided that the same were erected or installed with
the permission and approval of the Department of Public Works of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and insofar as the same are necessary as
aforesaid for the enforcement of these regulations, they shall be deemed
continuing hereunder, but in all other respects all prior rules, orders and
regulations made by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Williamstown
for the regulation of vehicles are hereby expressly repealed. This repeal,
however, shall not affect any punishment or penalty imposed or any
complaint or prosecution pending at the time of the passage hereof for
any offense committed under said prior rules, orders or regulations hereby
repealed, nor shall said repeal be effective unless and until these rules and
regulations have been approved and published as required by law.
§ 130-7. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these rules and
orders is for any reason unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of these rules and orders. The Board of
Selectmen hereby declares that it would have passed these regulations and
each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of
the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional.
§ 130-8. Responsibility of owners for violations.
If any vehicle is found upon any street or highway in violation of any
provisions of these rules and orders and the identity of the driver cannot
be determined, the owner or the person in whose name such a vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violations.
Any person convicted of a violation of any other rule, regulation or
order made hereunder, except as otherwise provided, shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $20 for each offense.
B.
§ 130-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-8
1:374
ARTICLE II
Authority and Duties of Police
§ 130-9. Direction of traffic; emergencies.
It shall be the duty of officers designated by the Chief of Police to enforce
the provisions of these rules and orders. Such officers are hereby authorized
to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal
in conformance with the provisions of these rules and orders, provided that,
in the event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of these rules and
orders.
§ 130-10. Temporary closing of streets.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to close temporarily any street
or highway in an impending or existing emergency, or for any lawful
assemblage, demonstration or procession.
§ 130-11. Temporary parking prohibitions.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to prohibit, temporarily, parking
on any street or highway or part thereof in an impending or existing
emergency, or for a lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession.
Vehicles parked in places where parking is prohibited temporarily may be
moved by or under the direction of an officer.
§ 130-12. Exemptions.
The provisions of these rules and orders shall not apply to drivers actually
engaged in work upon a street or highway closed to travel or under
construction or repair, to officers when engaged in the performance of
public duties nor to drivers of emergency vehicles while operating in an
emergency and in performance of public duties when the nature of the
work of any of these necessitate a departure from any part of these rules
and orders. These exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of
any vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of
others.
§ 130-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-12
1:375

ARTICLE III
Signs, Signals and Markings
§ 130-13. Location of bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones.
The location of all bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones shall be
specified by the Board of Selectmen, and, in the case of taxicab stands, the
Chief of Police, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen, shall designate
who may use them as such.
§ 130-14. Obedience to traffic signs, signals and markings.
No driver of any vehicle or of any streetcar shall disobey the instructions
of any official traffic control signal, sign, marking, marker or legend unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 130-15. Traffic signs and signals.
§ 130-16. Display of unauthorized signs, signals and markings
prohibited; removal by Chief of Police.
No person or corporation shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any street any unofficial devise, sign, signal, curb marking or street marking
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
device, signal, curb marking or street marking or which attempts to direct
the movement of traffic or which hides from view any official sign, signal,
marking or device. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to remove
every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device or cause it to be
removed without notice.
The Superintendent of Streets is hereby authorized, and, as to those
signs and signals required hereunder, it shall be his duty to place
and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official traffic
signs, signals, markings and safety zones. All signs, signals, markings
and safety zones shall conform to the standards as prescribed by the
Department of Public Works of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
A.
Sections 130-10, 130-11, 130-25, 130-28 through 130-34, inclusive,
relating to parking and § 130-21 concerning turning movements and
§ 130-23 pertaining to exclusion shall be effective only during such time
as official signs are erected and maintained in each block designating
the provisions of such sections and located so as to be easily visible to
approaching drivers.
B.
Sections relating to one-way streets shall be effective only during such
time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected and maintained
at the entrance and each of the exits for each one-way street, so that at
least one sign will be clearly visible for a distance of at least 75 feet to
drivers approaching such an exit.
C.
§ 130-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-17
1:377
§ 130-17. Experimental regulations.
For the purpose of trial, the Board of Selectmen may make temporary rules
regulating traffic or test under actual conditions traffic signs, markings or
other devices. No such experimental rules relating to traffic shall remain in
effect for a period longer than 60 days.
§ 130-17 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-17
1:378
ARTICLE IV
Traffic Regulations
§ 130-18. One-way streets.
The streets or portions thereof designated in Schedule I (§ 130-50) hereto
appended and specifically incorporated in this section are declared to be
one-way streets, and all vehicular traffic shall move on those streets or
portions thereof in the direction designated in said Schedule I.
§ 130-19. Rotary traffic.
Within the area set forth below, vehicular traffic shall move only in a rotary
counterclockwise direction except when otherwise directed by an officer.
§ 130-20. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule II (§ 130-51) are designated as
lane use reservations, and traffic shall move as indicated.
§ 130-21. U-turns prohibited.
No operator shall back or turn a vehicle so as to proceed in the direction
opposite to that in which said vehicle is headed or traveling on the streets
designated in Schedule III (§ 130-52).
§ 130-22. Stop signs.
Every driver of a vehicle, railway car or other conveyance approaching
an intersection of ways where there exists facing him an official sign
bearing the word "stop" or a flashing red signal indication, said signs
or signal having apart from these rules and regulations, the written
approval of the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and such approval being in effect, shall, before
proceeding through the intersection, bring such vehicle, railway car or
other conveyance to a complete stop at such point as may be clearly
marked by a sign or line, or, if a point is not so marked, then at
the nearer line of crosswalk of said intersection. In the case of a line
of two or more vehicles approaching such stop sign or flashing red
signal indication, the drivers of the second and third vehicles in any
group shall not be required to stop more than once before proceeding
through the intersection. This section shall not apply when the traffic is
otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful traffic regulating sign,
signal or device or as provided in § 130-48D.
A.
In accordance with the foregoing, the streets listed in Schedule IV
(§ 130-53) of these rules and orders are hereby declared to constitute
isolated stop streets or flashing red signal intersections as the case
may be, and said Schedule IV is hereby specifically incorporated in this
section.
B.
§ 130-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-23
1:379
§ 130-23. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are excluded from the streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 130-54), except for the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
A.
Subsection A of this section shall not apply to heavy commercial
vehicles going to or coming from places upon said streets for the
purpose of making deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise to or
similar collections from abutting land or buildings or adjoining streets
or ways to which access cannot otherwise be gained; or to vehicles
used in connection with the construction, maintenance and repair of
said streets or public utilities therein; or to federal, state-, municipalor
public-corporation-owned vehicles.
B.
§ 130-23 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-23
1:380
ARTICLE V
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 130-24. General standing and parking prohibitions.
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name
to stand or park in any street, way, highway, road or parkway under the
control of the Town of Williamstown in violation of any of the traffic rules
and orders adopted by the Board of Selectmen, and in particular in any
of the following places except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic sign
or signal:
Within an intersection, except within those intersections where the
installations of parking meters has been specifically approved by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works.
A.
B. Upon any sidewalk.
C. Upon any crosswalk.
D. Upon the roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district.
Upon a roadway where parking is permitted unless both wheels on the
right side of the vehicle are within 12 inches of the curb or edge of
the roadway, except upon those streets which are designated as oneway
streets. On such one-way streets vehicles shall be parked in the
direction in which said vehicle is moving and with both wheels within
12 inches of the curb. This shall not apply to streets or parts of streets
where angle parking is required by these regulations.
E.
Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear
and unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic.
F.
G. Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
In front of any private road or driveway without the consent of the
owner of said private road or driveway.
H.
Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of an intersecting way,
except alleys.
I.
Within 15 feet of the wall of a fire station or directly across the street
from such fire station, provided that signs are erected acquainting the
driver of such restriction.
J.
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
K.
L. On a bridge and the approach thereto.
§ 130-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-25
1:381
§ 130-25. Service zone.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in any service zone for a
period of time longer than 30 minutes and except while actually engaged in
loading and unloading.
§ 130-26. Parking vehicle for sale prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street or highway any
vehicle displayed for sale.
§ 130-27. All-night parking.
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name,
other than one acting in an emergency, to be parked on any street for a
period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. of any day.
§ 130-28. Diagonal parking.
§ 130-29. Parking prohibited at all times.
Parking is prohibited at all times in accordance with Schedule VII
(§ 130-56), appended hereto, to which reference is made and which
schedule is specifically incorporated in this section. No operator shall park
a vehicle in the designated prohibited locations at any time.
§ 130-30. Time limit parking.
No operator shall park a vehicle on the streets or parts of streets designated
in Schedule VIII (§ 130-57), appended hereto, to which reference is made
and which schedule is specifically incorporated in this section, for longer
than the time limit and between the hours listed in said schedule on any day,
except Sundays and holidays.
The Board of Selectmen shall determine the streets upon which
diagonal parking will be permitted and shall cause said streets to be
designated by signs and the surfaces thereof to be marked as directed
by the Chief of Police.
A.
Diagonal parking is permitted upon certain sections of a number of
streets as designated in Schedule VI (§ 130-55), hereto appended to
which reference is made and which Schedule VI relative to diagonal
parking is herewith specifically incorporated in this section. Where
such diagonal parking is permitted, vehicles shall be parked with one
wheel within 12 inches of the curb and at the angle to the curb
indicated by official marks and signs. The vehicle shall be parked so
that all four wheels thereof shall be placed wholly within the area
indicated for parking, and headed to the curb.
B.
§ 130-25 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-31
1:382
§ 130-31. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No operator shall park a vehicle on the streets or parts of streets designated
in Schedule IX (§ 130-58), appended hereto, to which reference is made
and which schedule is specifically incorporated in this section, between the
hours listed in said schedule on any day, except Sundays and holidays.
§ 130-32. Parking prohibited at safety zones.
No person shall park a vehicle within 20 feet of either end of a safety zone
which is located within 30 feet of the curb or edge of the roadway.
§ 130-33. Bus stops.
§ 130-34. Taxicab stands.55
A. No person shall stop or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop.
No person shall park a bus upon any street within a business district at
any place other than a bus stop when a nearby bus stop is available for
use.
B.
No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab upon any street
within a business district in any taxicab stand.
A.
No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business district
at any place other than the taxicab stand or stands designated in
Schedule X (§ 130-59) for the use of his taxicab or taxicabs.
B.
55.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 125, Taxicabs.
§ 130-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-34
1:383

ARTICLE VI
Rules of the Road
§ 130-35. Passing vehicles traveling in same direction.
The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass a vehicle proceeding
in the same direction unless there is sufficient clear space ahead on the
right side of the roadway to permit the overtaking to be completed without
impeding the safe operation of any vehicle ahead.
§ 130-36. Driver to give way to overtaking vehicle.
The driver of a vehicle when about to be overtaken and passed by another
vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver
of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle
until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
§ 130-37. Obstructing traffic.
§ 130-38. Following too closely.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and
the traffic upon and condition of the street or highway.
§ 130-39. Clinging to moving vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon a bicycle, motorcycle,
coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or
his vehicle to any moving vehicle or street car upon any roadway.
§ 130-40. Care in starting, stopping, turning or backing.
No person shall drive in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily
the normal movement of traffic upon any street or highway. Officers are
hereby authorized to require any driver who fails to comply with this
section to drive to the side of the roadway and wait until such traffic as
has been delayed has passed.
A.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk and on the right half of the roadway to accommodate the
vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles or pedestrians notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
B.
The driver of any vehicle before starting, stopping, turning from a
direct line or backing shall first see that such movement can be made
in safety. If such movement cannot be made in safety or if it interferes
A.
§ 130-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-40
1:385
§ 130-41. Emerging from alley or private driveway.
The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or a garage shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving on to a sidewalk or on to the
sidewalk area extending across alleyway or driveway.
§ 130-42. Obedience to traffic control signals.
Colors and arrow indications in traffic control signals shall have the
commands ascribed to them in this section, and no other meanings, and
every driver of a vehicle, railway car or other conveyance shall comply
therewith, except when otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful
traffic regulating sign (other than a stop sign), signal or device or except as
provided in § 130-48B of these rules and orders. In no case shall a driver
enter or proceed through an intersection without due regard to the safety
of other persons within the intersection regardless of what indications may
be given by traffic control signals.
unduly with the normal movement of other traffic, said driver shall wait
for a more favorable opportunity to make such movement.
If the operation of another vehicle should be affected by a stopping or
turning movement, the driver of such other vehicle shall be given a
plainly visible signal, as required by statute law.
B.
Flashing green. A flashing green lens shall indicate an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk in use or subject to use by entering or crossing
traffic. Drivers may proceed only with caution and shall be prepared to
comply with a change in the signal to red and/or yellow indication.
A.
Flashing red. When a red lens is illuminated in a traffic control signal by
rapid intermittent flashes, and its use has been specifically authorized
by the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
drivers shall stop before entering the nearer line of crosswalk of the
street intersection, or at a stop line when marked, and the right to
proceed shall then be governed by the provisions of MGL C. 89, § 8.
B.
Flashing yellow. A flashing yellow lens shall indicate the presence of a
hazard, and drivers may proceed only with caution.
C.
Green. While the green lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal
may proceed through the intersection, but shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersection
at the time such signal was exhibited. Drivers of vehicles making a right
or left turn shall yield the right of way to pedestrians crossing with the
flow of traffic.
D.
Red. While the red lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal shall
stop outside of the intersection, or at such point as may be clearly
marked by a sign or line; provided, however, that if a green arrow
is illuminated at the same time, drivers may enter the intersection to
make the movement permitted by such arrow.
E.
§ 130-40 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-42
1:386
§ 130-43. Keep to the right of roadway division.
Upon such roadways as are divided by a parkway, grass plot, reservation,
viaduct, subway or by any structure or area, drivers shall keep to the right
of such a division, except when otherwise directed by an officer, signs,
signals or markings.
§ 130-44. Operation at under- or overpasses and at intersections
with islands.
At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have been
separated and where the ways are connected by ramps and at any
intersection of ways in which there are traffic islands, drivers of vehicles
shall proceed only as indicated by official signs, signals or markings.
§ 130-45. Driving on road surfaces under construction or repair.
No operator shall enter upon a road surface of any street or highway
or section thereof, when, by reason of construction, surface treatment,
maintenance or the like, or because of some unprotected hazard, such road
surface is closed to travel, and one or more signs, lights or signals have
been erected to indicate that all or part of the road surface of the street
or highway is not to be used or when so advised by an officer, watchman,
member of a street or highway crew or employees of the Town, either
audibly or by signals.
§ 130-46. Driving on sidewalks prohibited.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
Red and yellow. While the red and yellow lenses are illuminated
together, drivers shall not enter the intersection and during such time
the intersection shall be reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
F.
Right, left and vertical green arrows. When a right green arrow is
illuminated, drivers facing the said signal may turn right. When a left
green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing the said signal may turn left.
When a vertical green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal
may go straight ahead. When a green arrow is exhibited, together with
red or yellow lens, drivers may enter the intersection to make the
movement permitted by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles and pedestrians proceeding from another direction on a green
indication.
G.
Yellow. While the yellow lens is illuminated, waiting drivers shall not
proceed, and any drivers approaching the intersection or a marked stop
line shall stop at such point unless so close to the intersection that a
stop cannot be made in safety; provided, however, that if a green arrow
is illuminated at the same time, drivers may enter the intersection to
make the movement permitted by such arrow.
H.
§ 130-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-47
1:387
§ 130-47. Driving through safety zones prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle, except on signal from a police
officer, to drive the same over or through a safety zone.
§ 130-48. Funeral processions.
§ 130-49. Unlawful riding.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any portion of a vehicle
not designated or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is
in motion. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty or within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.
A funeral composed entirely or partly of a procession of vehicles shall
be identified as such by means of black pennants bearing a purple
symbol attached to both the first and last vehicles, or other suitable
means.
A.
It shall be the duty of each driver in a funeral or other procession to
keep as near to the right edge of the roadway as is feasible and to follow
the vehicle ahead as closely as practicable and safe.
B.
At an intersection where a traffic control signal is operating, the driver
of the first vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one
required to stop for a red and/or yellow indication.
C.
At an intersection where a lawful stop sign exists, the driver of the first
vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one required
to stop before proceeding through the intersection.
D.
§ 130-47 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-49
1:388
ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 130-50. Schedule I: One-Way Streets.
The streets or portions thereof designated below are declared to be oneway
streets, and all vehicular traffic shall move on those streets or portions
thereof in the direction designated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Mill Street [Added
8-27-1990]
East From Arnold Street to its terminus
with Elm Street
Spring Street [Added
5-14-2001]
South From Main Street to a point 280
meters south
Walden Street [Added
4-14-2008; repealed
7-13-2016]
§ 130-51. Schedule II: Lane Use Reservations.
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
Cole Avenue and Main Street
[Added 1-26-1998]
a. Southbound right lane of Cole Avenue
reserved for right turn only b.
Southbound left lane of Cole Avenue
reserved for left turn only
North Street and Main Street
[Repealed 12-14-2009]
§ 130-52. Schedule III: U-Turns.
No operator shall back or turn a vehicle so as to proceed in the direction
opposite to that in which said vehicle is headed or traveling on the following
streets:
Name of Street
(Reserved)
§ 130-53. Schedule IV: Isolated Stop Streets.
The streets listed below are hereby declared to constitute isolated stop
streets or flashing red signal intersections as the case may be:
§ 130-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-53
1:389
Intersection
Arnold Street and Cole Avenue
Church Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
Front Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
Haley Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
Hall Street and Cole Avenue
Hill Province Road Street and West Main Street [Added 2-22-1993]
Hoxsey Street and Walden Street [Added 9-8-1997]
John Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
Linden Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
Maple Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
Moorland Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
Mount Williams Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
Intersection
Prospect Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
Route 43 and Route 2 [Added 5-8-1995]
Saulnier Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
School Street and Cole Avenue [Added 1-26-1998]
South Street and Glen Road
Walden Street eastbound at Spring Street [Amended 2-14-2000]
White Oaks Road and Bridges Road
§ 130-54. Schedule V: Vehicles Over Designated Weight.
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are excluded from the streets
or parts of streets described below, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight
Limit
(tons) Location
Bridges Road 2 1/2 Entire length
North Hoosac Road 2 1/2 Entire length
Sand Springs Road 2 1/2 Entire length
§ 130-55. Schedule VI: Diagonal Parking.
Diagonal parking is permitted upon certain sections of a number of streets
as designated below:
§ 130-53 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-55
1:390
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 130-56. Schedule VII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
Parking of vehicles is prohibited at all times on the following streets or parts
of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Adams Road [Added
6-24-1985]
Both Entire length
Arnold Street [Added
8-27-1990]
South From a point 135 feet east of
easterly curb of Cole Avenue east
to Elm Street
Arnold Street [Added
8-27-1990]
South Entire length
Church Street [Added
6-10-2002; repealed
12-12-2005]
Church Street [Added
12-12-2005]
North Entire length
Church Street [Added
6-10-2002; amended
9-9-2002; repealed
12-12-2005]
Church Street [Added
12-12-2005]
South From Cole Avenue westerly a
distance of 825 feet
Church Street [Added
6-10-2002; amended
9-9-2002]
South From Southworth Street easterly
a distance of 415 feet
Cole Avenue [Added
12-12-2005]
East From a point 132 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Arnold
Street, southerly a distance of 25
feet
Cole Avenue East From Arnold Street to North
Hoosac Road
Cole Avenue [Added
1-26-1998]
East From Maple Street to Hall Street
Cole Avenue [Added
12-12-2005]
West From a point 82 feet south of the
northerly curbline of Front
Street, northerly a distance of 25
feet
§ 130-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-56
1:391
Name of Street Side Location
Cole Avenue [Added
1-26-1998;] amended
12-12-2005]
West From a point 30 feet south of
Church Street to a point 20 feet
north of Church Street
Front Street [Added
8-27-1990]
Both From a point on the westerly
curbline of Cole Avenue to a
point 750 feet west to the end of
Front Street
Front Street [Added
8-27-1990]
Both Entire length
Hoxsey Street [Repealed
9-22-2003]
Hoxsey Street [Added
6-29-2008; amended
6-23-2008]
Both Entire length
Latham Street [Added
2-14-2000]
Both From Water Street (Route 43) to
Meacham Street
Latham Street [Added
2-14-2000; amended
12-12-2005]
North From a point 328 feet east of
Spring Street to Meacham Street
Latham Street [Added
2-14-2000; amended
12-12-2005]
North From Spring Street to a point
135 feet east of Spring Street
Latham Street [Added
5-12-1975]
North From Water Street to Spring
Street
Latham Street [Added
2-14-2000; amended
12-12-2005]
South From a point 171 feet east of
Spring Street to Meacham Street
Latham Street [Added
2-14-2000; amended
12-12-2005]
South From a point 49 feet east of
Spring Street to Spring Street
Main Street Both From Southworth Street to Park
Street
Main Street South From Water Street to a point 100
feet easterly therefrom
Manning Street [Added
10-15-2002]
East From Church Street north to John
Street
Manning Street [Added
10-15-2002]
West From 57 feet north of the Church
Street curbline to Church Street
Meacham Street [Added
9-9-2002]
East and
north
From Latham Street to Water
Street
§ 130-56 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-56
1:392
Name of Street Side Location
Meacham Street [Added
8-14-2006]
West and
south
From a point 773 feet south of
Latham Street south and east to
Water Street
Mill Street [Added
6-10-2002]
Left Entire length
Mill Street [Added
6-10-2002]
Right From Arnold Street to the
entrance to Mill Street a distance
of 124 feet northerly and easterly
Mill Street [Added
6-10-2002]
Right From a point 647 feet northerly
and easterly from Arnold Street
at the entrance to Mill Street for
a distance of 195 feet northerly
and westerly to Arnold Street
North Street [Added
9-9-2002; amended
12-14-2009]
East From the northerly curbline of
Main Street to the beginning of
the State Highway
North Street [Added
9-9-2002; amended
12-14-2009]
West From a point 225 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Main
Street to the beginning of the
State Highway
Park Street [Added
9-8-2003]
East From the northerly curbline of
Main Street north a distance of
218 feet
Park Street [Added
9-8-2003; amended
4-28-2014]
West From the northerly curbline of
Main Street north a distance of
182 feet
Park Street [Added
9-8-2003]
West From the southerly curbline of
Whitman Street south a distance
of 45 feet
School Street [Added
4-12-2004]
North From Cole Avenue for a distance
of 520 feet westerly
School Street South Entire length
South Street [Repealed 12-14-2009]
Southworth Street
[Amended 4-12-2004]
East Entire length
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
East From a point 13.0 meters north
of Bank Street for a distance of
18.5 meters northerly
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
East From a point 11.0 meters north
of Latham Street for a distance of
48.5 meters northerly
§ 130-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-56
1:393
Name of Street Side Location
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
East From a point 54.0 meters north
of Latham Street for a distance of
15.5 meters northerly
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
East From Main Street (Route 2) for a
distance of 23.0 meters southerly
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
East From a point 65.0 meters south
of Main Street (Route 2) for a
distance of 17.0 meters southerly
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
East From a point 23.0 meters south
of Bank Street for a distance of
18.0 meters southerly
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
West From a point 35.5 meters north
of Bank Street for a distance of
25.0 meters northerly
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
West From a point 22.0 meters south
of Bank Street for a distance of
13.5 meters southerly
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
West From a point 7.5 meters south of
Dennison Park for a distance of
15.0 meters northerly
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
West From Main Street (Route 2) to a
point 19.0 meters southerly
Spring Street [Added
2-14-2000]
West From a point 17.0 meters south
of Walden Street to a point 12.0
meters north of Walden Street
Stetson Court [Repealed
5-21-2013 ATM, Art. 22]
Walden Street [Added
5-12-1975; amended
4-14-2008; 7-13-2016]
Both From Hoxsey Street to Spring
Street
Whitman Street [Added
11-13-1984]
Both From a point on the easterly curb
on North street east to Park
Street
§ 130-57. Schedule VIII: Time Limit Parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day, except Sundays and holidays, upon any of the
streets or parts of street described below:
§ 130-56 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-57
1:394
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Bank Street Both 30 min. All Entire length except 77 feet
southerly from Spring Street
westerly
North Street
[Amended
12-14-2009;
repealed
4-25-2016]
North Street
[Repealed
12-14-2009]
Park Street
[Added 9-8-2003]
East 2 hrs. 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
From a point 218 feet north
of the northerly curbline of
Main Street north a distance
of 612 feet
Park Street
[Added 9-8-2003]
West 2 hrs. 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
From a point 39 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
Whitman Street to a point
698 feet south
School Street
[Added
12-13-1993;
repealed
4-12-2004]
Spring Street
[Added
5-23-1994;
amended
12-14-2009]
East 1 hr. 9:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
From a point 23 meters south
of Main Street to a point 12
meters north of Walden
Street
Spring Street
[Amended
12-14-2009]
West 1 hr. 9:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
From a point 19 meters south
of Main Street to a point 12
meters north of Walden
Street
Spring Street
[Added
1-12-2009]
West 15
mins.
9:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
From a point 100 feet south
of the southerly curbline of
Walden Street to a point 36
feet southerly therefrom
Spring Street
Municipal Parking
Lot56 [Added
7-25-2005]
East 1 hr. 1:00
a.m to
6:00
a.m
Municipal Parking Lot: 4
spaces facing Spring Street; 5
spaces opposite the above 4
spaces
§ 130-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-57
1:395
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
2 hrs. 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
Walden Street
[Added
4-14-2008;
repealed
7-13-2016]
Waterman Place
[Amended
12-14-2009]
East 1 hr. 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
From the northerly curbline
of Main Street to a point 145
feet northerly therefrom
§ 130-58. Schedule IX: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day, except
Sundays and holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Hoxsey Street
[Repealed 9-22-2003]
School Street [Added
5-12-1975; repealed
4-12-2004]
Southworth Street
[Added 5-12-1975;
repealed 4-12-2004]
Spring Street Municipal
Parking Lot57 [Added
7-25-2005]
East No parking
Saturday,
6:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
when
posted
Municipal Parking Lot; 4
spaces facing Spring Street;
5 spaces opposite the above
4 spaces
§ 130-59. Schedule X: Taxicab Stands.
No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business district at
any place other than the taxicab stand or stands designated below for the
use of a taxicab or taxicabs:
56.Editor's Note: For parking prohibitions during certain hours on Saturday for the Spring
Street Municipal Parking Lot, see § 130-58.
57.Editor's Note: For time limit parking restrictions for the Spring Street Municipal Parking
Lot, see § 130-57.
§ 130-57 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-59
1:396
Location From To Type
(Reserved)
§ 130-60. Schedule XI: Handicapped Parking Spaces. [Added
6-10-2002]
Handicapped parking spaces shall be as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Church Street [Amended
9-9-2002]
South From a point 415 feet east of
Southworth Street for a distance of
28 feet east
Park Street [Added
9-8-2003]
West From a point 550 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Whitman
Street for a distance of 22 feet south
Spring Street [Added
6-23-2003, effective
7-1-2003]
East From a point 40 feet north of Bank
Street for a distance of 22 feet north
Spring Street West From a point 130 feet north of Bank
Street for a distance of 22 feet north
Spring Street Municipal
Parking Lot
Northeast
corner
Four spaces closest to Spring Street
§ 130-61. Schedule XII: School Zones. [Added 3-14-2005]
The locations designated below are declared to be school zones wherein the
maximum speed for all vehicles in the zone shall be 20 miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Church Street From a point 300 feet west of the westerly most
point of the elementary school building to a
point 300 feet east of the easterly most point of
said school building
§ 130-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-61
1:397
Chapter 137
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and water — See Ch. 49.
Water — See Ch.67.
Sewers — See Ch. 117.
Wells — See Ch. 164.
§ 130-61 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 130-61
1:398
ARTICLE I
Distribution of Drinking Water
[Adopted 2-13-1995]
§ 137-1. Application for water service.
§ 137-2. Special applications.
The rules and regulations of the Water Department in their entirety
as hereinafter set forth or hereafter adopted are a part of every
application, contract, agreement or license entered into between the
applicant and the Water Department, and every such applicant by
taking water agrees that the same shall be binding upon him.
A.
Wherever the word "applicant" is used in these rules and regulations it
shall be taken to mean the person, company or corporation making the
application or who is supplied with water.
B.
Wherever the word "department" is used in these rules and regulations
it shall be taken to mean the Williamstown Water Department, its
Superintendent or other duly authorized employee or agent acting
within the proper limits of authority set forth by the Board of Selectman
acting as Water Commissioners.
C.
Application for a connection to the Departments mains for a supply of
water or application for water service from a service connection which
has previously been installed shall be made in writing by the owner of
the property to be supplied at the office of the Department in the form
required by the Department and must be accepted by the Department
before it is effective.
D.
The application as accepted by the Department shall constitute the
contract between the applicant and the Department which shall be
effective for a term of not less than one year and shall continue in effect
thereafter until terminated as provided for herein.
E.
Special contracts will be made for a period of less than one year for
water service for construction or other temporary purposes, subject to
the rules and regulations as herein after provided.
F.
The property owner will be required to pay bills for premises where the
tenants are changing frequently or for other causes, as directed by the
Board of Selectmen acting as Water Commissioners.
G.
A supply of water for transient or temporary purposes must be applied
for.
A.
A supply of water for building purposes will be furnished on application
for a metered domestic supply and the applicant will be liable for the
amount of water used in conformity with the schedule of rates of the
Department.
B.
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-2
1:399
§ 137-3. Service connections.
§ 137-4. Water connection charges and policies.
A supply of water for building purposes when not furnished by meter
will be supplied under a special application.
C.
Whenever an application is made for temporary service the applicant
will bear the entire cost and expense for labor and material of tapping
the main and laying and maintaining the service connection.
D.
Any water customer who uses water in such a manner that it is not
discharged into the town's sewerage system may be granted a
reduction in his sewer service charge in proportion to the water not
so discharged into the system. In order to receive such consideration,
the owner shall, at his expense, purchase and install a water meter to
measure said water. The Water Department will read this meter and
report the same to the Sewer Department.
E.
Effective April 13,1981, when a new swimming pool is built by a
homeowner no sewer charge will be made for the water used for the
first filling. After the first filling, all water used by the homeowner will
have a sewer charge.
F.
A. The Department will make all connections to its mains.
The corporation cock, curb cock, curb box and the street service pipe
from the main to the curb cock, not to exceed 50 feet, will be furnished
and placed by and shall remain the property of the Department.
B.
Municipal charges or fees for a road opening permit for opening the
street and the cost of relaying pavement for original installation or
replacement will be paid for by the applicant.58
C.
Where a service connection is already laid to the curb or lot line, the
applicant must connect with the line as laid.
D.
E. The curb stop box shall be left accessible at all times.
Please see enclosed application and connection charges to install/repair
water or sewerage system.59
F.
Water connection charges shall be as set periodically by the Board of
Selectmen. [Amended 3-23-1998]
A.
In residential developments where the water service has already been
installed to the property line, the rate shall be 1/2 the applicable
charge.
B.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. II, Openings and Obstructions.
59.Editor's Note: The Application to Install/Repair Water or Sewage System is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 137-2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 137-4
1:400
§ 137-5. Service pipes.
A building that ties into a private water main which is connected
to a public water main shall be liable for 1/2 the applicable water
connection charge.
C.
D. If a water betterment is assessed, there shall be no connection charge.
For taps 3/4 inch through two inches, the Water Department will furnish
all materials and install the tap and service to the property line.
E.
For taps four inches through six inches, the Water Department will
furnish all materials and install the tap. The owner shall be responsible
for service from the tapping gate to the building.
F.
The Water Department shall not install a tap or service on private
property.
G.
In all instances, the owner shall be responsible for excavation and
repair of the trench, including the restoration of the road surface.
H.
All connection charges shall be due upon application for the water
connection permit.
I.
The Department requires the use of Type K copper to be laid between
the curb cock and the premises to be supplied or up to the meter where
same is placed on the applicant's premises.
A.
The applicant shall furnish and lay the necessary pipe to make the
connection from the curb cock to the place of consumption.
B.
The applicant's portion of the service pipe and connections and fixtures
attached thereto are subject to the inspection and approval of the
Department before the water is turned on.
C.
Service pipes shall be laid at all points at least five feet below the
surface of the ground and shall be placed on firm, continuous and
original undisturbed dirt or rock so as to give unyielding and permanent
support and shall be installed in a trench at least 10 feet in a horizontal
direction from any sewer. In cases where it is not practical to maintain
a ten-foot separation, it is permissible to install a waterline closer to a
sewer, provided that the water service is laid in a separate trench on an
undisturbed earth shelf located at such an elevation that the bottom of
the water service is at least 18 inches above the top of the sewer.
D.
The applicant shall install a stop and waste cock of approved type on
the service pipe immediately inside the foundation wall of the building
supplied for the protection of the premises from damage by leaks or
bursting of pipes or fixtures.
E.
The applicant will make all changes in his portion of the service pipe
required on account of changes of grade, relocation of mains or other
causes.
F.
§ 137-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-5
1:401
§ 137-6. Meters.
No attachment to the service pipe or branch therein shall be made
between the meter and the street main.
G.
Each single building or premises shall be supplied through an
independent service pipe from a separate curb cock and box, and all
double or rows of houses, apartments houses, office buildings and
business blocks must have a separate curb cock for each tenant unless
specifically approved or ordered by the Department, in which event the
owner is to contract for and pay the Department for all water used on
and in said building or premises.
H.
No applicant shall be supplied by more than one service pipe unless
specifically approved and ordered by the Department, and in such cases
separate bills will be rendered and separate charges assessed for each
service line as though they were serving separate applicants.
I.
When two or more buildings or premises are supplied through a single
service pipe which has been approved and ordered by the Department,
any violation of the rules and regulations of the Department with
reference to either or any of said buildings or premises shall be deemed
a violation as to all, and the Department may take such action as would
be taken for a single building or premises, provided that reasonable
notice shall have been given to each consumer concerned.
J.
When service pipes are installed and same pass over or through
premises which at the time may be the property of persons other than
the owner of the premises to be supplied, the applicant shall obtain
the necessary permits or right-of-way and assume all liability in that
connection.
K.
A. The Department shall specify the kind and size of meter to be installed.
The applicant shall provide at his expense a readily accessible and
protected location for the installation of a meter at a point as will
control the entire supply and as approved by the Department as most
convenient for its service, so that it may be easily examined, read
or removed, and shall further provide suitable pipe connections and
necessary valves and other fittings as may be designated by the
Department for the proper installation and protection of the meter.
B.
Remote reading meters are installed where specified by the
Department and accessibility and protection are essential.
C.
Meters up to two inch in size will be furnished, installed and removed
by the Department and shall remain its property.
D.
Meters located within a building shall be placed immediately within
the wall, and there shall be no fittings except a stop and waste cock
between it and the wall.
E.
§ 137-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 137-6
1:402
§ 137-7. Public fire hydrants.
§ 137-8. Private fire service.
Meters not installed in a building shall be placed in a meter box or
vault, furnished by the Department at the expense of the applicant, just
inside the applicant's property line or at such other locations as may be
ordered by the Department.
F.
The Department may change any flat-rate account to metered service at
any time after reasonable notice and will also provide metered service
at the request of an applicant having a flat-rate basis. In either case
the applicant shall make the provisions for a meter as previously stated
herein.
G.
Each building or premises must have a separate meter, and all double
or rows of houses, apartment houses, office buildings and business
blocks may have a battery of meters installed on a single service line at
the discretion of the Department.
H.
All public fire hydrants shall be furnished, installed and maintained by
the Department.
A.
The use of fire hydrants will be restricted to the taking of water for
the extinguishing of fires or drills, and water shall not be taken from
any hydrant for construction purposes, flushing sewers or gutters or
for any other use unless specially permitted by the Department for the
particular time and occasion.
B.
Inspections will be made by the Department of fire hydrants at
convenient times and reasonable intervals.
C.
Any obstruction blocking the view of a public fire hydrant which could
effect the rapid connection of that device shall be removed as
determined by the Fire Chief and Water Superintendent.
D.
Private fire protection includes hydrants, sprinkler systems, standpipes,
fire hoses, etc. Private fire protection service size shall be determined
by the valve size preceding the system. In cases where there are
multiple private fire protection services, there shall be a separate
charge for each connection to the water service line prior to the meter.
There shall be no charge for private fire protection services if they are
connected after the water meter.
A.
The entire cost of labor and materials for installing a private fire service
connection shall be borne by the applicant. (See § 137-4 for water
connection charges and policies.)
B.
All necessary excavation and filling shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. This will include the obtaining of any necessary permits and
the repair or replacement of any existing structures or pavement and
assuming of all liability in connection with said work.
C.
§ 137-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-8
1:403
§ 137-9. Meter test.
D. The Department will not do any work within any building.
The Department will designate the size of the connection to its main
which will depend not only upon the needs of the applicant but upon the
size of the supply mains to the point of connection and the effect upon
other property.
E.
A curb stop valve, controlling the entire supply, will be placed at the
curb or property line of the street on which the main is located, and
any valve pit or vault which may be required will be furnished at the
expense of the applicant.
F.
All piping, fittings and other fixtures connected with a private fire
service connection shall be subject to the inspection, test and approval
of the Department before the service is made effective, and the
Department may at reasonable intervals make inspections of all pipe
and fixtures connected therewith. The applicant will provide any
reasonable and necessary facilities for making such inspections or test.
G.
The applicant will immediately notify the Department of any leak,
defect or damage to any pipe or fixture connected with a private fire
service connection, and the Department may at its discretion turn off
the water supply until proper corrections have been made.
H.
The entire private fire service connection and all parts of it which are
located outside of the property line of the applicant and any meter or
other indicating or controlling device and all parts and appurtenances
thereof remain the property of the Water Department.
I.
Should it be necessary to draw water from a private fire service
connection for the purpose of testing any fire-fighting equipment, the
Department will be notified in advance and will have its representatives
present at such a test.
J.
Hydrants and other fixtures connected with a private fire service
connection may be sealed by the Department, and such seals shall only
be broken in case of fire or as specially permitted by the Department.
K.
All charges are due and payable in advance semiannually on January 1
and July 1 of each year. The first semiannual payment will be due at the
time of making the application and shall be in amount for six months.
The second semiannual payment will be due and payable on the next
following January 1 or July 1 and will be adjusted to the nearest month
for the portion of the ensuing semiannual payment then unpaid.
L.
All water meters are tested before installation and must meet the
requirements of AWWA C700. Standards for Cold-Water Meters
Displacement Type, Bronze Main Case. (See ANSI/AWWA C700-90,
page 7.)
A.
§ 137-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 137-9
1:404
§ 137-10. Maintenance, repairs and leaks.
§ 137-11. Water conservation; water supply emergencies.
The Water Department upon written request of the applicant shall test
the accuracy of the meter to meet the above standards by a certified
approved independent tester. If the meter is found to be correct within
the guidelines of AWWA C700 standards, the customer will be charged
for that test. If the meter is found to be over-registering beyond the
established standards, the customer will not be charged for the test. In
both cases the current bill will be corrected to agree with the quantity
actually used as indicated by the test.
B.
In any dispute the customer has a right to have his case reviewed
by the Town Manager and the Board of Selectman acting as Water
Commissioners.
C.
If a property owner does not repair a leaking water service within 10
days after being notified by the Water Department to repair the leak,
an extra charge of $10 per day shall be added to the water bill until the
leak has been repaired. After notifying the property owner verbally, a
letter will be sent stating the date the property owner was notified and
the date that the ten-dollar per day charge will start accruing. (Leaking
water policy adopted by the Board of Selectmen November 14, 1983.)
A.
The applicant shall immediately notify the Department of any leak
defect or other damage to any part of a service connection or its meter.
B.
The service connection from the main to and including the curb cock
will be maintained by the Department.
C.
Meters will be maintained by the Department at its expense in so far
as ordinary wear is concerned, but damage due to freezing, thawing,
hot water or other external causes shall be paid for by the applicant in
addition to the charge for removal and replacement of the meter.
D.
All irrigation sprinklers on the water distribution system with a service
of 1 1/2 inches and larger should have the approval of the Water
Department before use.
A.
All nonresidential users of the public system will be limited to 100,000
gallons per day withdrawal unless otherwise approved by the Water
Department.
B.
Authority. This section is adopted by the town under its home rule
powers, its police powers to protect public health and welfare and its
specific authorization under MGL C. 40, §§ 21 and 21D.
C.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect, preserve and
maintain the public health, safety and welfare whenever there is in
force a state of water supply emergency by providing for enforcement
of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions
D.
§ 137-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-11
1:405
§ 137-12. Discontinuance of service.
imposed by the town or by the Department and included in the town's
plan approved by the Department of Environmental Protection to abate
the emergency.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
meanings indicated:
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The town's Board of Water
Commissioners or other department or board having responsibility for
the operation and maintenance of the water supply, the Health
Department, the town police, special police and any other locally
designated body having police powers.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — A state of water supply
emergency declared by the Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to MGL C. 21G, § 15, MGL C. 111, § 160, as amended, or by
the Governor.
E.
The following shall apply to all users of water supplies supplied by the
town:
Following notification by the town of the existence of a state of
water supply emergency, no person shall violate any provision,
condition, requirement or restriction included in a plan approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection which has as its
purpose the abatement of a water supply emergency.
(1)
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition
with which users of water supplied by the town are required to
comply to abate a situation of water emergency shall be sufficient
if it is published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
town or by such other notice as is reasonably calculated to reach
and inform all users of the town supply.
(2)
F.
Penalty. Any person or entity who violates this regulation shall be liable
to the town in the amount of $50 for the first violation and $100
for each subsequent violation which shall inure to the town for such
uses as the Board of Water Commissioners may direct. Fines shall
be recovered by indictment or on complaint before the District Court
or by noncriminal disposition in accordance with MGL C. 40, § 21D.
Each separate instance of noncompliance following the issuance of any
warning or citation pursuant to this section shall constitute a separate
violation.
G.
Right-of-entry. Agents of the enforcement authority may enter any
property for the purpose of inspecting or investigating any violation of
this regulation or enforcing against the same.
H.
Severability. The invalidity of any portion or provisions of this
regulation shall not invalidate any other portion, provision or section
hereof.
I.
§ 137-11 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 137-12
1:406
Service rendered under an application, contract or agreement may be
discontinued by the Department after reasonable notice for any of the
following reasons:
For misrepresentation as to the property or fixtures to be supplied
or the use of water for any property or purpose not agreed to by
the Department.
(1)
For whoever maintains a cross connection without a permit, or
after revocation of the permit to maintain such connection, and
whoever maintains a cross connection without installing the
appropriate backflow-prevention device required by Massachusetts
Drinking Water Regulations, 310 CMR 22.22, Cross Connection.
(2)
For willful or indifferent waste of water through improper or
imperfect pipes, fixtures, meters or otherwise.
(3)
For failure to protect from injury or damage any meter, connection,
service pipe or fixture on the property of the applicant.
(4)
For molesting or tampering by the applicant, or others with the
knowledge of the applicant, with any meter, connections, service
pipe, curb cock, valve, seal or any other appurtenance of the
Department controlling or regulating the water supply.
(5)
For failure to provide the Department's employees free and
reasonable access to the property supplied or for obstructing the
way of ingress to the meter or other appliance controlling or
regulating the water supply.
(6)
For nonpayment of any account for water supplied, or water
service, or for meter or service maintenance, or for any other fee
or charge accruing under the application.
(7)
(8) In case of vacancy of the premises.
(9) For violation of any rule or regulation of the Department.
A.
Water service will be discontinued to any premises on account of
vacancy upon written order of the applicant, without in any way
affecting the application in force, upon payment of all charges and
fees due as provided for in the rates, rules and regulations of the
Department.
B.
No water fixture, meter or other appliance in connection with the
supply of water will be considered cut off until it is removed,
disconnected, plugged or seated in a manner satisfactory to the
Department.
C.
Discontinuing the supply of water to a premises shall not prevent
the Department from pursuing any lawful remedy by action at law or
otherwise for collection of moneys due.
D.
§ 137-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-12
1:407
§ 137-13. Abatements and refunds.
§ 137-14. Bills for service.
§ 137-15. Terms of payment.
§ 137-16. Liability of Department.
The Department may at any time shut off the water in the mains in
case of accident, or for the purpose of making connections, alterations,
repairs, changes or other reasons and may restrict the use of water to
reserve a sufficient supply for fire protection or other emergencies.
E.
Where water is furnished by meter the quantity recorded by it shall
be conclusive on both the applicant and the Department, except when
the meter has been found to be registering incorrectly or has ceased to
register. In such cases the quantity may be determined by the average
registration of the meter when in order or by such other fair and
reasonable method as shall be based on the best information obtained.
A.
On metered service no abatement will be made for leaks or for water
wasted by improper or damaged fixtures.
B.
Property owners are responsible for furnishing the Department their
correct address, including apartment numbers. Failure to receive bills
will not be considered as permitting an extension of the period during
which bills are payable at face nor delay the date when the account will
be considered delinquent.
A.
The use of water by the same applicant in different premises or
localities will not be combined, and each installation shall stand by
itself.
B.
Payments will be made at the office of the Treasurer/Collector, 31 North
Street, Williamstown.
C.
The Department will not be bound by bills rendered under mistake of
fact as to the quantity of service rendered.
D.
All water services in Williamstown are metered. These services are
billed quarterly; every other billing is estimated. The estimated billings
are based upon the last three actual meter readings. The only exception
would be where there has been a problem with a break or unusual use.
E.
A. Domestic metered service will be payable on a quarterly basis.
Commercial, industrial and institutional metered services will be
payable on a quarterly basis.
B.
C. Charges for private fire protection service will be payable semiannually.
D. Special charges will be payable on demand.
§ 137-12 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 137-16
1:408
§ 137-17. Accessibility of fixtures; turning off water prohibited.
§ 137-18. Specifications.
The Williamstown Water Department shall not in any way or under any
circumstances be held liable or responsible to any person or persons
for any loss or damage resulting from any excess or deficiency in
the pressure or supply of water due to any cause whatsoever. The
Department will undertake to use reasonable care and diligence in
order to prevent and avoid interruptions and fluctuations in the service,
but it cannot and does not guarantee that such will not occur. In case of
any foreseen interruption in the service, the Department will endeavor
to notify its customers in advance but does not guarantee to do so.
A.
The Department will not be liable for any damage done by reason of
breaking or leaking of, or any defect in any of the applicants service
pipe or fixtures.
B.
All service connections, service pipes, meters and fixtures shall at all
reasonable hours be accessible to the Department for inspections or
repairs.
A.
No person shall turn the water on or off at any street valve, corporation
cock, curb cock or other street connection, or disconnect or remove any
meter without the consent of the Department. Penalties provided by law
for such actions will be rigidly enforced.
B.
Pipe, valves and fittings.
All water pipe used in water system will be ductile iron water pipe,
Class 52, cement lined, (ANSI A21.4 AWWA C104) outside coated
with push-on joints or mechanical joints, and the gaskets shall
conform to the standards set by ANSI/AWWA/C111/ A21.11-85.
(1)
All fittings will be mechanical joint ductile iron and shall conform
to the standards set by ANSI/AWWA C153/A21.53-88 and ANSI/
AWWA C 110/A21.10-82.
(2)
Bolts and nuts for all connections shall be ductile iron or stainless
steel.
(3)
All gates will be Resilient Wedge valves conforming to AWWA C509
standards. All gates will open left, and conform to 250 pounds per
square inch pressure ratings.
(4)
A.
Service fittings.
Corporation stops will be Mueller 110 compression connection or a
Mueller flared connection.
(1)
Curb stops will be Mueller Oriseal Full Flow 110 Conductive
Compression or flared fitting, without drain.
(2)
B.
§ 137-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-18
1:409
All service pipe, 0.75 inch to 1.50 inches from the main to the curb
stop, will be Type k copper.
(3)
Boxes.
Curb valve boxes for three-fourths-inch service connections shall
be Erie type extension or Minneapolis pattern, 66 inches in length,
one-inch pipe screw cap.
(1)
Valve boxes for a one-inch to two-inch curb stop will be the Arch
Pattern type, sixty-six-inch length, two inches inside diameter, castiron
construction.
(2)
Valve boxes for gates will be base belled and have a forty-eight-inch
base in length and a twenty-six-inch or thirty-six-inch top section
with no bottom flange. The box top will be the sliding type. The
complete unit will be cast iron.
(3)
(4) All covers shall have "water" clearly cast into the cover.
C.
Hydrants. Mueller Centurion or Darling B-84-B hydrants are accepted.
All hydrants will have to conform to AWWA C-502-80 standards. Value
size will be five-and-one-forth-inch. Value opening will be left. Inlet
connection shall be Mech. joint, operating nut one-and-one-half-inch
standard pentagon. There shall be two hose nozzles 2 1/2 inches and
one pumper nozzle, National Standard thread, color yellow. All hydrants
will be plugged so no groundwater will enter the barrel.
D.
§ 137-18 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 137-18
1:410
ARTICLE II
Cross Connection Control Regulations
[Adopted 10-16-1995]
§ 137-19. Purpose.
This article is adopted for the following purposes:
§ 137-20. Responsibility.
The Superintendent of the Williamstown Water Department will be
responsible for the protection of the town's public potable water system
from contamination due to cross connections. If, in the judgment of the
Superintendent or the Water Superintendent's designated agent, a backflow
or back-siphonage device is needed at the water service connection or
within the building, the owner will be notified and will be subject to the
drinking water regulations of Massachusetts 310 CMR 22.22 and the
regulations herein.
§ 137-21. Implementation.
To prevent cross connections within the Williamstown public water
system and to eliminate back-siphonage and backflow into the public
system of contaminants that would affect drinking water quality and
public health.
A.
To improve the existing cross-connection control program, upgrading
recordkeeping, reporting, tracking and surveying concentrating on the
removal or control of existing cross connections within its customers
potable and nonpotable water systems, including commercial,
institutional, industrial and residential facilities.
B.
To provide for a continuing effective program that will systemically
prevent the contamination or pollution of our potable water system by
cross connection.
C.
Implementation of the cross-connection control program will begin with
the mailing of a packet explaining the program in detail to all building
owners included in the survey.
A.
The second contact with the building owner or his representative will
be to set up an appointment for the survey and reacquaint the parties
involved with the program.
B.
After the completion of the initial inspection, if the owner desires, a
meeting can take place to discuss any violations and corrective work. If
a testable device is required, the owner will be sent a transmittal form
for permit application and a design data sheet.
C.
The building owner will have 60 days to return the design data sheets
to the Water Department for permitting and approval or show an
alternative to the cross connection. If the owner does not respond and
D.
§ 137-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-21
1:411
§ 137-22. Testing and inspections.
remains in violation, a letter will be sent indicating the water service
will be terminated, if work is not initiated on the cross connection
within 15 days.
The Williamstown Water Department has been authorized by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) to be the designee, and
approval can take place locally by the Water Department.
E.
The owner will be notified of approval and will have 60 days to install
the device. Upon installation a new device test shall be made. A copy
of the test results will be forwarded to DEP. The DEP will issue an ID
number to the owner. The owner will be subject to an annual state
permit fee from DEP.
F.
The Williamstown Water Department's water supply and distribution
system is protected as required by Massachusetts state law regulation
310 CMR, Section 22.22. All backflow devices required by this
regulation will be installed, tested and maintained. Any violations of
these regulations could lead to a discontinued water service by the
Water Department until violations are corrected.
A.
All cross connections found as a result of surveys, by a state certified
tester, will have an approved backflow prevention device installed as
shown on the design data sheets, or the cross connection will be
removed.
B.
All owners or operators of a premises served by a public water supply
system shall authorize agents and employees of the Town Water
Department, upon presentation of their credentials, to enter their
premises without a warrant for the purpose of inspecting and surveying
their water systems for cross connections and assuring compliance with
these regulations, whether or not the Water Department has evidence
that the system is in violation of the applicable legal requirement, in
accordance with 310 CMR 22.22.
C.
All backflow prevention testable devices will be tested two times a year
(November - December and February - March) by the Williamstown
Water Department's state certified testers.
D.
The owner of high-hazard testable backflow prevention devices
(RPBP's) will be subject to three tests per year, two test by the Water
Department and one test by an independent state certified tester,
preferably July - August. The owner must maintain on the premises
a spare-parts kit and any special tools required for removal and
reassembly of devices which are to be tested.
E.
The owner of a low-hazard testable backflow prevention device, double
check valve assemblies (DCVA's) will be tested twice a year by the
Williamstown Water Department.
F.
§ 137-21 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 137-22
1:412
§ 137-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — A device to prevent
backflow or siphonage, approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection or its designated authority.
BACK PRESSURE — A pressure that exceeds the water system pressure and
causes a backflow or a reversal of flow back into the water supply.
BACK SIPHONAGE —
BACKFLOW — A reverse flow of pollutants or unwanted liquids in a water
system. It can be caused by back pressure or back siphonage.
CROSS CONNECTION — A link or channel between pipes carrying polluted
water or substances and pipes carrying drinking water. The contaminant
If a customer has a well or backup water supply, the public water supply
shall be protected against backflow, and the appropriate device will be
installed on the service line.
G.
In cases where water quality is questionable and yet may not pose
a public health threat, but if introduced into the system could be
objectionable, then an approved double check value assembly will be
installed.
H.
In cases where it is impossible to gain entry to determine if a cross
connection does exist or if piping and plumbing arrangements are
of such fashion that it is impossible to determine, then to protect
the public water system, an approved backflow prevention device
appropriate to the believed degree of hazard will be installed.
I.
Where there is evidence of possible backflow into the public water
system, the Water Department will first inspect the private water
system. If, after investigation, backflow is discovered, in order to ensure
the delivery of a fit and pure water supply, the Water Department may
cease supplying water to any premises if one or more cross connections
are maintained in violation of the requirements of these regulations;
alternatively, the Water Department may require any person to take
such actions as are reasonable and necessary to prevent cross
connections. In addition, the Water Department may revoke any permit
upon due notice to the person maintaining the cross connection,
whenever, in the opinion of the Water Department, the connection or
maintenance thereof no longer complies with these regulations, and no
portion of the permit fee shall be refunded, in accordance with MGL C.
111, § 160A.
J.
A vacuum created by a pressure drop or a negative pressure in the
water system condition caused by gravity, causing a reverse flow.
A.
Undersized piping, high-velocity water, causing an aspirator effect
creating a partial vacuum and a reverse flow.
B.
§ 137-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-23
1:413
enters the water system when pressure from the polluted source exceeds
pressure on the drinking water. This is a reversal of hydraulic pressure,
called back siphonage or back pressure.
NONPOTABLE WATER — Water which is not safe for human consumption.
POTABLE WATER — A drinking water supply approved by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM OR CUSTOMERS — Include all facilities and
distribution from the curb stop used for delivering potable water to its
points of use.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — Consists of approved water sources, surface
and underground, connected to a distribution system that is under the
complete control of the utility to an entry point on the service line into the
curb stop.
§ 137-23 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 137-23
1:414
Chapter 141
BODY ART
§ 137-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-23
1:415

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 141-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum requirements to be
met by any person performing body art upon any individual and for any
establishment where body art is performed. These requirements shall
include, but not be limited to, general sanitation of premises wherein body
art is to be performed and sterilization of instruments. These rules and
regulations are necessary to protect the public health by preventing
diseases, including, but not limited to, transmission of Hepatitis B and/or
human immune-deficiency virus.
§ 141-2. Scope.
These rules and regulations shall establish procedures for:
§ 141-3. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority of MGL c. 111, § 31, and any
other power thereto enabling.
§ 141-4. Definitions.
For purposes of these regulations, the words and phrases shall be as
defined.
BOARD — The Williamstown Board of Health or its designated agent.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Williamstown Board of Health.
BODY ART — Any method of inserting a needle into the body to place
jewelry in the perforation produced by the needle and/or indelible colors, so
as to leave permanent marks or designs Establishments and/or individuals
involved in the piercing of ear(s), using only approved ear piercing guns,
are not included in these regulations.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any room or space where body art
procedures are practiced or where the business of body art is conducted or
any part thereof.
A. The licensing of all persons performing body art.
Minimal training standards for the prevention of disease transmission
and for knowledge of anatomy and physiology.
B.
C. Regular inspection of premises wherein body art is performed.
Revocation of the registration of any person or establishment deemed
in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated under this section.
D.
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:417
BODY ART TECHNICIAN — Any person who performs piercing or tattooing
of any part of the body (other than the ear), which is pierced by use of an
appropriate piercing gun or needle.
CLEANING AREA — The area in a body art establishment used in the
sterilization, sanitization or other cleaning of instruments or other
equipment used for body art activity.
CONDUCT OF BODY ART — The discrete procedure of permanently
applying body art upon a client. The conduct of body art does not include
other activities, such as cleaning, sanitization and sterilization.
CUSTOMER WAITING AREA — The area in a body art establishment for use
and occupation by persons and clients prior to and after the conduct of any
body art.
INSTRUMENT STORAGE AREA — The area in a body art establishment
used for storage of instruments, linens, equipment and other items used in
any body art activity.
PRE-STERILIZED — Instruments or procedure set-ups that are sold
individually packaged and sterilized. Each package shall have an auditable
sterilization lot number from a department approved sterilization facility.
(See also § 141-39D.)
SANITIZATION or TO SANITIZE — Bactericidal and virucidal treatment of
a clean instrument or surface in a manner effective in destroying pathogens
in accordance with these regulations. Sanitization is not the same or equal
to sterilization.
SHARPS — Instruments and other objects that can penetrate the skin,
including, but not limited to, tattoo needles, permanent cosmetic needles,
piercing needles and razors.
SINGLE-USE — Manufactured and approved for use only once in
accordance with manufacturers instructions prior to disposal.
STERILIZATION or TO STERILIZE — The use of a physical or chemical
procedure to destroy all microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial
endospores, in accordance with these regulations. Sterilization includes the
use of an appropriate and approved method of testing so as to ensure
sterilization.
WORKSTATION — The area within a body art establishment exclusively
used in and during the conduct of body art upon a client.
§ 141-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-4
1:418
ARTICLE II
Body Art Technicians
§ 141-5. Permit.
Every person applying for or renewing his or her permit as a body art
technician will complete the application form approved by the Board of
Health.
A.
Every applicant will provide proof of a high school diploma or its
equivalent.
B.
Every applicant will provide photographic proof (i.e., driver license,
passport, etc.) of his or her identity and age.
C.
Every applicant will provide proof to the Board of Health that they have
held a license to practice their body art discipline (piercing, tattooing,
etc.) for at least one year in another municipality or state or have
completed one year of apprentice training as a body piercer or three
years of apprentice training as a tattooist under a licensed body art
technician in the specific discipline.
D.
Applicants will provide proof of eligibility for membership as a
professional business member or professional member at large by the
Association of Professional Piercers. Eligibility will consist of verifiable
documentation that applicant has met all criteria established by the
organization.
E.
Applicants will provide proof of eligibility for membership as a
professional tattooist by the Alliance of Professional Tattooists.
Eligibility will consist of verifiable documentation that applicant has
met all criteria established by the organization.
F.
Body artists and their employees must show evidence or current
certification of successfully completing the courses listed below prior to
receipt of a certificate of registration:
Basic training in first aid and advanced CPR as well as proof of
attendance at required renewal courses.
(1)
Completion of a course on prevention of disease transmission and
bloodborne pathogens, conducted under the American Red Cross
Instruction program, or its equivalent. [Amended 10-4-2004]
(2)
Passed a course in anatomy and physiology given at an accredited
university or community college. A copy of the transcript will be
provided to the Board.
(3)
G.
Body artists shall submit with their initial application a statement by
a physician, issued not more than 30 days prior to the application
submission, that they have been examined and are free from any
contagious or communicable disease. [Amended 3-3-2003]
H.
§ 141-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-6
1:419
§ 141-6. Hepatitis B vaccination status.
Every body art technician shall have, with a copy provided to the owner
of the body art establishment in which the technician performs body art
activity, valid documentation of Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) vaccination stating:
§ 141-7. Bloodborne pathogen training course.
A. Certification of completed vaccination.
B. Laboratory evidence of immunity.
Documentation stating the vaccine is contraindicated for medical
reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's
statement specifying the name of the employee and that the vaccine
cannot be given.
C.
Any course taken by a person to fulfill the requirements of § 141-5G. (2)
shall include the following: [Amended 10-4-2004]
A general explanation of the epidemiology and symptoms of
bloodborne diseases and all communicable diseases potentially
transmitted through body art activity;
(1)
An explanation of the modes of transmission of bloodborne
pathogens and other communicable diseases potentially
transmitted through body art activity;
(2)
An explanation of the appropriate methods for recognizing tasks
and other activities that may involve exposure to blood for the body
art technician and/or the client;
(3)
An explanation of the use and limitations of methods that will
prevent or reduce exposure to the body art technician and/or the
client of bloodborne pathogens and other communicable diseases;
(4)
Information on different types, proper use and removal of gloves
and proper hand washing techniques;
(5)
Information on the proper selection and use of disinfectants and
antiseptics;
(6)
Information on the HBV vaccine, including information on its
efficacy, safety, method of administration and the benefits of
vaccination against HBV;
(7)
An explanation of what constitutes an exposure incident, the risk
of disease transmission following an exposure incident and the
options for post-exposure evaluation and follow up if an exposure
incident occurs involving bloodborne pathogens; and
(8)
An opportunity for interactive questions and answers with the
instructor of the training session.
(9)
A.
§ 141-6 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-7
1:420
§ 141-8. Hygiene.
Every body art technician shall maintain a high degree of personal
cleanliness, conform to hygienic practices and wear clean clothes when
conducting body art activity. If the body art technicians clothes are or
become contaminated, clean clothing shall be donned prior to
commencement of any body art activity.
§ 141-9. General requirements.
Upon conclusion of a course as described above, an examination based
on the information covered in the course shall be administered to each
attendee of the course, with documentation of the results for each
attendee provided to him or her.
B.
No minors shall receive a tattoo. No minor shall receive a piercing
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian who has signed a
consent form. No body art procedure of the genitalia of minors shall be
allowed. (See also § 141-54J.)
A.
No body art procedure performed upon animals shall be allowed in
piercing studios.
B.
Pre-procedural consultation to discuss body art, its risks and potential
complications shall be required with each client. All clients shall sign
an informed consent form prior to the commencement of any body
art procedure. Clients shall be supplied a copy of the consent form,
and the consent form shall be kept on file by the body artist. Clients
should be told to consult with their physician regarding any medical
condition which could be exacerbated by the piercing procedures (i.e.,
hemophilia, open sores, etc.).
C.
Patrons who admit to or are obviously under the influence of alcohol or
other judgment-altering drugs shall not receive a body art procedure.
D.
Body artists shall not be under the influence of any substance, legal or
illegal which might impair their judgment or ability to properly perform
body art procedures.
E.
Patrons will receive verbal and written instructions on the cleaning,
use of antiseptics and other specific instructions for body art postprocedure
care, including the signs and symptoms of complications.
F.
§ 141-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-9
1:421

ARTICLE III
Clients
§ 141-10. Application and consent form for body art activity.
Every application and consent form for body art activity shall contain at a
minimum:
General information regarding body art, including, at a minimum, the
following statements:
Tattoos, permanent cosmetics and body piercing should be
considered permanent;
(1)
Removal of tattoos and permanent cosmetics requires surgery or
a medical procedure that may result in scarring of the skin tissue;
and
(2)
Closure of a hole caused by body piercing may require a medical
procedure that may result in scarring of the skin tissue:
(3)
A.
Information as to side effects of body art, including, but not limited to,
hypertrophic scarring, adverse reaction to ink/dye/pigment, change in
color of ink/dye/pigment over time, decreased ability of physician to
locate skin melanoma in regions concealed by tattoos, nerve damage,
febrile illness, tetanus, systemic infection and keloid formation (thick,
raised scarring);
B.
After-care instructions, including, at a minimum:
(1) Responsibilities and care following the procedure;
(2) Restrictions, if any, upon the client;
(3) Signs and symptoms of infection; and
(4) Instructions to contact a physician if signs of infection occur;
C.
Client information, including:
(1) Name;
(2) Age and valid identification;
Parent or legal guardian consent, including name of parent or legal
guardian, and proof of parentage or legal guardianship through
a copy of a birth certificate or court order of guardianship,
respectively, or a notarized document signed by the parent or legal
guardian attesting to the parent's or legal guardian's relationship
to the client and consent to the conduct of the contemplated body
art activity upon the client;
(3)
D.
§ 141-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-10
1:423
Description of requested body art activity with a list/description of
any device/jewelry to be inserted and to remain in body following
the body art activity;
(4)
Instructions requiring client to adhere to the exposure control plan as
they relate to client conduct in the body art establishment;
E.
Name of body art technician to conduct the body art and corresponding
Board permit number;
F.
Codes, identity of manufacturer and lot number of any dye and pigment
to be used in the body art activity;
G.
H. Signature of client;
I. Signature of clients parent or legal guardian if client is a minor;
J. Signature of body art technician;
K. Date(s) of all signature(s); and
Date(s) of procedure, including a daily estimate of progress for the
conduct of body art requiring multiple days to complete.
L.
§ 141-10 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-10
1:424
ARTICLE IV
Body Art Establishments
§ 141-11. Exposure control plan - contents and submission.
Every body art establishment owner must submit for Board approval plans
and specifications demonstrating compliance with these regulations. Where
applicable, the Board may otherwise determine compliance with these
regulations upon inspection of a body art establishment.
§ 141-12. Workstation.
§ 141-13. Separate areas.
§ 141-14. Walls, floors, ceilings.
A. Every workstation shall have a minimum of 80 square feet.
Every body art establishment shall have at least one workstation which
can be completely screened from view from any person outside such a
workstation, including, but not limited to, clients, body art technicians
and other persons in other workstations, the customer waiting area and
any area outside the body art establishment.
B.
Every area in a body art establishment used for body art activity shall
be:
Used for no other purpose, including, but not limited to, use as a
food establishment, for human habitation, hair and nail activities,
or any other use which may cause contamination of instruments,
other equipment or work surfaces used for body art activity; and
(1)
Separated from any area used for a non-body art activity by a
wall or other solid barrier extending from floor to ceiling so as
to prevent airborne contamination of the workstation and the
instruments and other equipment therein.
(2)
A.
Every body art establishment shall have therein an instrument cleaning
area. Every instrument cleaning area shall have an area for the
placement and use of an ultrasonic cleaning unit located or positioned
so as not to be immediately adjacent to any sterilization unit.
B.
Every body art establishment shall have therein an instrument storage
area exclusive of and separate from any cleaning area.
C.
Every body art establishment shall have therein a customer waiting
area exclusive of and separate from any workstation, instrument
storage area, cleaning area or other area in a body art establishment
used for body art activity.
D.
§ 141-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-14
1:425
§ 141-15. Lighting and ventilation.
§ 141-16. Plumbing.
Every workstation, instrument storage area, toilet room and cleaning
area in a body art establishment shall be constructed as follows so as to
provide a durable smooth, nonabsorbent and washable surface:
Floors: constructed of commercially rated continuous sheet vinyl,
smooth-sealed cement, ceramic tile or other similar approved
materials.
(1)
Walls: covered with a semi-gloss or gloss enamel paint, or
constructed of fiberglass reinforced panel (FRP), or ceramic tile or
other similar materials approved by the Board.
(2)
Ceiling: covered with semi-gloss or gloss enamel paint, or approved
acoustical paneling.
(3)
A.
All such walls and ceilings shall be light-colored. For purposes of this
chapter, light-colored shall mean a light reflectance value of 70% or
greater.
B.
These requirements do not apply to the walls, floors and ceilings of any
customer waiting area or office.
C.
Every body art establishment shall be well ventilated and have a
minimum light service maintained at all times during operation at an
equivalent of not less than 20 footcandles as measured 36 inches above
the floor, except that a minimum of 100 footcandles shall be provided
on the area of the client's body subject to the conduct of body art,
in any area where instruments or sharps are assembled, and where
sanitization or sterilization activities are performed.
A.
Every workstation or every area in a body art establishment where
linens, instruments or other equipment used in body art activity are
exposed, sanitized or sterilized shall exclusively use readily cleanable
light fixtures with lights of shatterproof construction or lights enclosed
by a shatterproof shield.
B.
All plumbing and plumbing fixtures shall be installed in compliance
with local plumbing codes. To the extent permitted by applicable
federal, state and local laws and ordinances, all liquid wastes shall be
discharged through the plumbing system into the public sewerage or
into a Board-approved private sewage disposal system.
A.
Water supply. An adequate, protected, pressurized, potable water
supply shall be provided to every body art establishment. Such water
supply and plumbing shall be Board approved.
B.
For purposes of these regulations, "hot water" shall mean a
temperature of 110° to 130° F.
C.
§ 141-14 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-17
1:426
§ 141-17. Toilet rooms.
§ 141-18. Hand-washing sinks.
§ 141-19. Janitorial sinks.
§ 141-20. Instrument sinks.
Every body art establishment shall provide toilet rooms with adequate
lighting and department-approved ventilation to the outside for use
by employees and clients, and available to clients during all business
hours.
A.
The number and construction of toilet rooms, commodes and separate
stalls for each commode in a toilet room shall be in accordance with
state building and plumbing codes.
B.
Every toilet room shall be fully enclosed and have a well-fitting, selfclosing
door which shall remain closed.
C.
Toilet tissue shall be provided in a permanently installed dispenser in
each stall.
D.
Toilet rooms shall not be used for the storage of instruments or other
supplies used for body art activity.
E.
A hand-washing sink shall be provided:
(1) Within any toilet room; and
(2) In each room with one or more workstations.
A.
Every hand-washing sink shall be equipped with:
An adequate supply of hot and cold running water under pressure
with fixtures to allow for washing of hands; and
(1)
Liquid hand cleanser and single-use sanitary towels in devices for
dispensing, and a waste container of washable construction.
(2)
B.
At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in every body art
establishment for use in cleaning the body art establishment and proper
disposal of liquid wastes in accordance with all applicable federal, state
and local laws. For purposes of this chapter, a janitorial sink means a
sink of adequate size equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure so as to permit the cleaning of the body art establishment and
any equipment used for cleaning.
A.
Janitorial sinks may not be used as a hand-washing or instrument
washing sink, and must be located in a separate room.
B.
Every cleaning area shall have an instrument sink used exclusively for
the cleaning of instruments.
A.
§ 141-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-20
1:427
§ 141-21. Exposure control plan - contents and submission.
Every instrument sink shall be of adequate size and equipped with hot
and cold running water under pressure so as to permit the cleaning of
instruments used in body art activity.
B.
The exposure control plan for a body art establishment shall be
submitted by the owner to the Board for plan review.
A.
A copy of the body art establishment's exposure control plan as set forth
above shall be maintained at the body art establishment.
B.
§ 141-20 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-21
1:428
ARTICLE V
Instruments and Equipment
§ 141-22. Equipment.
The surface of all equipment and furniture located in an area used for
body art activity or instrument storage area, including, but not limited to,
counters, tables, equipment, benches, chairs, recliners, shelves, storage
containers and cabinets in the workstations, cleaning areas and instrument
storage areas shall be made of materials that are, or shall be treated so
as to be, smooth, nonabsorbent, nonporous, easily cleanable and able to
withstand repeated cleaning and disinfection.
§ 141-23. Sanitizing and sterilization units.
§ 141-24. Waste receptacles.
Every body art establishment shall have the following so as to ensure
the cleaning and maintenance of an adequate supply of instruments for
use in body art activity:
One or more ultrasonic cleaning units sold for cleaning purposes
under approval of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Every
ultrasonic cleaning unit shall be clearly labeled biohazardous and
installed or placed in an area separate from any workstation or
area used for sterilization in accordance with the requirements
set forth by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA);
(1)
One or more sterilization units sold for medical sterilization
purposes under approval of the FDA; and
(2)
One or more commercial biological monitoring (spore) system tests
per each sterilization unit, consistent with the sterilization unit
manufacturer's instructions for use by the Board during inspection.
(3)
A.
The requirements of Subsection A shall not apply if pre-sterilized,
individually packaged, needle chamber machine tips, machine casings
and combo-couples are exclusively used for body art activity.
B.
C. Only single-use needles are permitted for body art procedures.
Every workstation shall have a foot-operated, covered, cleanable, waste
receptacle for disposal of trash and other debris.
A.
Every body art establishment shall have a waste receptacle exclusively
used for the disposal of contaminated waste in accordance with 105
CMR 480.000, Storage and Disposal of Infectious or Physically
Dangerous Medical or Biological Waste, State Sanitary Code, Chapter
VIII. Each such receptacle shall be tightly covered and clearly labeled
as containing biohazardous waste.
B.
§ 141-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-25
1:429
§ 141-25. Linens.
Every body art establishment shall maintain an adequate supply of reusable,
launderable linens or single-use linens, such as drapes, lap cloths and
aprons, to be used in body art activity in accordance with these regulations.
§ 141-26. Rotary pens.
If used in body art activity, rotary pens, also known as "cosmetic machines,"
shall have detachable, disposable, sterile combo-couplers and shall have
detachable, disposable casings or casings designed and manufactured to be
easily cleaned and sterilized in accordance with these regulations.
§ 141-27. Ink, dye, pigment.
§ 141-28. Inserted objects - jewelry.
§ 141-29. Telephone access.
Every body art establishment shall have a telephone in good working order
easily accessible to all employees during all hours of operation for the
purpose of contacting and requesting emergency medical assistance/
paramedic services in the event of an emergency or perceived need. A
legible sign shall be posted at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the
correct emergency contact telephone number, for example 911.
§ 141-30. Prohibited instruments and materials.
No person shall utilize or have available in a body art establishment:
All inks, dyes and pigments used to alter the color of skin in the
conduct of body art shall be specifically manufactured for such purpose,
approved, properly labeled as to its ingredients, manufacturer and lot
number in accordance with applicable FDA requirements and shall
not be contaminated or adulterated. The mixing of such inks, dyes
or pigments or their dilution with potable sterile water is acceptable,
unless prohibited or not recommended by its/their manufacturer.
A.
Inks, dyes and pigments prepared by or at the direction of a body
art technician for use in body art activity shall be made exclusively of
nontoxic and noncontaminated ingredients approved by the Board or
FDA.
B.
Jewelry or objects intended for bodily insertion shall be sterilized,
in good condition, designed and manufactured for insertion into the
intended body part (i.e., jewelry designed for insertion in pierced ear
lobes shall not be used for insertion in other parts of the body).
A.
Only jewelry manufactured of implant grade, ASTM F138 and ISO
5832-1 implant grade stainless steel, solid 14K through 24K gold,
niobium, titanium, platinum or other materials considered by the Board
to be equally biocompatible shall be inserted into newly pierced skin.
B.
§ 141-25 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-30
1:430
§ 141-31. Animals prohibited.
§ 141-32. Smoking, eating and drinking prohibited.
No person shall smoke, or otherwise use tobacco within the establishment,
eat or drink at or in the workstation, instrument storage area or cleaning
area.
Unapproved instruments or materials, such as styptic pencils or
devices, alum, or any similar material, to check the flow of blood.
A.
Liquid sterilants for the sterilization of any reusable instrument or
component.
B.
Rotary pens that are designed or manufactured with a sponge-type
material at the opening of the chamber for the purpose of prohibiting
the backflow of pigment and body fluid into the machine.
C.
Multiple-use instruments or components that are designed in such a
manner that restrict or prevent proper cleaning or sterilization.
D.
Drugs, chemicals or agents that require a licensed medical
practitioner's authorization for use, application or dispensation.
E.
Suturing kits or suturing devices, scalpels, cauterizing tools or devices,
branding tools or devices, or other tools, devices or instruments used
for or in conjunction with any prohibited body art activity, and not
otherwise used for any permitted body art activity.
F.
Except as otherwise provided below, no animal shall be kept in or
permitted to enter into:
Any instrument storage area or any area in a body art
establishment used for sterilizing, sanitizing or other cleaning of
instruments; and
(1)
(2) Any workstation or other area of a body art establishment.
A.
Subsection A(2) does not apply to any guide animal, signal animal or
service animal, accompanied by a totally or partially blind person or
deaf person, person whose hearing is impaired or handicapped person,
any dog accompanied by a person licensed to train guide dogs, or any
dog accompanied by a uniformed employee of a private patrol operator
or an operator of a private patrol during and within the course and
scope of their employment as patrol persons.
B.
Subsection A does not apply to dogs under the control of uniformed law
enforcement officers.
C.
Subsection A does not apply to fish or other aquatic life contained
in a completely enclosed aquarium so long as the presence of any
aquarium does not interfere with proper maintenance of the body art
establishment as set forth in these regulations.
D.
§ 141-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-33
1:431
§ 141-33. Disease transmission.
Except as set forth in these regulations, no person shall commit or permit
any act that may expose any person to disease or illness or otherwise
contaminate any instrument or area in a body art establishment used for
body art activity.
§ 141-34. Exposure incident report.
§ 141-35. Record maintenance.
An exposure incident report shall be completed by the close of business
on and for every exposure incident occurring in the conduct of any body
art activity.
A.
Each exposure incident report shall contain:
A copy, where applicable, of the application and consent form for
body art activity completed by any client involved in the exposure
incident;
(1)
A full description of the exposure incident, including the portion of
the body involved therein;
(2)
(3) Instrument(s) or other equipment implicated;
A copy of the employee/independent operator records of any body
art technician;
(4)
(5) Date and time of exposure;
Any medical history released to the body art establishment or body
art technician independent operator on any person involved; and
(6)
Information regarding any recommendation to refer to a physician
or waiver to consult a physician by persons involved.
(7)
B.
All exposure incidents reports must be maintained as permanent
records of the establishment.
C.
Every owner of a body art establishment shall have and retain at
the body art establishment for inspection by the Board the following
information for the time period specified below, to be updated as
needed to remain current:
Exposure control plan: one copy of the exposure control plan for
the body art establishment submitted to the Board;
(1)
Employee records (three years) indicating: name, home address,
home phone number, identification photograph, state identification
card number, physical description as detailed on state identification
card, date of birth, type(s) of body art procedures conducted, exact
duties, dates of employment at location, body art technician permit
number, Hepatitis B vaccination status;
(2)
A.
§ 141-33 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-35
1:432
§ 141-36. Establishment maintenance.
Every area of a body art establishment shall be kept in good repair, clean
and free of all vermin and maintained so as to prevent contamination of
clients and other persons.
§ 141-37. Toilet room and plumbing maintenance.
§ 141-38. Equipment and instrument maintenance.
Body art technician independent operator(s) records (three years)
indicating: name, home address, phone number, state identification
card number, physical description as detailed on state identification
card, date of birth, type(s) of body art procedures conducted, dates
operating at location, body art technician permit number, Hepatitis
B vaccination status;
(3)
Client records (three years): copies of all application and consent
forms for body art activity;
(4)
Waste hauler manifests for contaminated waste and sharps
transport and disposal in accordance with 105 CMR 480.000 (three
years) (See also § 141-51);
(5)
Training records (three years): documentation to verify training
of exposure control plan to all employees and body art technician
independent operator(s) conducting body art activity at such
establishment;
(6)
Dye, ink and pigment records (three years): manufacturer, color
and code information for all dye, ink and pigment; ratios of colors
and sterile water if mixed by the body art technician;
(7)
Instrument records (three years): vendor name, address and phone
number for all instruments intended for use in body art activity;
(8)
Commercial biological monitoring (spore) system test results
(three years); and
(9)
Body art regulations: one copy of the most current version of these
body art regulations.
(10)
Every owner of a body art establishment shall have and permanently
retain at the establishment for inspection by the Board all exposure
incident reports. Disposal or destruction of these reports is prohibited.
B.
Every toilet room, plumbing and plumbing fixture shall be kept clean,
fully operative and in good repair.
A.
Every toilet room shall be separated by a closed door from other areas
of the body art establishment.
B.
§ 141-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-38
1:433
§ 141-39. Instrument sterilization.
All instruments and surfaces of equipment used for body art activity,
including, but not limited to, devices, containers, cabinets, storage
compartments, chairs, tables, counters, and dispensers shall be
maintained clean, fully operative, in good repair and free from
contamination.
A.
All instruments manufactured for performing any specific body art
activity shall be so designated, used and approved, and shall not be
adulterated, contaminated or improperly used. Instruments used for
body piercing shall be constructed of stainless surgical-grade steel, and
designed and manufactured for such use.
B.
C. Instruments intended for single-use shall not be reused.
Every contaminated reusable instrument or component thereof,
including, but not limited to, needles, needle bars, needle tubes, needle
caps, body piercing tubes, rotary pens, and coil machines, shall be
immersed in water or other approved liquid solution in the cleaning
area until cleaned and sterilized.
A.
Prior to sterilization, every such instrument shall be thoroughly washed
by scrubbing with an appropriate soap or disinfectant solution and hot
water in accordance with manufacturer's instructions so as to remove
contamination.
B.
Upon completion of the washing process as set forth in Subsection
B above, every such instrument shall be cleaned using an ultrasonic
cleaning unit in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
C.
Upon completion of the cleaning process as set forth in Subsection C
above, every such instrument shall be packaged into procedure set-up
packages with color-change indicators designed to indicate complete
sterilization thereof, initials of the person responsible for sterilizing
the instruments and date of such sterilization. Instruments may be
packaged individually or with other instruments to the extent permitted
under the package manufacturer's instructions.
D.
Upon completion of the packaging process as set forth in Subsection
D above, every such instrument shall be properly sterilized in an
approved sterilization unit according to manufacturer's instructions.
E.
If a package becomes wet or is opened or compromised so as to
allow the contamination of the contents of the package, any instrument
therein shall be deemed contaminated and again shall be washed,
cleaned, packaged and sterilized as indicated above prior to use.
F.
Sterilized instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or tightly
covered container. Cabinets and containers designated for the storage
of sterilized instruments shall be used for that purpose exclusively.
G.
§ 141-38 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-39
1:434
§ 141-40. Instrument storage.
All instruments must be stored in an instrument storage area in a manner
so as to prevent contamination. Identical instruments shall be exclusively
stored together, unless intermingled storage with different instruments
does not represent a hazard as determined by the Board.
§ 141-41. Use of chemicals and cleansers.
All germicides, disinfectants, chemicals and cleansers must be used
according to the manufacturer's requirements, used only for the purpose
approved and intended by the manufacturer and properly labeled and
stored so as to prevent contamination and hazard.
§ 141-42. Labeling.
All storage containers, cabinets, shelves and other storage areas in the
instrument storage area shall be properly labeled as to their contents,
including, but not limited to, identification of contaminated or soiled
contents as appropriate.
§ 141-43. Linen storage and cleaning.
Every sterilized package shall be deemed expired six months after the
date of sterilization. Every instrument therein shall again be washed,
cleaned, packaged and sterilized consistent with the provisions of this
chapter prior to use.
H.
Liquid sterilants shall not be used for the sterilization of any reusable
instrument.
I.
Clean linen shall be stored in a manner so as to prevent contamination.
Containers used for the storage of such linen shall be clearly labeled
as to the contents and used for no other purpose. Linens that have
become soiled or contaminated shall be disposed of, or not be used,
until properly laundered. Contaminated linen shall be labeled, handled,
stored, transported and laundered or disposed of so as to prevent
hazard in a manner approved by the Board.
A.
Any other protective clothing, garments and other cloth items worn
during or used in body art activity and intended for reuse shall be
mechanically washed with detergent and dried after each use. The
items shall be stored in a clean, dry manner and protected from
contamination until used. If washing is conducted in the body art
establishment, all applicable plumbing codes shall apply. Should such
items become contaminated directly or indirectly with bodily fluids,
the items shall be washed in accordance with standards applicable to
hospitals and medical care facilities, at a temperature of 160° F. or a
temperature of 120° F. with the use of chlorine disinfectant.
B.
§ 141-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-44
1:435
§ 141-44. Cleaning and testing of ultrasonic cleaning units and
sterilization units.
§ 141-45. Waste hauling.
§ 141-46. Workstation sanitizing.
§ 141-47. Hand washing and use of gloves.
Every ultrasonic cleaning unit and sterilization unit shall be used,
cleaned and maintained according to manufacturer's specifications.
A.
Every sterilization unit shall be tested with a commercial biological
monitoring (spore) system test in a manner and frequency consistent
with the manufacturer's instructions, but no less than once every
month, to monitor the efficacy of the unit's eradication of all living
organisms, including spores.
B.
Records, including dates and initials, of these tests will be available at
all times for inspection by the Board.
C.
All waste shall be removed from the body art establishment on a daily
basis and placed in an approved secured receptacle for pickup and
removal.
A.
All contaminated waste and sharps shall be disposed of through use
of an approved medical waste hauler in accordance with all applicable
federal laws and regulations. The frequency of disposal shall be be no
less than every 30 days.
B.
An Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) registered hard surface
disinfectant product such as iodophor, chlorine, phenolic, or alcohol
containing germicide or 1:100 dilution of household nonscented bleach
and water (two tablespoons of bleach in one quart of water) shall be
used after cleaning with water and soap or other appropriate cleaning
compound to disinfect any surface contaminated or reasonably
suspected of such. The disinfectant or germicide shall be applied using
a single-use paper towel.
A.
The workstation, including but not limited to the client's chair, table,
tray and similar surfaces, shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized
with an approved disinfectant or germicide (as set forth in Subsection
A above) immediately before and immediately after the conduct of body
art upon a client therein/thereon.
B.
Every body art technician shall clean his/her hands and forearms
thoroughly by washing with antibacterial soap and warm water and
promptly dry with single-use towels prior to conducting any body art
activity.
A.
Every body art technician shall wear new, clean, single-use examination
gloves:
B.
§ 141-44 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-47
1:436
§ 141-48. Instrument and equipment preparation.
§ 141-49. Use of workstation.
While assembling all instruments and other supplies intended for
use in the conduct of body art; and
(1)
(2) During the conduct of body art upon a client.
If a glove is pierced, torn or contaminated through contact with any
part of the client not subject to the conduct of body art, any person
other than the client or otherwise exposed to an unsanitized or
nonsterile surface, both gloves must be promptly removed and
discarded into an appropriate waste receptacle.
C.
If the body art technician's gloves are removed at any time during
assembly of instruments or supplies, or the conduct of body art, the
body art technician must clean his/her hands and don new gloves in
accordance with this section.
D.
The use of single-use examination gloves does not preclude or
substitute for hand washing procedures.
E.
Every body art technician shall use linens, properly cleaned in
accordance with these regulations, or new single-use drapes, lap cloths
and aprons for each client receiving body art.
A.
Every substance used in the conduct of body art shall be dispensed
from containers so as to prevent contamination of the unused portion.
Immediately before applying a tattoo or permanent cosmetics upon a
person, the quantity of the ink, dye or pigment to be used therefor
shall be transferred from its/their original bottle into sterile, single-use
disposable cups, caps or containers.
B.
Upon sanitization of the workstation in compliance with these
regulations, the instrument tray shall be covered with an
uncontaminated single-use paper towel or tray cover.
C.
Every instrument required for the conduct of body art upon a person
shall be placed and arranged on the instrument tray in a manner so
as to prevent contamination of sterilized instruments. All sterilized
instruments shall remain in sterile packages until opened in front of the
client.
D.
Sharps containers shall be easily accessible to the body art technician
and located as close as is feasible to the immediate area where sharps
will be used.
E.
The conduct of body art shall occur only upon a client exclusively in and
at a workstation under sterile conditions.
A.
Only the client, the client's parent or guardian if the client is a minor,
the client's guide animal, signal animal or service animal, and the
B.
§ 141-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-49
1:437
§ 141-50. Use of instruments.
All instruments used in the conduct of body art shall be without
contamination and properly sanitized and sterilized in accordance with
these regulations.
§ 141-51. Waste disposal.
Disposable items used for the conduct of body art, or which have otherwise
become contaminated, shall be promptly discarded upon completion of the
conduct of body art into an appropriate waste receptacle and disposed of
in accordance with 105 CMR 480.000, Storage and Disposal of Infectious
or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waste, State Sanitary Code,
Chapter VIII.
§ 141-52. Multiple body art activities.
The following shall be deemed as multiple body art activities on a single
client, each requiring proper washing, cleaning, sanitization and
sterilization of instruments, workstations and other equipment and areas as
set forth under these regulations:
§ 141-53. Mobile and temporary body art establishments.
Mobile and temporary body art establishments are not permitted in the
Town of Williamstown.
§ 141-54. Enforcement.
body art technician conducting the body art shall be permitted in the
workstation during the conduct of body art.
Applying two or more tattoos on different areas of the body of a client;
or
A.
B. The use of more than one needle during the conduct of body art.
The Board shall have the authority to enforce these regulations and
permits issued thereunder by:
(1) Inspection and investigation.
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders.
(3) Civil and criminal court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of these regulations is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town
of Williamstown. Each day of violation, after written notice, is a
separate violation.
B.
§ 141-49 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-54
1:438
§ 141-55. Waivers.
The Board of Health may, in its discretion, waive compliance with a
particular requirement of these regulations when, in its opinion:
§ 141-56. Appeals. [Amended 2-7-2011]
The Board of Health may, after written notice, suspend or revoke the
body artist's permit for violations of this chapter.
C.
The body artist's permit shall be suspended immediately upon notice to
the holder (without a hearing) when the Board has reason to believe
that an imminent health hazard exists.
D.
In all other instances of violation of the provisions of this administrative
regulation, the Board of Health shall serve the permit holder a written
notice specifying the violation and afford the registrant or certificate
holder a reasonable opportunity to correct the same.
E.
The holder of the body artist's permit shall be notified in writing that
the permit shall be suspended at the end of 10 days following the
service of the notice unless a request for a hearing is made within the
ten-day period.
F.
Any person whose permit has been suspended may make a written
request for reinstatement.
G.
For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
administrative regulation or for interference with the Board in the
performance of its duties, or for persons found guilty of any crime
related to body art, the body artist's permit may be permanently
revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided.
H.
Every person who shall perform body art without a valid permit may be
penalized by indictment or on complaint brought in the district court.
I.
Body art on minors. Every person who shall perform body art on any
minor under the age of 18 without the written consent and presence of
a parent or legal guardian for parts other than the genitalia areas of
minors which shall not have body art emplaced, may be penalized by
indictment or on complaint brought in the district court.
J.
A. The enforcement of the regulation would do manifest injustice; and
The applicant has proved that the same degree of protection of the
public health, safety and welfare can be achieved without strict
application of the particular provision. Any alternative means of
protection shall be detailed and documented by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the Board of Health.
B.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
A.
§ 141-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-56
1:439
§ 141-57. Severability.
If any portion, or sentence, clause or phrase of this regulation shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of this regulation shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 141-58. Effective date.
The effective date for this chapter is February 26, 2001.
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
At the hearing the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
C.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
§ 141-56 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 141-58
1:440
Chapter 142
FLOOR DRAINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and water — See Chs. 49, 67, 117 and
137.
Fuel storage tanks — See Ch. 92.
Wells — See Ch. 164.
§ 142-1. Findings; purpose.
Whereas floor drains in industrial and commercial facilities are often tied to
a system leading to a leaching structure (e.g. dry well, cesspool, leach field)
or a septic system; and poor management practices and accidental and/
or intentional discharges may lead petroleum and other toxic or hazardous
materials into these drainage systems in facilities managing these products;
and improper maintenance or inappropriate use of these systems may allow
the passage of contaminants or pollutants entering the drain to discharge
from the leaching structure or septic system to the ground; and discharges
of hazardous wastes and other pollutants to floor drains leading to leaching
structures and septic systems have repeatedly threatened surface and
ground water quality throughout Massachusetts; and surface and ground
water resources in the Town of Williamstown contribute to the town's
drinking water supplies; the Town of Williamstown adopts the following
regulation, under its authority as specified in § 142-2, as a preventative
measure for the purposes of: preserving and protecting the Town of
Williamstown's drinking water resources from discharges of pollutants to
the ground via floor drains; and minimizing the threat of economic losses to
the town due to such discharges.
§ 142-2. Statutory authority; scope.
§ 142-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
following meanings:
BOARD — The Williamstown Board of Health or its designated agent.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Williamstown Board of Health.
The Town of Williamstown Board of Health adopts the following
regulation pursuant to authorization granted by MGL c. 111, §§ 31 and
122.
A.
The chapter shall apply, as specified herein, to all applicable facilities,
existing and new, within Well Protection Zone II of the Town of
Williamstown.
B.
§ 141-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:441
COMMERCIAL and INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — A public or private
establishment where the principal use is the supply, sale and/or
manufacture of services, products or information, including, but not limited
to: manufacturing, processing or other industrial operations; service or
retail establishments; printing or publishing establishments; research and
development facilities; small or large quantity generators of hazardous
waste; laboratories; hospitals.
DEPARTMENT — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISCHARGE — The accidental or intentional disposal, deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration or placing of toxic or hazardous
material or waste upon or into any land or water so that such hazardous
waste or any constituent thereof may enter the land or waters of the
commonwealth. Discharge includes, without limitation, leakage of such
materials from failed or discarded containers or storage systems and
disposal of such materials into any on-site leaching structure or sewage
disposal system.
FLOOR DRAIN — An intended drainage point on a floor constructed to be
otherwise impervious which serves as the point of entry into any subsurface
drainage, treatment, disposal, containment or other plumbing system.
LEACHING STRUCTURE — Any subsurface structure through which a fluid
that is introduced will pass and enter the environment, including, but not
limited to, dry wells, leaching catch basins, cesspools, leach fields and oil/
water separators that are not watertight.
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A device designed and installed so as to
separate and retain petroleum-based oil or grease, flammable wastes, as
well as sand and particles from normal wastes, while permitting normal
sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the drainage system by gravity.
Other common names for such systems include MDC traps, gasoline and
sand traps, grit and oil separators, grease traps and interceptors.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual
or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human health if
such substance or mixture were discharged to land or water of the Town
of Williamstown. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation,
synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive
or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis, and all substances defined as "toxic
or hazardous" under MGL c. 21C and 21E or Massachusetts Hazardous
Waste regulations (310 CMR 30.000), and also include such products as
solvents, thinners and pesticides in quantities greater than normal
household use.
USE OF TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — The handling, generation,
treatment, storage or management of toxic or hazardous materials.
ZONE II — That area defined by the Roman Numeral "II" in the "Green River
Well and Stetson Road Wellfield Zone II Map," attached as Appendix A.60
§ 142-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 142-4
1:442
§ 142-4. Prohibitions.
With the exception of discharges that have received (or have applied for
and will receive) a Department issued permit prior to the effective date of
this chapter, no floor drains shall be allowed to discharge, with or without
pretreatment (such as an oil/water separator), to the ground, a leaching
structure or septic system in any industrial or commercial facility if such
floor drain is located in either:
§ 142-5. Requirements for existing facilities.
A. An industrial or commercial process area.
B. A petroleum, toxic or hazardous materials and/or waste storage area.
The owner of a facility in operation prior to the effective date of this
chapter with a prohibited (as defined under § 142-4) floor drain system
shall:
Disconnect and plug all applicable inlets to and outlets from (where
possible) applicable leaching structures, oil/water separators and/
or septic systems.
(1)
Remove all existing sludge in oil/water separators, septic systems
and, where accessible, leaching structures. Any sludge determined
to be a hazardous waste shall be disposed of in accordance with
state hazardous waste regulations (310 CMR 30.000). Remedial
activity involving any excavation and/or soil or groundwater
sampling must be performed in accordance with appropriate
Department policies.
(2)
Alter the floor drain system so that the floor drain shall be either:
Connected to a holding tank that meets all applicable
requirements of Department policies and regulations, with
hauling records submitted to the Williamstown Board of Health
at the time of hauling;
(a)
Connected to a municipal sanitary sewer line, if available, with
all applicable Department and local permits; or
(b)
(c) Permanently sealed.
(3)
A.
Compliance with all provisions of this chapter must be accomplished in
a manner consistent with Massachusetts Plumbing, Building and Fire
Code requirements.
B.
Upon complying with one of the options listed under § 142-5(A)(3), the
owner/operator of the facility shall notify the Department of the closure
of said system by filing the Department's UIC Notification Form (which
C.
60.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Inspection Services Office and may be examined
there during regular business hours.
§ 142-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-5
1:443
§ 142-6. Effective dates for all facilities.
The effective date of this chapter is the date posted on the front page of the
chapter, which shall be identical to the date of adoption of the chapter.61
§ 142-7. Violations and penalties.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent of
any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town of Williamstown.
Each day of violation, after written notice, is a separate violation.
§ 142-8. Appeals. [Added 2-7-201162]
may be obtained by calling 413-784-1100 or 617-292-5770) with the
Department and sending a copy to the Williamstown Board of Health,
in compliance with Department requirements.
Existing facilities.
Owners/operators of a facility affected by this chapter shall comply
with all of its provisions within 120 days of the effective date.
(1)
All applicable discharges to the leaching structures and septic
systems shall be discontinued immediately through temporary
isolation or sealing of the floor drain.
(2)
A.
New facilities.
As of the effective date of the chapter, all new construction and/
or applicable change of use within the Town of Williamstown shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(1)
Certification of conformance with the provisions of this chapter
by the Board of Health shall be required prior to issuance of
construction and occupancy permits.
(2)
B.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
A.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
At the hearing the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
C.
61.Editor's Note: See chapter history.
62.Editor's Note: This amendment also renumbered former § 142-8 as § 142-9.
§ 142-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 142-8
1:444
§ 142-9. Severability.
Each provision of this chapter shall be construed as separate to the end that
if any provision or sentence, clause or phrase thereof shall be held invalid
for any reason, the remainder of that section and all other sections shall
continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 143
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 143-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to adopt local requirements for the safe
and effective operation of all food establishments permitted to operate in
the Town of Williamstown.
§ 143-2. Statutory authority; incorporation of state standards.
§ 143-3. Applications for new or upgraded establishments.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
This regulation is adopted under the authority of MGL c. 111, § 31, and
any other power thereto enabling.
A.
By adoption, this regulation incorporates the provisions of 105 CMR
590.000, State Sanitary Code Chapter X, Minimum Sanitation
Standards for Food Establishments.
B.
All applicants for new or upgraded food establishments must complete
a food establishment plan review application.
A.
The new restaurant plan review guidelines will be used when designing
new or upgraded food establishments.
B.
All menu changes requiring additional use of equipment, or an increase
in the size and complexity of the operation, will be considered an
upgrade of the establishment.
C.
§ 142-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-4
1:445
§ 143-4. Designated person in charge required.
In addition to the requirements of 105 CMR 590.000, any temporary food
establishment serving potentially hazardous foods on more than one
occasion in any calendar year, must have a designated person in charge.
§ 143-5. Ventilation hoods.
§ 143-6. Grease traps.
Ventilation hoods must be designed, permitted and installed in
accordance with the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International (BOCA) Mechanical Code.
A.
Ventilation hoods must be completely cleaned by a professional service
as often as necessary, but not less than once every six months.
B.
Ventilation hood grease filters will be cleaned as often a necessary to
prevent grease and dust build-up, but not less than once per week.
C.
Grease traps for establishments served by an on-site sewage disposal
system shall be designed, permitted and installed in accordance with
310 CMR 15.000, the State Environmental Code, Title 5.
A.
Grease traps for on-site sewage disposal systems shall be inspected
monthly and must be cleaned by a licensed septage hauler whenever
the level of grease is 25% of the effective depth of the trap, but not less
than once every three months, whichever is sooner.
B.
Grease traps for establishments served by a community sewer system
shall be designed, permitted and installed according to 248 CMR 10.00,
Uniform State Plumbing Code.
C.
Grease traps for establishments served by community sewer shall be
inspected weekly, and cleaned and emptied whenever the level of
grease is 25% of the effective depth of the trap, but not less than once
per month.
D.
Chemical grease dissolvers will not be permitted for use in grease
traps.
E.
Should the community sewer system become affected by grease as a
result of inadequate maintenance of a grease trap, the Board of Health,
at its discretion, will require the responsible food establishment to
install an alternate method for grease interception.
Automatic grease recovery unit (AGRU). The AGRU shall meet the
following requirements:
The AGRU shall be sized to properly pretreat the measured or
calculated flows for all connected fixtures or drains.
(a)
(1)
F.
§ 143-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 143-6
1:446
§ 143-7. through § 143-9. (Reserved)
§ 143-10. Variances.
The AGRU shall be constructed of corrosion-resistant material,
such as stainless steel or plastic.
(b)
Solids shall be intercepted and separated from the effluent
flow using an internal or external strainer mechanism. This
mechanism shall be an integral part of the unit.
(c)
The unit shall operate using a skimming device, automatic
draw-off, or other mechanical means to automatically remove
separated fats and oils. This automatic skimming device shall
be either hard wired or cord and plug connected electrically
and controlled using a timer or level control. The operation of
the automatic skimming device shall be field adjustable. The
AGRU shall operate not less than once per day.
(d)
The AGRU shall be fitted with an internal or external flow
control device to prevent the exceeding of the manufacturer's
recommended design flow.
(e)
The AGRU shall be located so as to permit easy access for
maintenance.
(f)
All AGRUs shall be designed and installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's specifications.
(g)
An exterior grease trap designed and installed according to 310
CMR 15.000, but connected to the community sewer. Maintenance
and cleaning schedules will be as specified in § 143-6B.
(2)
It is the system owner's responsibility to ensure that grease traps are
pumped regularly and maintained.
G.
The owner of the establishment will keep records of the cleaning of
all grease traps and will provide them, upon request, to the Board of
Health or its designated representative.
H.
An establishment subject to these regulations may make written
application to the Board of Health for a variance from these regulations.
A.
Every variance is subject to a public hearing. Notice of a hearing upon
an original application for a variance shall be posted as part of the
public notice of the meeting at which the Board of Health will consider
the application. The notice shall be posted not less than one week
before the meeting.
B.
Vote; conditions.
By vote of a majority of its full authorized membership, the Board
of Health may vary the application of any provision of these
(1)
C.
§ 143-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-10
1:447
§ 143-11. Enforcement.
§ 143-12. Appeals. [Added 2-7-201163]
regulations with respect to any particular case in which, in the
Board of Health's opinion, both of the following requirements are
fulfilled:
The enforcement of the regulations would do manifest
injustice; and
(a)
The applicant has proved that the same degree of protection of
the public health, safety and welfare can be achieved without
strict application of the particular provision. Any alternative
means of protection shall be detailed and documented by the
applicant to the satisfaction of the Board of Health.
(b)
(2) A variance may be granted subject to appropriate conditions.
D. Any variance granted by the Board of Health shall be in writing.
An establishment to whom a variance has been granted under this
section shall keep a copy available for public inspection.
E.
The Board shall have the authority to enforce this regulation, and
licenses and permits issued thereunder by:
(1) Inspection and investigation;
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders; and/or
(3) Civil and criminal court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of this regulation is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town
of Williamstown. Each day of violation, after written notice, is a
separate violation.
B.
The Board of Health may suspend, revoke or deny any license or permit
for violations of this chapter.
C.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
A.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
63.Editor's Note: This amendment also renumbered former §§ 143-12 and 143-13 as §§ 143-13
and 143-14, respectively.
§ 143-10 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 143-12
1:448
§ 143-13. Severability.
If any portion, sentence, clause or phrase of this regulation shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of this regulation shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 143-14. Effective date.
The effective date of this regulation is June 1, 2008.
Chapter 147
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 70.
Rental property — See Ch. 154.
Subdivision rules and regulations — See Ch.
170.
§ 147-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules for the licensing,
construction and operation of manufactured housing communities in order
to protect the health and safety of the occupants of those communities and
of the public in the Town of Williamstown.
§ 147-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority of MGL c. 140, § 32B, and c.
111, § 31, and any other power thereto enabling.
§ 147-3. Definitions:
In this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated.
APPENDAGE — Includes any awning, deck or other addition attached to
a manufactured home and any shed, structure or other combination of
At the hearing the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
C.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
§ 143-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-3
1:449
materials upon a manufactured home site necessitating piling, footings or a
foundation for attachment to the land.
BOARD — The Williamstown Board of Health or its designated
representative.
DWELLING UNIT — The room or group of rooms in a manufactured home
used or intended for use by a single family or household.
LICENSEE — An operator who holds a current manufactured housing
community license from the Williamstown Board of Health under MGL c.
140, § 32B.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, built in conformance with the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, which is
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or which,
when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or
without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities
and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein.
MANUFACTURED HOME SITE (LOT) — A parcel of land within a
manufactured housing community on which a manufactured home, its
appendages and appurtenances are or may be located and over which a
tenant has possessory or other rights or interests.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY — Any lot or tract of land upon
which three or more manufactured homes occupied for dwelling purposes
are located, including any buildings, structures, fixtures and equipment
used in connection with manufactured homes.
OPERATOR — A person who directly or indirectly owns, conducts, controls,
manages or operates any manufactured housing community and his, her or
its agents or employees.
PERSON — Every individual, partnership, corporation, including a
municipal corporation, firm, trust, association or the agent or agents of any
of them, including lessee, and licensee carrying on an activity governed by
this chapter.
§ 147-4. License.
License required. No person may operate or manage, directly or
indirectly, a manufactured housing community unless that person holds
a valid license issued by the Williamstown Board of Health acting under
the authority of this chapter and of the applicable requirements of MGL
c. 140, §§ 32A through 32S.
A.
Applicant for license. The applicant for an original or a renewal license
for a manufactured housing community shall be the owner of the land
on which the community is or is proposed to be located.
B.
C. Application for original license.
§ 147-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 147-4
1:450
Contents. Every application for an original license shall be
submitted on a form promulgated by the Williamstown Board of
Health and shall include detailed plans with at least the following
information:
The name of the manufactured housing community, its
boundaries, North point, date and scale.
(a)
(b) The name and address of the record owner and the engineer.
The information called for by the Code of Williamstown,
Chapter 170, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, § 170-3.5
(Definitive plan).
(c)
A typical street profile and cross-section as specified in the
Code of Williamstown Chapter 113 (as applicable).
(d)
A statement as to whether any variance or waiver of the
provisions of those regulations is requested.
(e)
(f) A statement as to whether a conditional license is requested.
Designation of a person or persons who will be available at
the manufactured housing community during normal business
hours and who will be authorized to accept on behalf of the
licensee any notice, order, directive, letter or other documents
issued by the Board.
(g)
A copy of the rules proposed for the community and a
certificate that they have been submitted to the appropriate
commonwealth authorities on a stated date pursuant to MGL
c. 140 § 32L(5) and either approved or not disapproved.
(h)
An estimate of the proposed costs of establishing the
community.
(i)
(1)
Processing.
The Board shall refer the application and detailed plans to
the Health Inspector and the Zoning Administrator for initial
review and distribution to the DPW, Conservation Commission,
Police Department and Fire Department for their review and
comments, which shall be submitted to the Health Inspector
and the Zoning Administrator. These officials shall determine
whether the materials are complete and conduct a staff plan
review.
(a)
At the conclusion of the review, the Health Inspector and the
Zoning Administrator shall forward their written
recommendations to the Williamstown Board of Health and to
the Planning Board.
(b)
(2)
§ 147-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-4
1:451
The Williamstown Board of Health shall withhold further action
on the application until the Planning Board has granted a
special permit for it pursuant to § 707.4C(2) of the
Williamstown Zoning Bylaw.
(c)
Following the granting of a special permit, the Board shall
give not less than 10 days' notice of a public hearing on the
application by notice published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town of Williamstown.
(d)
Following the public hearing, the Williamstown Board of
Health may:
[1] Approve the application;
Approve the application conditionally, with the approval
of the State Department of Environmental Protection,
pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 32H;
[2]
[3] Grant waivers; or
Disapprove the application. Each disapproval shall be
accompanied by a written explanation specifying the
reasons for the disapproval.
[4]
(e)
Issuance of license. If the Williamstown Board of Health approves an
application conditionally or otherwise, it shall issue an appropriate
license valid until December 31 of the year in which the license is
issued.
D.
Renewal license.
Application date. An application for a renewal license shall be filed
annually, not later than November 1 of the year prior to the year
for which the application is made.
(1)
Contents of application. Every application for a renewal license
shall include the following information:
The number of occupants in each manufactured home and
the location or address of the manufactured home in the
community as of the date of the application.
(a)
The current sources of water supply, the method of sewage
disposal and the method of refuse disposal.
(b)
A copy of the existing and any proposed new rules for the
community, with the certificate required by § 147-4C(1)(h).
(c)
Any other information that may be required in the interest of
the health and safety of the occupants.
(d)
(2)
(3) Renewal application requesting modification, expansion, etc.
E.
§ 147-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 147-4
1:452
§ 147-5. Location, space and site requirements.
If an application for a renewal license includes a request for
modification, expansion or addition of manufactured home
spaces to an existing manufactured housing community, it shall
include the information required by Subsection E(2) of this
section, and also the applicable information and detailed plans
required by § 147-4C(1).
(a)
With respect to any modification, expansion or addition, the
application shall be processed pursuant to § 147-4C(2) or other
appropriate zoning permitting process.
(b)
Grant of renewal license. The Williamstown Board of Health may
grant a renewal license for one calendar year without a public
hearing, unless the application is filed under Subsection E(3)
above. In that event, with respect to any requested modification,
expansion or addition, the provisions of § 147-4C(2) and D apply.
The Williamstown Board of Health also may grant a conditional
renewal license, subject to the performance of specified conditions.
(4)
General location. Every manufactured housing community shall be
located in an area that is suitable for the maintenance of proper
sanitary facilities. This area shall be graded to ensure proper drainage
of surface water and to prevent formation of adjacent pools of stagnant
water or swampy areas. No manufactured housing community shall be
located less than 200 feet from a public way or highway.
A.
Manufactured home site and setback.
A minimum of 6,600 square feet of land shall be provided for each
manufactured home site. The lot shall not be less than 60 feet in
width and 110 feet in depth. Each lot corner shall be marked with
permanent markers. For double-wide homes, sectional homes or
homes greater than 19 feet in width, the minimum lot size shall be
7,700 square feet (not less than 70 feet in width and 110 feet in
length).
(1)
A manufactured home and its appendages placed thereon shall
be at least 20 feet from the front line of the area provided for
the manufactured home, which front line shall border on a
manufactured housing community street. Each manufactured home
and its appendages shall be at least 12 feet from its lot lines to the
sides and 10 feet from its lot lines to the rear of the lot designated
for each manufactured home or the manufactured housing
community's property line.
(2)
B.
Open space facilities. Open space facilities, including recreation and
parking facilities, are required in every manufactured housing
community to the extent that they are considered necessary by the
C.
§ 147-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-5
1:453
§ 147-6. Fire protection; gas appliances and gas piping; wiring and
electrical facilities; plumbing.
Williamstown Board of Health to meet the needs of the occupants the
community is designed to serve.
Manufactured housing community streets.
Every manufactured housing community street shall be 50 feet
wide, with the traveled way being hard-surfaced to a minimum of
24 feet in width. If off-street parking facilities are provided, the
overall street or right-of-way width may be reduced to 40 feet.
There shall be no dead-end streets without adequate provisions
for a turnaround for motor vehicles. Each turnaround shall be
adequately paved and shall have a paved diameter of at least 80
feet.
(1)
All street construction and layouts shall be subject to the approval
of the Williamstown Board of Health, which approval shall be based
upon the requirements of the Town of Williamstown Subdivision
Rules and Regulations (Chapter 170, Code of Williamstown).
(2)
D.
Manufactured housing community sanitary sewer, storm drains and
water systems. The design and construction of manufactured housing
community sanitary sewers, storm drains and water systems shall be
subject to the approval of the Williamstown Board of Health. Approval
shall be based upon the requirements of the Town of Williamstown
Subdivision Rules and Regulations and Title 5 of the State
Environmental Code (310 CMR 15.000) and DEP Storm Water
Management Policy.
E.
Manufactured housing community streetlighting. Streetlighting shall
be provided for each manufactured housing community street and shall
be such as to give the equivalent of not less than 0.75 footcandles of
light installed at intervals of 150 feet, measured at the base of the
luminaires.
F.
Application of this section. The requirements of Subsections A, B, C, D,
E and F apply to any construction or expansion of any manufactured
housing community that occurred on or after the effective date of this
chapter.
G.
Fire protection. Hydrants conforming to the specifications and
requirements of the Williamstown Planning Board Subdivision Rules
and Regulations shall be located within a radius of 250 feet of every
manufactured home occupying a lot in every manufactured housing
community established on or after the effective date of this chapter or
the expansion of an existing community on or after that date, except
that where the water supply system available to the community does
not provide at least a six-inch water main, a two-inch frost-protected
A.
§ 147-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 147-6
1:454
§ 147-7. Water supply.
§ 147-8. Refuse disposal.
water riser shall be installed within 150 feet of each manufactured
home or building.
Gas appliances and gas piping. The regulations and standards of the
Massachusetts Fuel Gas Code (248 CMR 6.00) shall apply for every
manufactured housing community.
B.
Wiring and electrical facilities. The requirements and regulations in
the Massachusetts Electrical Code (527 CMR 12.00) apply to a
manufactured housing community on or after the effective date of this
chapter. All electric service shall be in an underground conduit.
C.
Plumbing. All plumbing installed in a manufactured housing community
on or after the effective date of this chapter shall conform to the
Massachusetts Plumbing Code (248 CMR) requirements.
D.
General. The operator shall provide a supply of potable water sufficient
in quantity and pressure to meet the ordinary needs of residents, which
may be connected with a public water system, or with any other source
that the Board has determined does not endanger the health of any
potential user and meets the requirements of 310 CMR 22.00, Drinking
water regulations.
A.
Distribution. The water distribution system shall be adequate to provide
a minimum of 20 pounds per square inch of pressure at each
manufactured home connection.
B.
General requirements. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse
and recyclable materials in each manufactured housing community
shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage,
insect breeding areas, accident, fire hazards or air pollution.
A.
Storage of refuse. All refuse and recyclable materials shall be stored
in insect-proof, watertight and rodent-proof containers, one of which
shall be located not more than 500 feet from each manufactured home
site. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity
to properly store all refuse and recyclable materials. Racks or holders
shall be provided for all containers, which shall be designed to prevent
containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container
deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them.
B.
Collection. All refuse and recyclable materials shall be collected at least
once a week by the manufactured housing community operator or by a
private collector licensed to remove refuse and recyclable materials by
the Williamstown Board of Health under the authority of MGL c. 111,
§ 31A of the Massachusetts General Laws.
C.
§ 147-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-8
1:455
§ 147-9. Manufactured home space.
§ 147-10. Waivers.
The Board of Health may, in its discretion, waive compliance with a
particular requirement of this chapter when, in its opinion:
§ 147-11. Inspection, notices, hearings.
Disposal of refuse. It is the responsibility of the community
management to provide for collection and transportation of all refuse
in covered containers and covered vehicles by a carrier licensed by the
Board.
D.
Minimum square footage, general. Every manufactured home sited in a
manufactured housing community on or after the effective date of this
chapter shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first
occupant and at least 100 square feet of floor space for each additional
occupant, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable
room area.
A.
In each such home, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space; every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall
contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant.
B.
A. The enforcement of the regulation would do manifest injustice; and
The applicant has proved that the same degree of protection of the
public health, safety and welfare can be achieved without strict
application of the particular provision. Any alternative means of
protection shall be detailed and documented by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the Board of Health.
B.
Inspection. The Board shall from time to time inspect each
manufactured housing community in the Town of Williamstown in order
that it may perform its duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the
community occupants and of the general public.
A.
Entry on property.
The Board may enter at reasonable times upon any private or
public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating
conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter. It is the duty
of the owner or licensee of a manufactured housing community and
of the occupant of each home contained therein or the person in
charge thereof to give the Board free access to such premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
(1)
If any owner, occupant or other person refuses, impedes, inhibits,
interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to any
part of the manufactured housing community where inspection
(2)
B.
§ 147-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 147-11
1:456
§ 147-12. Maintenance of facilities; curtailment of services.
authorized under this chapter is sought, the Board may seek, in a
court of competent jurisdiction, a search warrant so as to apprise
the owner, occupant or other person concerning the nature of the
inspection and justification for it and may seek the assistance of
police authorities in presenting said warrant.
Notice; hearing; revocation.
Whenever the Williamstown Board of Health finds any condition
or practice in a manufactured housing community that violates
any of this chapter or applicable state law, it shall issue a written
notice to the person licensed to operate the community, ordering
the condition or practice to be corrected within a reasonable time.
(1)
The notice shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, on the licensee or on the person
authorized to accept service in the original or any renewal
application for the manufactured housing community. If service is
made on the person authorized, and that person is not the licensee,
a copy shall be sent to the licensee by first-class mail, addressed to
the licensee's address as given in the most recent application for
the manufactured housing community license.64
(2)
C.
Emergency action.
Whenever the Williamstown Board of Health, in an original notice
as provided in § 147-11C(1) and 2) above, states that an emergency
exists and that immediate action is required to protect the public
health, the person to whom the notice is directed shall immediately
take action to correct the conditions that cause the emergency.
That person may petition for a hearing as provided in § 147-11C(3)
above, but the petition is not cause for delay in correcting the
emergency.
(1)
If a person fails to correct an emergency situation in the time
specified by the Board, the Board of Health may immediately
suspend the license until such time as the emergency situation has
been corrected or the Board may undertake measures to correct
the emergency situation. All expenses incurred thereby shall
constitute a debt due to the Town of Williamstown upon completion
of the correction and the rendering of the account therefor to the
owner or his or her authorized agent and shall be recoverable from
the owner or authorized agent.
(2)
D.
All facilities and utilities for manufactured housing communities shall
be maintained in good repair, free from defects and in compliance with
A.
64.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3) through (6), which immediately followed and
provided for a hearing and suspension or revocation of license, was repealed 2-7-2011. For
current provisions, see § 147-13.
§ 147-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-12
1:457
§ 147-13. Appeals. [Amended 2-7-201165]
all applicable health and safety laws and previous Board of Health
regulations and orders. All violations shall be corrected in a timely
manner and in a workpersonlike fashion. Licenses and permits shall
be obtained when they are required to perform the work necessary to
correct any violations (such as, but not limited to, building, plumbing
and wiring). The appropriate code enforcement officials must certify
that the work has been completed in accordance with applicable laws
and regulations. Properly licensed personnel (such as, but not limited
to, plumbers, electricians and construction supervisors) will be used to
perform maintenance where required by law.
Curtailment generally prohibited. No owner or operator of a
manufactured housing community shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required to be made available under this
chapter or otherwise by law to be removed from or shut off from a
manufactured home or manufactured housing community except for
such temporary period as may be necessary during actual repairs or
alterations or during temporary emergencies when curtailment is
approved by the Williamstown Board of Health.
B.
Notice to Board and to home owners. Whenever it is necessary to
shut off or curtail the use of a utility to make general repairs or
alterations, each manufactured home owner and, in addition, the Board
shall be notified in writing by the manufactured housing community's
management of the curtailment at least 12 hours in advance of its
approximate duration or by an alternative means of notification
approved by the Williamstown Board of Health. This requirement does
not apply to any emergency situation involving a utility, such as a
broken waterline, where an immediate shut-off is necessary to prevent
serious property damage. The manufactured housing community's
management shall immediately notify all affected manufactured home
owners of the emergency shut-off or curtailment and its approximate
duration, provided that the emergency repairs will require more than
one hour.
C.
Notice to Williamstown Fire Department. Whenever it is necessary to
shut off the water supply in a manufactured housing community for
normal repairs or alteration, the management of the manufactured
housing community shall notify the Williamstown Fire Department at
least 12 hours in advance with a projection of its duration. For an
emergency shut-off and repairs, the community management shall
notify the Williamstown Fire Department immediately following its
occurrence.
D.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
A.
65.Editor's Note: This amendment also renumbered former §§ 147-13 through 147-16 as
§§ 147-14 through 147-17, respectively.
§ 147-12 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 147-13
1:458
§ 147-14. Violations and penalties.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent of
any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions of
this chapter is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town of Williamstown.
Each day of violation, after written notice, is a separate violation.
§ 147-15. Severability.
If a court determines that any provision of this chapter is invalid or
unenforceable, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby, but shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 147-16. Repealer.
As of the effective date of this chapter, all prior Williamstown Board of
Health Regulations (including those adopted by the Board of Selectmen
acting as a Board of Health) pertaining to trailer parks, mobile home parks
and manufactured housing communities are repealed.
§ 147-17. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter is January 4, 1999.
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
At the hearing the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
C.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
§ 147-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-17
1:459
Chapter 148
(RESERVED)
Chapter 150
NUISANCES AND NOISOME TRADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Poultry — See Ch. 10, Art. I.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 29.
Noise — See Ch. 40.
Solid waste — See Ch. 56.
Fuel storage tanks — See Ch. 92.
Food establishments — See Ch. 143.
Refuse and recycling — See Ch. 153.
Septic systems — See Ch. 157.
§ 150-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted under MGL c. 111, § 31, which gives the
Williamstown Board of Health (hereinafter designated as "the Board of
Health") authority to make reasonable health regulations. This chapter is
also adopted under MGL c. 111, § 122, which directs the Board of Health
to assess all nuisances, sources of filth, and potentials for sickness within
its Town, which may, in its opinion, be injurious to the public health and to
destroy, remove, or prevent the same. This chapter is also adopted under
MGL c. 111, § 143, which addresses trade or employment, assignment of
places, and prohibition attendant with noisome and injurious odors.
§ 150-2. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to restrict and/or prohibit any trade or
employment, nuisances, sources of filth, injurious odors and potentials for
sickness, which may endanger the public health, safety, or welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town of Williamstown.
§ 150-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Williamstown Board of Health or its designated agent(s).
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Williamstown Board of Health unless otherwise
specified.
DEP — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any substance or mixture of physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual or
§ 147-17 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 150-3
1:460
potential hazard to water supplies or to human health if such substance or
mixture were discharged to land, water, or air of the Town of Williamstown.
NOISOME TRADE — A trade or employment which may be harmful to the
inhabitants of the Town of Williamstown, dangerous to the public health, or
may be attended by injurious odors. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the following activities are hereby declared to be examples of
noisome trades:
NUISANCE — An act or failure to perform a legal duty which causes or
permits a condition to exist which injures or endangers the public health,
safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Williamstown. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following activities are hereby
declared to be examples of nuisances:
§ 150-4. Offensive or noisome trades.
The exterior storage of hazardous materials in excess of 55 gallons in
connection with any commercial or industrial use; and
A.
B. The operation of piggeries.
Parcels of land maintained in an unsanitary manner so as to cause
objectionable odors or sickness; and
A.
Any condition which would create harborage for vermin, rodents, or
other pests.
B.
Site assignments. After the adoptive date of this chapter, all noisome
trades as identified by the Board of Health are prohibited within the
Town of Williamstown except in places so assigned by the Board of
Health. All such assignments shall be entered into the records of the
Town of Williamstown.
A.
Appeal of site assignment. Any persons, including persons in control of
public land, aggrieved by the action of the Board of Health in assigning
certain places for the exercise of any noisome trade may, within 60
days, appeal from said assignment to the Department of Environmental
Protection.
B.
Orders of prohibition. The Board may issue orders of prohibition to
persons in violation of this chapter or a particular site assignment. An
officer qualified to serve civil process upon the person or occupant
having charge of the premises where such trade or employment is
exercised shall serve said order of prohibition.
C.
Appeal of order of prohibition. Whoever is aggrieved by an order of
prohibition may, within three days after service of said order upon him,
give written notice of appeal to the Board of Health of the Town of
Williamstown and the Department of Environmental Protection and file
a petition in Superior Court in Berkshire County.
D.
§ 150-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:461
§ 150-5. Nuisances.
§ 150-6. Enforcement.
Said trade or employment shall not be exercised contrary to the order
while such proceedings are pending unless specifically authorized by
the Board of Health.
E.
Examination into nuisances. The Board shall assess all nuisances,
sources of filth or potentials for sickness, which may, in its opinion, be
injurious to the public health.
A.
Agricultural exemption. Any odor from normal maintenance of livestock
or the spreading of manure upon agricultural, horticultural, or farming
lands, or noise from livestock or farm equipment used in normal,
generally acceptable farming procedures or from plowing or cultivation
operations upon agricultural, horticultural, or farming lands shall not
be deemed to constitute a nuisance.
B.
Supply of water. Upon a determination by the Board that the available
supply of water for drinking, culinary and/or other domestic purposes
in any place of habitation, or in any place where food or drink is
prepared, handled or served to the public, is so unsafe or inadequate as
to constitute a nuisance, the Board of Health may issue a written order
to the owner of such place requiring that said owner discontinue the
use of the water supply or that said owner supply an alternate water
supply safe and adequate for such purposes.
C.
Abatement of nuisance.
The Board shall order the owner or occupant of any private
premises, at his own expense, to remove any nuisance, sources of
filth or potentials for sickness found thereon within 24 hours or
such other time it considers reasonable.
(1)
If the owner or occupant fails to comply with such order, the
Board may cause the nuisances, sources of filth and potentials for
sickness to be removed, and all expenses incurred thereby shall
constitute a debt due the Town of Williamstown.
(2)
D.
The Board shall have the authority to enforce this chapter by:
(1) Inspection and investigation;
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders;
(3) Civil and criminal court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of this chapter is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town
B.
§ 150-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 150-6
1:462
§ 150-7. Waivers.
The Board of Health may, in its discretion, waive compliance with a
particular requirement of this chapter when, in its opinion:
§ 150-8. Appeals. [Amended 2-7-2011]
§ 150-9. Severability.
If any portion, or sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of this chapter shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 150-10. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter is July 1, 2002.
of Williamstown. Each day of violation, after written notice, is a
separate violation.
A. The enforcement of the regulation would do manifest injustice; and
The applicant has proved that the same degree of protection of the
public health, safety and welfare can be achieved without strict
application of the particular provision. Any alternative means of
protection shall be detailed and documented by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the Board of Health.
B.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
A.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
At the hearing the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
C.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
§ 150-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-10
1:463
Chapter 153
REFUSE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 29. Solid waste — See Ch. 56.
§ 153-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules for the permitting of refuse
haulers and to govern the storage and disposal of waste and recyclable
materials in the Town of Williamstown.
§ 153-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority of MGL c. 111,§§ 31, 31A and
31B, and any other power thereto enabling.
§ 153-3. Scope.
The Town of Williamstown requires all residents and businesses to
implement a program of recycling in conjunction with ordinary waste
disposal (Chapter 56 of the Code of the Town of Williamstown). In addition,
the Board of Health requires that all persons obtaining a permit to haul
refuse must institute a program of collection of refuse and recyclables.
§ 153-4. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Williamstown Board of Health or its designated
representative.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Williamstown Board of Health.
COMMERCIAL PERMIT — Permit to haul refuse and recyclables issued
by the Board of Health to those businesses engaged in collecting and
transporting refuse and recyclables for residential, commercial, or
industrial facilities.
PERSON — Every individual, partnership, corporation, including municipal
corporation, firm, trust, association or agent(s) of any of them, including
lessee, and licensee conducting an activity governed by this chapter.
RECYCLABLES — Material that has the potential to be recycled, is
presorted and is not contaminated by significant amounts of toxic
substances. Recyclables include those items listed as acceptable by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, the Town of
Williamstown and/or the Northern Berkshire Solid Waste Management
District.[Amended 6-1-2009]
§ 150-10 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 153-4
1:464
REFUSE — Solid waste.
RESIDENTIAL PERMIT — Transfer station permit issued by the Town of
Williamstown to residents to allow disposal, at the Town of Williamstown
Transfer Station, of refuse and recyclables generated at their residences.
§ 153-5. Permit required; recycling plan.
§ 153-6. Collection.
All persons collecting, removing and/or transporting solid waste and/or
recyclables on a commercial basis must obtain an annual permit from
the Williamstown Board of Health.
A.
All commercial permit applicants must submit, along with the permit
application, a recycling plan detailing the method of collection and
disposal and/or distribution of solid waste and recyclables.
B.
All residents of the Town of Williamstown who transport their own
refuse and/or recyclables to the Town Transfer Station must first obtain
a permit from the Treasurer/Collector's office.
C.
All vehicles used for the collection and/or transport of refuse and/
or recyclables shall be constructed and loaded in such a manner as
to prevent their contents from spilling, dropping, shifting, leaking or
otherwise escaping therefrom. Vehicles loaded with any material which
may be blown about by the wind shall be suitably covered.
A.
All persons must recycle all materials determined to be recyclable by
the Board of Health.
B.
A hauler holding a commercial refuse hauler's permit must provide
recycling to all residential and commercial customers.
C.
All residents and businesses shall have a sufficient number of durable,
watertight containers to protect all refuse and recyclables from
weather and animals. Containers shall not be put out until the day of
collection.
D.
All solid waste and recyclable materials must be delivered to an
appropriate disposal facility (solid waste) or recycling facility
(recyclable materials).
E.
Collection of refuse and recyclables deposited in commercial dumpsters
is prohibited prior to 7:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, or 8:00 a.m.,
Saturday and Sunday. [Added 6-19-2000]
F.
The owner of any parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, shall be
responsible for maintaining such parcel of land in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from garbage, rubbish or other refuse. Tenants shall be
responsible for the portions of the property exclusively under their use.
[Added 6-25-2001]
G.
§ 153-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-7
1:465
§ 153-7. Yard waste.
§ 153-8. Reports. [Amended 2-7-2011]
Commercial permit holders must provide an annual collection/disposal
report to the Williamstown Board of Health, on the form approved by the
Board, to be received not later than January 15 of the year following the
reporting period.
§ 153-9. Enforcement.
§ 153-10. Waivers.
The Board of Health may, in its discretion, waive compliance with a
particular requirement of these regulations when, in its opinion:
Yard waste shall not be mixed with any household waste or trash, nor
any hazardous or toxic material.
A.
B. Yard waste shall not be set out with regular trash for collection.
Yard waste may be composted on the property on which it was
generated, or it may be transported to the Town of Williamstown
Transfer Station composting area by those holding a residential permit,
at a fee determined by the Board of Selectmen.
C.
Leaves and yard waste brought to the transfer station must be emptied
from the bags or containers used to transport the yard waste.
D.
The Board shall have the authority to enforce these regulations and
permits issued thereunder by:
(1) Inspection and investigation;
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders; and/or
(3) Civil and criminal court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of these regulations is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article 11, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the
Town of Williamstown. Each day of violation, after written notice, is a
separate violation.
B.
The Board of Health may, after written notice, suspend or revoke the
commercial refuse hauler's permit for violations of this chapter.
C.
A. The enforcement of the regulation would do manifest injustice; and
The applicant has proved that the same degree of protection of the
public health, safety and welfare can be achieved without strict
application of the particular provision. Any alternative means of
B.
§ 153-7 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 153-10
1:466
§ 153-11. Appeals. [Amended 2-7-2011]
§ 153-12. Severability.
If any portion or sentence, clause or phrase of this regulation shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of this regulation shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 153-13. Effective date.
The effective date for this chapter is January 1, 2000.
Chapter 154
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 154-1. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health, safety and wellbeing
of the occupants of rental housing.
§ 154-2. Authority.
These regulations are enacted by the Town of Williamstown Board of Health
under the authority of MGL c. 111, §§ 31 and 127A and any other power
thereto enabling.
protection shall be detailed and documented by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the Board of Health.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
A.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
At the hearing the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
C.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
§ 153-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-3
1:467
§ 154-3. Scope.
These regulations apply to all owners, managers or persons in charge of
rental dwelling units or rooming units in Williamstown whether or not a
written rental or lease agreement is signed.
§ 154-4. Definitions.
In these regulations, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Williamstown Board of Health or its designated agent.
DWELLING UNIT — A unit defined in 105 CMR 410.025, as it now exists or
may hereafter be amended, that is rented or intended for rental.
CHAPTER II — Chapter II of the State Sanitary Code, 105 CMR 410.00.
ROOMING UNIT — A unit defined in 105 CMR 410.040, as it now exists or
may hereafter be amended, that is rented or intended for rental.
§ 154-5. Certification of dwelling and rooming units.
No dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be occupied without a valid
certificate of compliance, except as provided by § 154-7 or 154-8B herein.
Dwelling units:
Whenever a dwelling unit is vacated by the occupant or occupants
thereof, the Board shall certify, prior to reoccupation, that the unit
meets the applicable standards set forth in Chapter II.
(1)
Application for certificate of compliance.
The owner, manager or person in charge of a dwelling unit
shall apply to the Board for the certificate of compliance as
soon as the unit is vacated. Notice must be given so as to
provide adequate time for the unit's inspection and repair,
if required, and to reasonably assure compliance with the
standards of Chapter II prior to its reoccupancy.
(a)
The owner, manager or person in charge of a new unit or
a previously uncertified unit shall apply for certification not
more than 30 days after the completion of the unit or from the
effective date of these regulations.
(b)
(2)
The property owner will ensure, by providing proof upon request,
that the heating system for the dwelling unit has undergone service
and/or maintenance by a licensed heating system professional
within the previous 12 months. [Added 1-19-1999; amended
7-8-2002]
(3)
A.
Rooming units:
The Board shall inspect and certify annually each rooming unit to
ensure that it meets the applicable standards of Chapter II.
(1)
B.
§ 154-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 154-5
1:468
§ 154-6. Inspection of dwelling and rooming units.
The Board shall conduct all inspections of dwelling and rooming units within
seven working days after the receipt of the application and required fee for
the certificate of compliance.
§ 154-7. Temporary certificate of compliance.
If after inspection of the dwelling unit or rooming units, the Board
determines that a period of time should be granted in which to make
repairs necessary for compliance with the regulations to qualify the unit for
certification and delay will not produce a condition which may endanger, as
defined in 105 CMR 410.023, the Board may issue a temporary certificate
of compliance whose term shall not exceed 45 days.
§ 154-8. Exclusion of certain dwelling and rooming units.
Application for certificate of compliance.
The owner, manager or person in charge of a rooming unit
shall apply to the Board for the certificate of compliance at
least 30 days in advance of the expiration date of the previous
certificate of compliance.
(a)
The owner, manager or person in charge of a new unit or
a previously uncertified unit shall apply for certification not
more than 30 days after completion of the unit or from the
effective date of these regulations.
(b)
(2)
If the rooming unit meets the applicable standards, the Board shall
issue a certificate of compliance, certifying that it meets those
standards.
(3)
The property owner will ensure, by providing proof upon request,
that the heating system for the dwelling unit has undergone service
and/or maintenance by a licensed heating system professional
within the previous 12 months. [Added 1-19-1999; amended
7-8-2002]
(4)
Failure of the Board to perform inspections. If the Board fails to
perform the inspection within the required time period, a dwelling unit
or rooming unit may be reoccupied without the certification required
by this regulation.
A.
Subsequent inspection not precluded. Failure by the Board to inspect in
a timely manner does not preclude the inspection of the dwelling unit
or rooming unit at a later date for compliance and enforcement of these
regulations and the standards in Chapter II.
B.
The property owner will abate all violations and nonconformances of
105 CMR 410.000, listed in correction orders, by the scheduled date of
reinspection. [Added 7-8-2002; amended 1-5-2004]
C.
§ 154-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-8
1:469
§ 154-9. Variances.
Recently certified units. No dwelling unit need be certified for
occupancy more than once in any consecutive twelve-month period.
A.
Exclusion of certain rooming units. The certification required herein
does not apply to hotels, bed and breakfasts or motels. Dormitory rooms
operated exclusively by an educational institution are also excluded,
except that such institutional housing in a facility containing not more
than 12 beds where rooms are let and occupants have free access
to complete kitchen facilities shall be inspected annually using the
same criteria that apply to dwelling units. Nothing in this exclusion
shall exempt these rooming units from complying with all applicable
regulations and standards set forth in Chapter II.
B.
Applicant. The owner, manager or person in charge of a dwelling or
rooming unit may make written application to the Board of Health for a
variance from these regulations. Each request for a variance shall state
the specific variance sought and the reasons therefor.
A.
Public hearing. Every variance is subject to a public hearing. Notice of
a hearing upon an original application for a variance shall be posted as
part of the public notice of the Board of Health meeting at which the
Board of Health will consider the application. The notice shall be posted
not less than one week before the meeting. Notice also shall be given
to all affected occupants.
B.
Procedure.
By vote of a majority of its full authorized membership, the Board
of Health may vary the application of any provision of these
regulations with respect to any particular case in which, in the
Board of Health's opinion, all of the following requirements are
fulfilled:
(a) The enforcement of the regulation would do manifest injustice.
The applicant has proved that the same degree of protection of
the public health, safety and welfare can be achieved without
strict application of the particular provision. Where required,
an alternative means of protection shall be detailed and
documented by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Board of
Health.
(b)
The variance would not conflict with the spirit of the minimum
standards prescribed by Chapter II.
(c)
(1)
A variance may be granted subject to appropriate conditions,
including, but not limited to duration.
(2)
C.
Variance in writing. Any variance granted by the Board of Health shall
be in writing. Any denial of a variance shall also be in writing and
D.
§ 154-8 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 154-9
1:470
§ 154-10. Fees.
The Board of Health shall establish a schedule of fees for inspections and
variances.
§ 154-11. Enforcement.
Compliance with the provisions of these regulations shall be enforced by the
Board, which may institute appropriate legal proceedings to enforce these
regulations, restrain by injunction, or both.
§ 154-12. Fines.
Whoever himself or by his servant or agent, or as the servant or agent of
any other person, firm or cooperation, violates any of the provisions of these
regulations is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town of Williamstown.
Each day of violation, after written notice, is considered a separate offense.
§ 154-13. Amendments.
These regulations or any portion of them may be amended, supplemented or
repealed from time to time by the Board of Health, with notice, as provided
for by MGL C. 111 § 31. A proposal to amend these regulations may be
initiated by the Board or by petition.
§ 154-14. Repealer.
As of the effective date of these regulations, all prior Williamstown Board of
Health regulations governing certification of dwelling and rooming units in
Williamstown are repealed.
§ 154-15. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby, but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 154-16. Effective date.
The effective date of these regulations is January 1, 1997.
Chapter 156
SCHEDULE OF FEES
shall contain a brief statement of the reasons therefor. A variance is not
effective until it is filed by the owner in the Registry of Deeds for the
county.
§ 154-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-1
1:471
§ 156-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to adopt fees to be assessed by the Board
of Health for services provided, and in conjunction with applications for
licenses and permits issued by the Board of Health.
§ 156-2. Authority.
This regulation is adopted under the authority of MGL C. 111, § 31, and any
other power thereto enabling.
§ 156-3. Fees. [Amended 11-3-2014]
§ 156-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Schedule of Fees will be posted in the Community Development
Department. Once posted, the most current Schedule of Fees is
incorporated into this regulation.
A.
Unless otherwise noted, annual permits/licenses expire on December
31 of any calendar year. Applications must be received by December 1,
or a late fee will be assessed.
B.
Unless otherwise noted, seasonal permit/license applications must be
received by April 1 of any year, or a late fee will be assessed.
C.
Unless otherwise noted, all other annual permits/licenses must be
received by the date noted, or a late fee will be assessed.
D.
Recreational camp permit applications, along with an original health
care consultant agreement, must be received by April 1 of any year.
E.
Unless otherwise noted, for all annual and seasonal licenses/permits
(except nonprofit organizations,) a surcharge of an additional 50% will
be added to all applications not received by the specified dates.
F.
Unless otherwise noted, the fee for any new annual license/permit
received after July 1 of any calendar year will be prorated at 1/12 of the
total fee for each month or portion of a month remaining in the calendar
year.
G.
The Board shall have the authority to enforce this regulation, and
licenses and permits issued thereunder by:
(1) Inspection and investigation;
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders; and/or
(3) Civil and criminal court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of this regulation is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General
B.
§ 156-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 156-4
1:472
§ 156-5. Appeals. [Added 2-7-201166]
§ 156-6. Severability.
If any portion, sentence, clause or phrase of this regulation shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of this regulation shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 156-7. Effective date.
The effective date of this regulation is March 3, 2003.
Chapter 157
SEPTIC SYSTEMS
§ 157-1. Purpose and authority.
Provisions, Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town
of Williamstown. Each day of violation, after written notice, is a
separate violation.
The Board of Health may suspend, revoke or deny any license or permit
for violations of this chapter.
C.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
A.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
At the hearing the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
C.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
Purpose. It is the purpose of these regulations to protect the public
health, safety and welfare by ensuring that all on-site sewage treatment
and disposal systems as defined by 310 CMR 15.00, Title 5, of the
A.
66.Editor's Note: This amendment also renumbered former §§ 156-5 and 156-6 as §§ 156-6
and 156-7, respectively.
§ 156-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-1
1:473
§ 157-2. Statement of local conditions.
The most recent revisions to Title 5 of the State Environmental Code are
by far the most technical to date. As more septic systems are repaired and
new systems installed, it is imperative that contractors have the technical
skills necessary to properly construct these systems. This is particularly
important with respect to new and constant changes in alternative
technologies. Since training for contractors is not currently required or
offered in this area, the Board of Health intends to address this need for
training through an on-going educational and certification program to be
conducted by the Berkshire County Boards of Health Association (BCBoH).
§ 157-3. Definitions.
§ 157-4. Septic tank filter installation.
Any septic tank installed or repaired after the effective date of these
regulations shall be fitted with a septic tank effluent filter.
State Environmental Code are properly constructed and maintained.
This will be accomplished through a comprehensive septic management
plan, which will incorporate educational, training, maintenance and
inspectional programs administered by the Berkshire County Boards of
Health Association (BCBoH).
Authority. They are enacted under the authority of MGL c. 111, § 31,
and any other power thereto enabling.
B.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health, or its designated agents.
CONTRACTOR CERTIFICATION TRAINING — An on-going educational
and training program conducted by the Berkshire County Boards of
Health Association (BCBoH) for the purpose of providing disposal
system installers a broad understanding of the regulatory issues,
construction practices and updates associated with 310 CMR 15.00,
State Environmental Code, Title 5.
DISPOSAL SYSTEM INSTALLER — A person licensed in accordance
with 310 CMR 15.019, Title 5, of the State Environmental Code who
constructs, repairs or replaces on-site subsurface disposal systems.
SEPTIC TANK FILTER — Effluent filters placed in the outlet tee of
the septic tank for the purpose of further removal of suspended solid
material from entering the soil absorption system, and as described in
310 CMR 15.289(4), Title 5, of the State Environmental Code.
A.
Any terms not specifically defined herein are to be construed in
accordance with the definitions of 310 CMR 15.00, State Environmental
Code, Title 5.
B.
§ 157-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 157-5
1:474
§ 157-5. Inspection. [Added 11-3-2014,67 effective 1-1-2015]
§ 157-6. Contractor certification. [Amended 1-5-2004]
Any person applying for a disposal system installer's permit must show
proof of satisfactory completion of the contractor certification training as
specified under § 157-3D of these regulations prior to issuance of said
permit.
§ 157-7. Administration.
The Board of Health, or its designated agent, will witness all septic
systems inspected under Section 15.300, and following, of 310 CMR
15.000. A fee, set by the Board of Health, will be collected prior to
inspection.
A.
Any inspection of the septic system for a dwelling that has been
unoccupied will undergo a follow-up inspection six months after the
date of reoccupation. [Amended 6-6-2016]
The Board of Health or its agent shall have the authority to
determine whether a system in an unoccupied dwelling need
undergo a follow-up inspection and, if so, the time frame to perform
that inspection.
(1)
The determination shall be based upon, but not limited to: the
age of the system, information about the system on file (designs,
previous inspections, pumping records), soil surveys, condition of
system components, and length of time the system has not been in
use.
(2)
B.
Continuing education. Contractor certification shall remain valid
provided the contractor attend Berkshire County Boards of Health
Association (BCBoH) or other recognized training sessions not less than
once per calendar year.
A.
Certificates not transferable. A contractor certification is not
transferable from one person to another.
B.
General enforcement. The State Environmental Code, 310 CMR 11.00,
shall govern the enforcement of these regulations.
A.
Amendments. These regulations or any portions thereof may be
amended, supplemented or repealed from time to time by the Boards of
Health, with notice as provided by law, on its own motion, or by petition.
B.
Variance.
The Board of Health may vary the application of any provision
of these regulations with respect to any particular case when, in
(1)
C.
67.Editor's Note: This amendment also provided for the renumbering of subsequent sections.
§ 157-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-7
1:475
§ 157-8. Enforcement.
§ 157-9. Appeals. [Added 2-7-2011]
the Board's opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest
injustice.
Every request for a variance shall be made in writing and shall
state the specific variance sought and the reason therefor.
(2)
Any variance granted by the Board shall be in writing. Any denial
of the variance shall also be in writing and shall contain a brief
statement of the reason for denial. A copy of each variance shall be
conspicuously posted for 30 days following its issuance and shall
be made available to the public at all reasonable hours.
(3)
The Board shall have the authority to enforce these regulations and
permits issued thereunder by:
(1) Inspection and investigation;
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders; and
(3) Civil and criminal court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of these regulations is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town
of Williamstown. Each day of violation, after written notice, is a
separate violation.
B.
The Board of Health may, after written notice, suspend or revoke any
septic system permit for violations of this chapter.
C.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
A.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
At the hearing the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
C.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
§ 157-7 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 157-9
1:476
§ 157-10. Severability.
If a court determines that any provision of these regulations is invalid or
unenforceable, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby, but shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 157-11. Effective date.
The effective date for this chapter is January 1, 2002.
Chapter 158
SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 158-1. Findings.
There exists substantial evidence that tobacco smoke causes lung cancer
and is a major risk factor in cardiovascular disease and various lung
disorders in smokers. In addition, nicotine is addictive, and it is clear
that addiction to nicotine occurs more quickly in children than in adults.
Increasing evidence further demonstrates that concentrations of
environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) may cause discomfort, respiratory
disorders (especially in children if continually exposed in their homes)
and, on occasion, lung cancer and other ailments in non-smokers. Many
non-cigarette tobacco products, such as cigars and cigarillos, can be sold
in a single "dose"; are available in fruit, candy and alcohol flavors; and
are popular among youth. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration and
the U.S. Surgeon General have stated that flavored tobacco products are
considered to be "starter" products that help establish smoking habits that
can lead to long-term addiction. Nicotine solutions, which are consumed
via electronic smoking devices such as electronic cigarettes, are sold in
dozens of flavors that appeal to youth, such as cotton candy and bubble
gum. The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has held that ". . . [t]he
right to engage in business must yield to the paramount right of government
to protect the public health by any rational means."
§ 158-2. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to protect the public health, comfort,
and environment by restricting smoking in public places, public buildings,
at public meetings, and in the workplace; to designate smoking areas; to
make tobacco products less accessible to children; and to set an example
for the children of the Town in an effort to protect them from the dangers
of nicotine. These regulations are adopted pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31,
as health regulations designed to protect and improve the health of the
residents of the Town of Williamstown and those who visit here.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
§ 157-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-3
1:477
§ 158-3. Definitions.
In these regulations, the following terms have the meanings indicated.
BAR — An establishment or an area within a restaurant, hotel, or other
establishment:
BLUNT WRAP — Any tobacco product manufactured or packaged as a wrap
or as a hollow tube made wholly or in part from tobacco that is designed or
intended to be filled by the consumer with loose tobacco or other fillers.
BOARD — The Williamstown Board of Health or its designated agents.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Williamstown Board of Health.
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
CIGAR — Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any
substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or mouthpiece, not
otherwise defined as a cigarette under MGL c. 64C, § 1, Paragraph 1.
CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR — A distinguishable taste or aroma, other than
the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint or wintergreen, imparted or
detectable either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product or
component part thereof, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas
relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert,
alcoholic beverage, herb or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco
product shall be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because
of the use of additives or flavorings that do not contribute to the
distinguishable taste or aroma of the product or the provision of ingredient
information.
COLLEGE — An educational facility offering education at above the
secondary-school level.
COMPONENT PART — Any element of a tobacco product, including, but not
limited to, the tobacco, filter and paper, but not including any constituent.
CONSTITUENT — Any ingredient, substance, chemical or compound, other
than tobacco, water or reconstituted tobacco sheet, that is added by the
manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacturing
or packaging of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke
constituent.
DISTINGUISHABLE — Perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer.
Which is primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises;
A.
In which the service of food is secondary to the consumption of
alcoholic beverages.
B.
§ 158-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 158-3
1:478
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust or
other organized group of individuals that uses the services of one or more
employees.
ENCLOSED EXTERIOR AREA — If the exterior/outdoor space has a
structure capable of being enclosed by walls or covers, regardless of the
materials or the removable nature of the walls or covers, the space will
be considered enclosed when the walls or covers are in place. All outdoor
spaces shall be physically separated from an enclosed work space. If doors,
windows, sliding or folding windows or doors or other fenestrations form
any part of the border to the outdoor space, the openings shall be closed
to prevent the migration of smoke into the enclosed work space. If the
windows, sliding or folding windows or doors or other fenestrations are
opened or otherwise do not prevent the migration of smoke into the work
space, the outdoor space shall be considered an extension of the enclosed
work space and subject to this chapter.
FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any tobacco product or component
part thereof that contains a constituent that has or produces a
characterizing flavor. A public statement, claim or indicia made or
disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person
authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public
statements concerning such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has
or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence
that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment permitted by the Board of
Health under the provisions of 105 CMR 590.000, State Sanitary Code
Chapter X, Minimum Sanitation Standards for Food Establishments, as
currently promulgated or promulgated in the future.
FREESTANDING DISPLAY — Any display of tobacco or tobacco products
which is not attached to or on top of a checkout counter, or where
distribution of the tobacco products is not directly controlled by an
employee.
HEALTH CARE INSTITUTION — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or trust or any person or group of persons that provides health
care services and employs health care providers licensed, or subject to
licensing, by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under MGL
c. 112 or a retail establishment that provides pharmaceutical goods and
services and is subject to the provisions of 247 CMR 6.00. Health care
institutions include, but are not limited to, hospitals, clinics, health centers,
pharmacies, drug stores, doctor offices and dentist offices.
MEMBERSHIP ASSOCIATION (also known as a PRIVATE CLUB) — A notfor-
profit entity that has been established and operates for a charitable,
philanthropic, civic, social, benevolent, educational, religious, athletic,
recreation or similar purpose, and is comprised of members who collectively
belong to: (i) a society, organization or association of a fraternal nature that
operates under the lodge system, and having one or more affiliated chapters
or branches incorporated in any state; or (ii) a corporation organized under
MGL c. 180; or (iii) an established religious place of worship or instruction
§ 158-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-3
1:479
in the commonwealth whose real or personal property is exempt from
taxation; or (iv) a veterans' organization incorporated or chartered by the
Congress of the United States, or otherwise having one or more affiliated
chapters by the Congress of the United States, or otherwise having one
or more affiliated chapters or branches incorporated in any state. Except
for a religious place of worship or instruction, an entity shall not be a
membership association for the purpose of this definition, unless individual
membership containing not less than full membership costs and benefits is
required for all members of the association for a period of not less than 90
days.
MINIMUM LEGAL SALES AGE (MLSA) — The age an individual must be
before that individual can be sold a tobacco product in the municipality.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, including, but not limited to, an owner,
operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any establishment,
business or retail store.
PUBLIC TRANSIT FACILITY — A bus, taxi, or other means of public transit
while operating within the limits of Williamstown.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment commonly known as
a "supermarket" or "grocery store" in which the primary activity is the sale
of food items to the public for off-premises consumption.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment that is not required to
possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for
sale, but not for resale, tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia, in
which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and in which the entry
of persons under the age of 18 is prohibited at all times, and maintains a
valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products as required to be issued
by the Town of Williamstown Board of Health. Retail tobacco stores will not
sell any food products.[Amended 5-7-2018]
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may select a
tobacco product or a nicotine delivery product without assistance from an
employee or store personnel.
SCHOOLS — Public or private elementary or secondary schools.
SMOKE CONSTITUENT — Any chemical or chemical compound in
mainstream or sidestream tobacco smoke that either transfers from any
component of the tobacco product to the smoke or that is formed by the
combustion or heating of tobacco, additives or other component of the
tobacco product.
SMOKING BAR — An establishment that primarily is engaged in the retail
sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the premises
and is required by MGL c. 270, § 22, to maintain a valid permit to operate
a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue.
"Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those establishments that
are commonly known as "cigar bars" and "hookah bars."
§ 158-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 158-3
1:480
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested
by any other means, including, but not limited to: cigarettes, cigars, little
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, or electronic cigarettes,
electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah, or other similar
products, regardless of nicotine content, that rely on vaporization or
aerosolization. "Tobacco product" includes any component or part of a
tobacco product. "Tobacco product" does not include any product that has
been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration either as
a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical purposes and which is
being marketed and sold or prescribed solely for the approved purpose.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated or mechanical self-service device,
which upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses or makes cigarettes, any other tobacco products.
WORKPLACE — An area within a structure or portion thereof in which two
or more employees perform services for their employer. The word includes
areas such as an employee lounge, dining facilities, restroom, conference
room, hallway, stairway, and entranceway.
§ 158-4. Smoking in public places:
Smoking prohibited. Smoking is prohibited in the following public
places:
A hallway, elevator, entranceway, restroom, lobby or waiting area
of a museum, library, clinic, nursing home, auditorium, long-term
health care facility, indoor sports arena, theater, inn, hotel, motel,
restaurant, college or municipal building.
(1)
An auditorium, except as provided in § 158-5E; the performance
area of an indoor sports arena; or the galleries or display areas of
a museum.
(2)
(3) A public transit facility.
A food establishment, or bar, in any area (interior or exterior)
where food or beverage is received, stored, prepared, served, or
consumed.
(4)
(5) A licensed child-care facility.
(6) A school.
(7) A room or hall used for public meetings, while being so used.
The public areas of a building owned or maintained by the Town of
Williamstown and used by the general public.
(8)
A.
§ 158-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-4
1:481
§ 158-5. Exempt places.
The following places are not subject to the smoking prohibitions or
restrictions of these regulations:
§ 158-6. Smoking in workplaces.
§ 158-7. Implementation.
Smoking restricted. Unless prohibited by Subsection A above, or
pursuant to § 158-6 below, in the following public places, smoking is
permitted in a designated exterior unenclosed smoking area.
A museum, library, clinic, nursing home, auditorium, long-term
health care facility, indoor sports arenas, theater, inn, hotel, motel
or college.
(1)
B.
A. A private club.
B. A private residence.
A hotel or motel room rented to a guest and designated as permitting
smoking.
C.
D. A retail tobacco store.
The stage of a theatrical performance, if smoking is part of the
theatrical production.
E.
Smoking prohibition: Smoking in the workplace is prohibited, except
in specifically designated smoking areas permitted pursuant to
Subsection B of this section.
A.
Designated smoking areas: An employer may designate unenclosed
outdoor areas in which employees may smoke.
B.
Responsibility: It is unlawful for any person having control of any
premises upon which smoking is prohibited pursuant to Subsection A
knowingly to permit, or for his or her agent or employee knowingly to
permit, a violation of this regulation.
C.
The proprietor or other person in charge of a place subject to these
regulations shall:
Conspicuously post a "no smoking" sign or international symbol
as appropriate at the entrance to and within every area in which
smoking is permitted or prohibited by these regulations.
(1)
Ask a person who is smoking in a nonsmoking area either to refrain
from smoking or to move to a smoking area.
(2)
Use any other appropriate and reasonable means to implement
these regulations.
(3)
A.
§ 158-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 158-7
1:482
§ 158-8. Other applicable laws.
These regulations do not permit smoking if it is restricted or prohibited by
any other applicable health, safety, fire, or sanitary statute, regulation, or
code.
§ 158-9. Promotion and sale of tobacco and products.
Nothing in these regulations prohibits an employer, or the proprietor
or other person in charge of a place, establishment, or facility, from
prohibiting smoking within the entire place, establishment, or facility.
B.
ID required. A person who sells any tobacco product for personal
consumption shall verify by means of an ID that no person purchasing
the product is younger than the minimum legal sales age (MLSA) of 21
years of age, except that no such verification is required for a purchaser
over the age of 26. [Amended 7-13-2015]
A.
Sale or distribution to person under 21. It is unlawful for anyone to
sell any tobacco products to any person under the age of 21. It is
unlawful for anyone (other than a parent or guardian of the recipient)
to give tobacco products to any person under the age of 18. [Amended
7-13-2015]
B.
Posting of signs. In conformance with MGL c. 270, § 7, the proprietor
or person in charge of any place in which tobacco products are sold
at retail shall attach to each cash register the sign provided by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health or Board of Health
pertaining to tobacco product sales. The sign shall be posted so that
it may readily be seen by a person standing at or approaching the
cash register. The sign shall directly face the purchaser and shall not
be obstructed from view or placed at a height less than four feet nor
greater than nine feet from the floor. Such signage shall not be less
than 5 1/2 by 8 1/2 inches in size. In addition, each proprietor or person
in charge of any place in which tobacco products are sold at retail
shall post a sign, to be supplied by the Board of Health, advising that
"ID is required for all tobacco sales." The owner or other person in
charge of a shop or other place used to sell tobacco products at retail
shall conspicuously post signage provided by the Board of Health that
discloses current referral information about smoking cessation. Such
signage shall be not less than 8 1/2 by 11 inches in size.
C.
Promotion. No person or entity shall, in or upon any part of the streets,
parks, public grounds, public buildings or other public places within the
Town of Williamstown, distribute any products containing tobacco for
any promotional or other commercial purpose.
D.
Display. No person shall display or offer tobacco products for sale
except in an area, or from within an enclosure, which physically
precludes the removal of the tobacco products without the assistance
E.
§ 158-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-9
1:483
§ 158-10. Tobacco product sales permit. [Added 6-6-201668]
of the person authorizing such display or offer, or an employee of such
person.
Redemption. The redemption of coupons or promotions involving the
sale of tobacco products at less than full retail price shall be conducted
only at a checkout counter or at a location directly controlled by an
employee.
F.
Self-service displays. Self-service displays of tobacco products from
which individual items may be selected by the customer are prohibited.
G.
Original package required. Sale or distribution of tobacco products in
any form other than an original factory-wrapped package is prohibited.
H.
Single unit sales. No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold
or distributed a single cigar. No person shall sell or distribute or cause
to be sold or distributed any original package of two or more cigars,
unless such package is priced for retail sale at $5 or more. The Board
of Health may, in its discretion, raise this price as needed. This section
shall not apply to:
The sale or distribution of any single cigar having a retail price of
$2.50 or more.
(1)
A person or entity engaged in the business of selling or distributing
cigars for commercial purposes to another person or entity
engaged in the business of selling or distributing cigars for
commercial purposes with the intent to sell or distribute outside
the boundaries of the Town of Williamstown.
(2)
I.
Flavored tobacco products. No person shall sell or distribute or cause
to be sold or distributed any flavored tobacco product, other than
menthol, mint, or wintergreen, at retail, except in smoking bars or
retail tobacco stores.
J.
K. Blunt wraps. No person or entity shall sell or distribute blunt wraps.
Vending machines. No tobacco product may be sold by vending machine
within the Town of Williamstown.
L.
Sale of tobacco products by health care institutions. No health care
institution shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products as defined
herein. No retail establishment that operates or has a health care
institution within it, such as a pharmacy or drug store, shall sell or
cause to be sold tobacco products as defined herein.
M.
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco products, as
defined herein, within the Town of Williamstown without first obtaining
A.
68.Editor's Note: This amendment also renumbered former §§ 158-10 through 158-15 as
§§ 158-11 through 159-16, respectively.
§ 158-9 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 158-10
1:484
a tobacco product sales permit issued annually by the Town of
Williamstown Board of Health. Only owners of establishments with a
permanent, nonmobile location in the Town of Williamstown are eligible
to apply for a permit and sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at
the specified location in the Town of Williamstown.
As part of the tobacco product sales permit application process, the
applicant will be provided with the Town of Williamstown regulation.
Each applicant is required to sign a statement declaring that the
applicant has read said regulation and that the applicant is responsible
for instructing any and all employees who will be responsible for
tobacco product sales regarding federal, state and local laws regarding
the sale of tobacco and this regulation.
B.
Each applicant who sells tobacco products is required to provide proof
of a current tobacco retailer license issued by the Massachusetts
Department of Revenue, when required by state law, before a tobacco
product sales permit can be issued.
C.
The fee for a tobacco product sales permit shall be determined by the
Town of Williamstown Board of Health.
D.
A separate permit is required for each retail establishment selling
tobacco products, as defined herein.
E.
Each tobacco product sales permit shall be displayed at the retail
establishment in a conspicuous place.
F.
A tobacco product sales permit is nontransferable. A new owner of
an establishment that sells tobacco products, as defined herein, must
apply for a new permit. No new permit will be issued unless and until
all outstanding penalties incurred by the previous permit holder are
satisfied in full.
G.
Issuance of a tobacco product sales permit shall be conditioned on
an applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic inspections of his/her
retail establishment to ensure compliance with this regulation.
H.
A tobacco product sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder
has failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to appeal the fines
has expired and/or the permit holder has not satisfied any outstanding
permit suspensions.
I.
Maximum number of tobacco product sales permits.
At any given time, there shall be no more than seven tobacco
product sales permits issued in Town of Williamstown. No permit
renewal will be denied based on the requirements of this
subsection, except any permit holder who has failed to renew his
or her permit within 30 days of expiration will be treated as a
first-time permit applicant. New applicants for permits who are
applying at a time when the maximum number of permits have
(1)
J.
§ 158-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-10
1:485
§ 158-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 158-12. Variances.
been issued will be placed on a waiting list and will be eligible to
apply for a permit on a "first-come, first-served" basis as issued
permits are either not renewed, revoked, or are returned to the
Board of Health.
A tobacco product sales permit shall not be issued to any new
applicant for a retail location within 500 feet of a public or private
elementary or secondary school as measured by a straight line from
the nearest point of the property line of the school to the nearest
point of the property line of the site of the applicant's business
premises.
(2)
Applicants who purchase an existing business that holds a current
tobacco product sales permit at the time of the sale of said business
must apply within 60 days of such sale for the permit held by
the seller if the buyer intends to sell tobacco products, as defined
herein.
(3)
The Board shall have the authority to enforce these regulations by:
(1) Inspection and investigation;
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders;
(3) Civil and criminal court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of these regulations is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town
of Williamstown. Each day of violation, after written notice, is a
separate violation.
B.
An establishment subject to these regulations may make written
application to the Board of Health for a variance from these regulations.
A.
Every variance is subject to a public hearing. Notice of a hearing upon
an original application for a variance shall be posted as part of the
public notice of the meeting at which the Board of Health will consider
the application. The notice shall be posted not less than one week
before the meeting.
B.
Vote; conditions.
By vote of a majority of its full authorized membership, the Board
of Health may vary the application of any provision of these
regulations with respect to any particular case in which, in the
Board of Health's opinion, both of the following requirements are
fulfilled:
(1)
C.
§ 158-10 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 158-12
1:486
§ 158-13. Amendments.
These regulations or any portion of them may be amended, supplemented,
or repealed from time to time by the Board of Health, with notice as
provided by law, on the Board's own motion or by petition.
§ 158-14. Repealer.
As of the effective date of these regulations, all prior Williamstown Board of
Health smoking regulations are repealed.
§ 158-15. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby, but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 158-16. Effective date.
The effective date of these regulations is January 5, 2015.
Chapter 159
STABLES AND LIVESTOCK KEEPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 10.
Right to farm — See Ch. 46.
Nuisances and noisome trades — See Ch. 150.
The enforcement of the regulations would do manifest
injustice; and
(a)
The applicant has proved that the same degree of protection of
the public health, safety, and welfare can be achieved without
strict application of the particular provision. Any alternative
means of protection shall be detailed and documented by the
applicant to the satisfaction of the Board of Health.
(b)
(2) A variance may be granted subject to appropriate conditions.
D. Any variance granted by the Board of Health shall be in writing.
An establishment to whom a variance has been granted under this
section shall keep a copy available for public inspection.
E.
A variance may not be granted to make smoking lawful in any area in
which smoking is prohibited by law other than these regulations.
F.
§ 158-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-1
1:487
§ 159-1. Purpose and authority.
The Board of Health of the Town of Williamstown, acting under the authority
of Sections 31, 122-125A, 143, and 155-158 of Chapter 111, and Sections
7, 19 and 23 of Chapter 129, of the Massachusetts General Laws, and
amendments and additions thereto, and by any other power thereto,
enabling and acting thereunder, and in accordance therewith, has, in the
interest of and for the preservation of the public health, duly adopted the
following regulations for the control of livestock animals in the Town of
Williamstown.
§ 159-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUTTER — The owners or tenants of property which adjoin the lot upon
which livestock is to be kept, whether or not said properties are separated
by a public way.
ANIMAL — See "livestock."
BOARD — The Williamstown Board of Health, or its designated agents.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Williamstown Board of Health.
DWELLING — Any building or shelter used or intended for human
habitation or periodic human activity.
FACILITY — The total accommodations to be used for the keeping and care
of livestock, including, but not limited to, stable and corral.
FEED — A food mixture or preparation, and hay, used for consumption by
livestock, kept at or proximate to a facility.
FOWL — All members of the bird family, and shall include chickens (i.e.,
roosters, capons, hens), turkeys, pigeons, peafowl, ducks, guinea, swans,
and geese (other than wild species).
HORSE — Any solid-hoofed animals, including, but not limited to, a horse,
donkey, pony or mule.
HOUSING — Any structure used for the keeping of livestock. Housing does
not include perimeter fencing.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Soils having a percolation rate greater than 60
minutes per inch drop, and including, but not limited to, ledge, hardpan,
clay, peat, loam and organic matter.
LIVESTOCK — For the purpose of these regulations, livestock is to mean all
animals except dogs, cats, and domestic animals normally kept in the home,
and including fowl, that are kept or harbored as domesticated animals.
Livestock includes, but is not limited to, horse, goat, cattle, sheep, pig,
goose, duck, rabbit, chicken, guinea fowl, pigeon, emu, ostrich, turkey,
peacock, llama, and alpaca, or any number or combination thereof.
§ 159-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 159-2
1:488
LOT — An area of land, with definite boundaries, used or available for use
as the site of one or more buildings.
OWNER —
PERSON — Every individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association, or
group, including a city, town, county, or other governmental unit, owning
property or carrying on an activity regulated by these regulations.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The person owning or overseeing the facility and/
or livestock.
RUNOFF — Water from rain or melted snow that flows over the surface of
the ground.
UNSANITARY CONDITIONS — The state of being of a facility which, in the
opinion of the Board of Health, is conducive to or results in breeding of flies,
creation of offensive odors, rodent infestation, liquid effluent or runoff.
VERMIN — Any of various insects, or small animals regarded as
objectionable because they are destructive or disease-carrying, including,
but not limited to, flies, mosquitoes, lice, and rats.
WATERCOURSE — Any stream, storm drain, pond, lake, or other body of
water drained by a stream, dry ditch, or other depression that will permit
drainage water to empty into any open waters of the commonwealth.
WILD ANIMALS — Any animal not normally found or kept as a domesticated
animal. Federal or state permits are required to house and/or care for wild
animals.
§ 159-3. General requirements.
Every person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
(1) Has legal title to any lot, dwelling or dwelling unit; or
Has care, charge, or control of any lot, dwelling or dwelling unit
as agent, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, lessee, or
guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title.
(2)
A.
Each such person thus representing the holder of legal title is bound to
comply with the provisions of these regulations as if he were the owner.
B.
Fences, coops, cages, etc., shall be maintained to prevent escape of
livestock onto public ways and adjacent property. Any defect or
condition that causes livestock to escape will be repaired in a timely
manner not to exceed 24 hours.
A.
Unless otherwise noted, livestock will be maintained in accordance
with the University of Massachusetts Extension Service Livestock and
Poultry Best Management Practices.
B.
A supply of fresh water shall be available to the livestock at all times
and at or near the facility for feeding and cleaning. Adequate,
C.
§ 159-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-3
1:489
§ 159-4. Sanitation requirements.
nutritional feed will be made available to all livestock to maintain health
and good condition.
Wild animals can be housed only by those permitted to their care by
appropriate state and federal areas of jurisdiction.
D.
The Animal Inspector/Animal Control Officer, the Health Inspector, and/
or a licensed veterinarian or animal care specialist appointed by the
Board shall have the right to make an inspection in accordance with
Chapter 129, Sections 7, 19 and 23, and Chapter 111, Sections 16, 122
and 143.
E.
No person owning, leasing, or controlling the management of a facility
for the keeping of livestock shall, willfully or through negligence, cause,
suffer, allow or permit:
The floor and/or the ground of the facility for the keeping of
livestock to be designed, constructed, and/or maintained as to
cause or contribute to unsanitary conditions at said facility.
Adequate dry bedding and bedding areas will be made available.
(1)
Drainage or liquid effluent containing urine and/or fecal matter
from any animal kept at said facility to be discharged in runoff, or
to flow over the surface of the ground onto neighboring property,
public way or watercourses.
(2)
A.
Adequate shelter will be available and maintained to keep livestock out
of the wind and elements. Shelter will be made available to all livestock.
For large animals (goat or larger), adequate shelter shall have a
roof, protection from the wind, and shall have sufficient area for all
animals to stand and/or lie down without crowding.
(1)
Small animals and fowl shall have shelters as described in
Livestock and Poultry BMPs.
(2)
B.
Management and disposal of manure and soiled bedding shall be such
as to best management practices to minimize odors, breeding of flies,
and the attraction of vermin. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
to store and/or dispose of said waste in a safe and sanitary manner
consistent with acceptable farm practices.
C.
D. Livestock shall be maintained in a clean and healthy condition.
No owner of a facility for the keeping of livestock shall, willfully or
through negligence, cause, suffer, allow, or permit an infestation of
insects or vermin at said facility. Dead livestock shall be promptly
buried, incinerated, or disposed of in such a way as to prevent the
attraction of flies and prevent odors. Burial will be not less than six feet
below grade, covered by not less than 30 inches of soil and manure to
aid decomposition.
E.
§ 159-3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 159-5
1:490
§ 159-5. Enforcement.
§ 159-6. Waivers.
The Board of Health shall consult with the Williamstown Agricultural
Commission and may, in its discretion, waive compliance with a particular
requirement of these regulations when, in its opinion:
§ 159-7. Appeals.
The Board shall have the authority to enforce these regulations and
permits issued thereunder by:
(1) Inspection and investigation;
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders; and/or
(3) Civil and criminal court actions.
A.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of these regulations is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town
of Williamstown. Each day of violation, after written notice, is a
separate violation.
B.
A. The enforcement of the regulation would do manifest injustice; and
The applicant has proved that the same degree of protection of the
public health, safety and welfare can be achieved without strict
application of the particular provision. Any alternative means of
protection shall be detailed and documented by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the Board of Health.
B.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
A.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
At the hearing, the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
C.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
§ 159-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-7
1:491
§ 159-8. Severability.
If any portion, or sentence, clause or phrase of this regulation shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of this regulation shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 159-9. Effective date.
The effective date for this chapter is June 1, 2015.
Chapter 164
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Distribution of drinking water — See Ch. 37,
Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 70.
§ 164-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of these regulations to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by ensuring that private wells drilled in the Town of Williamstown
are properly permitted and constructed, that all water supply wells meet
appropriate chemical and bacteriological standards, and that groundwater
resources are protected.
§ 164-2. Authority.
These regulations are enacted by the Town of Williamstown Board of Health
under the authority which includes, but is not limited, to one or more of the
following: MGL, c. 111, §§ 31, 122, 122A, 127, 143, 155, 187, 188, Code of
Mass. Regulations 310 CMR 11.02 and MGL c. 40 § 54.
§ 164-3. Definitions.
In these regulations the following terms have the meanings indicated.
ABANDONED WELL — A private well that meets any of the following
criteria: construction was terminated prior to completion of the well, the
well owner declares and notifies the Board that the use of the well has
been permanently discontinued, the well has, after extended use, been out
of service for at least three years, the well is in such a state of disrepair
that its continued use is impractical or represents a physical threat, or the
well has the potential for transmitting contaminants from the land surface
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
§ 159-7 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 164-3
1:492
into an aquifer or from one aquifer to another and the situation cannot be
corrected.
APPLICANT — Any person who intends to have a private well constructed.
AQUIFER — A water-bearing geologic formation, group of formations, or
part of a formation that contains adequate saturated permeable material to
yield significant quantities of water for wells and springs.
BOARD — The Williamstown Board of Health or its designated agent.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Williamstown Board of Health.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certificate issued by the Board which
authorizes the use of a private well as a water supply.
CERTIFIED LABORATORY — Any laboratory which has been certified by
the Department of Environmental Protection as provided in its most recent
edition of Certification Status of Commercial Environmental Laboratories.
PRIVATE WELL — Any nonpublic well, drilled to locate and/or supply water
for any purpose. Wells drilled for potential public water supplies will be
considered private wells until such time as the application has been made
to the Department of Environmental Protection under the provisions of 310
CMR 22.00.
PUMPING TEST — A procedure used to determine the characteristics of a
well and adjacent aquifer by installing and operating a pump.
TITLE 5 — The State Environmental Code for On-site Sewage Treatment
and Disposal Systems.
WELL — A bored, drilled, or driven well or a dug hole with a depth greater
than its largest surface diameter, developed to locate and/or supply water
for any purpose and not subject to regulation by 310 CMR 22.00.
WELL DRILLER — Any person, association, partnership, company, or
corporation that constructs wells and is registered with the Division of
Water Resources of the Department of Conservation and Recreation in
compliance with the Well Diggers and Drillers Registration, 313 CMR 3.00.
§ 164-4. Standards for location, construction, decommissioning,
water quality, and water quantity.
Location of wells.
In establishing the location of a well, actual or possible sources of
contamination which exist or are proposed to exist within 150 feet
of the proposed well site shall be identified. Private wells shall be
located so as to avoid all potential sources of contamination. The
following minimum lateral distances apply for each listed source of
contamination:
(1)
A.
§ 164-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-4
1:493
Source of Contamination
Minimum Lateral
Distance
(feet)
Subsurface sewage disposal field
(leaching facility, in use, abandoned,
or in reserve)
100
Cesspool, seepage pit 100
Septic tank 50
Sewer line 50
Property line 10
Public way 25
Driveway 20
Underground fuel storage tank 100
Underground liquid propane storage
tank
25
Utility right-of-way 100
Stable, barnyard, manure pile,
manure storage tank, feedlot
150
Where deemed necessary or appropriate by the Board, the above
distances may be increased, or reasonable means of protection
may be required, or both. The Board may impose minimum lateral
distance requirements from other potential sources of
contamination not listed above. The Board shall add any such
special requirement as a condition of the well construction permit.
(2)
No one may locate, drill or dig a well or cause the same to be done
so as to limit the use or enjoyment of any neighboring property.
(3)
The construction of a new private well for drinking water is
prohibited where access to the municipal water supply or public
water main is within 200 feet of the applicant's nearest property
line.
(4)
In the event that inadequate yield requires a change of the well
site, relocation on the Engineer's or Sanitarian's plot plan shall be
indicated and subject to approval.
(5)
Well construction standards.
(1) A well shall be constructed by a registered well driller.
A well shall be constructed in compliance with the sections of
the Private Well Guidelines of the Department of Environmental
Protection's Division of Water Supply, October 30, 1989, or as
subsequently amended, that apply to well construction and well
decommissioning.
(2)
B.
§ 164-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 164-4
1:494
A well driller shall certify in writing that the well driller has
complied with the Private Well Guidelines as specified above in
order to receive a certificate of compliance.
(3)
Well decommissioning standards.
All wells that are abandoned shall be decommissioned to protect
the groundwater supply and to eliminate potential physical
hazards.
(1)
An abandoned well shall be destroyed in compliance with the
Private Well Guidelines. [See § 164-4B(2).]
(2)
A well driller shall certify in writing that the well driller has
complied with the Private Well Guidelines when decommissioning
the well.
(3)
C.
Water quality standards.
No private well shall be used as a water supply, and no building
permit shall be issued for new construction on a property where
the well is located, unless and until the water derived from the well
has been tested and approved for water quality.
(1)
Chemical and bacteriological analyses shall be conducted by a
certified laboratory and shall not exceed the following values:
Chemical:
Analysis
Standard
(mg/liter)
Ammonia (NH4) 0.05
Sodium (Na) 20
Chloride (Cl) 250
Nitrate nitrogen (N) 10
Nitrite nitrogen 1.0
(a)
Bacteriological:
Analysis Standard
Coliform Bacteria None/100 ml H20
(b)
In addition, the following water quality tests should be
conducted for the informational benefit of the landowner.
Analysis Should Not Exceed
Total dissolved solids 500 mg/liter
Iron (Fe) 0.3 mg/liter
Manganese (Mn) 0.05 mg/liter
(c)
(2)
D.
§ 164-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-4
1:495
§ 164-5. Construction permit; certificate of compliance;
decommissioning procedure.
Analysis Should Not Exceed
pH 6.5 - 8.5
Total hardness 180 mg/liter
Values over the levels advised above may require treatment at
the discretion of the owner.
(d)
Additional or repeated tests may be required when it is necessary
for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
(3)
Water quantity standards.
Yield test pumping shall be conducted at a rate at least equal to
the pumping rate expected during normal well use, and shall be
conducted for a minimum of four hours.
(1)
A well intended for drinking water supply is required to provide,
either through yield or with the addition of adequate storage
facilities, a minimum number of gallons per day according to the
following formula:
(number of bedrooms) x 110 gallons x 2 (safety factor) = daily
minimum yield (gals.)
(2)
E.
Well construction permit.
Well construction permit application.
An application for a well construction permit shall be
submitted by the property owner or his/her designated agent
to the Board on the form provided by the Board.
(a)
Except when a plan for new construction, including the
following data for the well, has been submitted so as to comply
with Title 5 requirements, the application shall include or be
accompanied by:
The Assessor's Map and lot number, the location of the
proposed well, and a general written summary of any
possible sources of contamination within 150 feet of the
well site. [See § 164-4.A(1).]
[1]
An extended plot plan, produced by a civil or sanitary
engineer or a registered sanitarian, which will show
distances less than 150 feet from the proposed well site to
the following:
[a] Existing and proposed structures.
[2]
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 164-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 164-5
1:496
[b] Subsurface waters and subsurface drainage courses.
Subsurface sewage disposal fields, trenches, or pits
and adjoining septic tanks or cesspools.
[c]
[d] Subsurface fuel storage tanks.
Other potential sources of pollution an experienced
well driller should reasonably be expected to
recognize.
[e]
[f] Property lines.
[g] Public ways.
The well driller's certificate of registration, unless the
certificate is on file with the Board.
[3]
[4] The application fee set by the Board of Health.
Well construction permit.
Well construction may proceed only upon approval of a permit
application in the form of a well construction permit issued by
the Board.
(a)
A permit for well construction expires at the end of 12 months
from the date of issuance. A permit may be extended for an
additional six months if a written request is received by the
Board prior to the expiration date. No additional fee shall be
charged for the extension, provided there is no change in the
plans for the proposed well.
(b)
After a permit has expired, a new application and a new fee
shall be submitted to the Board.
(c)
(d) Neither a permit nor an application is transferable.
The procedures and specifications defined in these regulations
are intended to be in conformance with, and where necessary,
to supplement § 70-7.4D of Chapter 70, Zoning. This section of
the bylaw covers the provisions for Water Resource 1 and 2 and
Confined Aquifer Districts.
(e)
(2)
Certificate of compliance.
The following shall be submitted to the Board to obtain a
certificate of compliance: No private well will be put into
operation until a certificate of compliance has been issued.
[1] A well construction permit application.
Within 30 days after completion of the well, the well driller
shall file with the Board a copy of the water well
completion report as required by the Massachusetts
[2]
(a)
(3)
§ 164-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-5
1:497
Division of Water Resources - Department of Conservation
and Recreation (See 313 CMR 3.00.).
Following well development and disinfection, the applicant
or his/her designated agent shall collect water samples
for bacteriological analysis. The applicant or his/her
designated agent shall cause chemical analysis to be
conducted and the report submitted to the Board for
approval.
[3]
Certificate of construction compliance stating that the well
driller has complied with Department of Environmental
Protection's Private Well Guidelines sections pertaining to
well construction that are part of these regulations [See
§ 164-4 B(2).]
[4]
Water quantity certification statement from the well driller
that the minimum supply has been met.
[5]
Upon receipt of all of the above documents the Board shall
determine whether the water supply meets all the water
quantity and quality requirements for private water supplies in
Williamstown.
Upon an affirmative determination, the Board shall issue a
certificate of compliance.
[1]
Upon a negative determination, or if the Board deems it
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
the Board shall issue a water supply disapproval letter
which requires additional water quality analysis, or
quantity testing, or both.
[2]
The Board may, at its discretion, issue a conditional
certificate of compliance. A conditional certificate shall set
forth the conditions which the Board deems necessary to
ensure fitness, purity, and quantity of the water derived
from the well. This may include but need not be limited to
requiring treatment of the water or regular testing.
[3]
(b)
Well decommissioning procedures.
A private water supply well will be abandoned and properly
plugged (decommissioned) if the well meets any of the following
criteria;
(a) Construction was terminated prior to completion of the well.
The well owner has notified the local Board of Health that the
use of the well has been permanently discontinued.
(b)
The well has, after extended use, been out of service for at
least three years.
(c)
(1)
B.
§ 164-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 164-5
1:498
The well is a potential hazard to public health or safety and the
situation cannot be corrected.
(d)
The well is in such a state of disrepair that its continued use is
impractical or represents a physical threat.
(e)
The well has the potential for transmitting contaminants from
the land surface into an aquifer or from one aquifer to another
and the situation cannot be corrected.
(f)
It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that all
abandoned wells and test holes or borings associated with private
well installation are properly plugged.
(2)
Only a registered well driller will plug abandoned wells, test holes,
and dry or inadequate borings. In addition, when an old well is
replaced by a new well, the well driller will plug the old well once
a certificate of compliance has been issued for the new well. In the
case of new well construction, any test holes and dry or inadequate
borings will be plugged before the well driller completes work at
the site.
(3)
Within 30 days following the completion of the plugging procedure,
the registered well driller who plugged the abandoned well, test
hole, or dry or inadequate boring must submit a well completion
report to the Division of Water Supply Protection and will submit
a decommissioning report to the Board of Health and the owner
of the property where the well, test hole, or boring is located.
The following information will be included in the decommissioning
report;
(a) Name and address of the property owner.
Name, address, and registration number of the registered well
driller who performed the plugging.
(b)
(c) Reason for abandonment.
Location of the well, test hole, or boring referenced to at
least two permanent structures or, when possible, location
coordinates determined by a registered land surveyor or
registered civil engineer.
(d)
All information known about the well, test hole, or boring
including but not limited to:
[1] Depth.
[2] Diameter.
[3] Type of casing.
(e)
Calculations made to determine the volume of the well, test
hole, or boring.
(f)
(4)
§ 164-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-5
1:499
§ 164-6. Administration and enforcement.
(g) Static water level before plugging.
(h) Types of plugging material used, including mix specifications.
(i) Quantity of each type of plugging material used.
Description of the plugging procedure including, but not
limited to, notes regarding:
[1] Removal of pump and other obstructions.
[2] Removal of screen.
[3] Perforation or removal of casing.
[4] Method used to place plugging material (s).
(j)
(k) A copy of the original well driller's report.
General enforcement. Environmental Code (310 CMR 11.00) governs
the enforcement of these regulations.
A.
Separate violations. Each day's failure to comply with any provisions
of these regulations is a separate violation. Each numbered or lettered
section or subsection of these regulations violated is a separate
violation.
B.
Variance.
By vote of a majority of its full authorized membership, the Board
of Health may vary the application of any provision of these
regulations with respect to any particular case when, in the Board
of Health's opinion, both of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a) The enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice.
The applicant has proved that the same degree of
environmental protection, and protection of the public health,
safety and welfare can be achieved without strict application
of the particular provision. The alternative means of protection
shall be detailed and documented by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the Board of Health.
(b)
(1)
Every request for a variance shall be made in writing and shall
state the specific variance sought and the reasons therefor.
(2)
Any variance granted by the Board of Health shall be in writing.
Any denial of the variance shall also be in writing and shall contain
a brief statement of the reason for denial. A copy of each variance
shall be conspicuously posted for 30 days following its issuance and
shall be available to the public at all reasonable hours.
(3)
C.
§ 164-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 164-6
1:500
§ 164-7. Appeals. [Added 2-7-201169]
§ 164-8. Amendments.
These regulations or any portion of them may be amended, supplemented,
or repealed from time to time by the Board of Health, with notice as
provided by law, on the Board of Health's own motion or by petition.
A variance may be subject to any qualification, revocation,
suspension, condition, or expiration provided in these regulations
or that the Board of Health expresses in its grant of the variance.
A variance may otherwise be revoked, modified, or suspended, in
whole or in part, only after the holder has been notified in writing
and has been given an opportunity to be heard, in conformity with
the requirements of Title 1 of the State Environmental Code (310
CMR 11.00) for orders and hearings.
(4)
Forms. Compliance with these regulations will be administered by the
forms prepared and approved by the Board of Health. The content of
these forms may be revised by the Board of Health from time to time by
administrative action of the Board of Health apart from § 164-7.
D.
Fines. Whoever himself or by his servant or agent, or as the servant or
agent of any person, firm, or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of these regulations is subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town
of Williamstown.
E.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any order issued under this chapter
may appeal by filing a written petition for hearing to the Board of
Health, which must be received within 10 days after the day the order
was served.
A.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 14 days after the
receipt of a petition.
B.
At the hearing the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given
an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary
evidence, and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn.
Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall
not affect the validity of any order.
C.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and
shall inform the petitioner.
D.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this commonwealth.
E.
69.Editor's Note: This amendment also renumbered former §§ 164-7 through 164-10 as
§§ 164-8 through 164-11, respectively.
§ 164-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-9
1:501
§ 164-9. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby, but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 164-10. Invalidation by state law.
Any part of these regulations subsequently invalidated by a new state law
or regulation, or by the modification of an existing state law or regulation,
shall automatically be brought into conformity with the new or amended
law or regulation and shall be effective immediately, without recourse to a
public hearing and the customary procedures for amendment or repeal of
these regulations.
§ 164-11. Effective date.
The effective date of these regulations is December 14, 2004.
Chapter 169
SCENIC ROADS RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 60.
Road construction standards — See Ch. 113.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 121.
§ 169-1. History of the Scenic Roads Act.70
In 1973 the Great and General Court of Massachusetts passed the
Scenic Roads Act (Appendix A) which was designed to protect the
aesthetic, environmental and historical values of Massachusetts rural
roads by preserving bordering trees and stone walls. This Act
complements the century-old Public Shade Tree Law (Appendix B).71
A.
At Town Meeting in 1976, Williamstown voters first used the Scenic
Roads Act to designate Bee Hill Road as scenic. In 1984, Northwest
Hill Road was the second road so named, and others have subsequently
been designated. See appendix D for copies of Town Meeting votes to
date designating the Scenic Roads in Williamstown.72
B.
70.Editor's Note: A caveat appearing at the beginning of these rules and regulations read as
follows: The Scenic Roads Act and the Shade Tree Act seem similar; however, compliance
with the provisions of one act does not necessarily mean compliance with the provisions of
the other. The Williamstown Planning Board has jurisdiction over the Scenic Roads Act;
the Williamstown Tree Warden has jurisdiction over the Shade Tree Act. Any person
wishing to do work on a Scenic Road should consult with both the Planning Board and the
Tree Warden to ensure compliance.
71.Editor's Note: Appendices A and B are on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
72.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 164-9 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 169-2
1:502
§ 169-2. Purpose.
By adopting the rules and regulations contained herein, the Planning Board,
the Conservation Commission and Historical Commission intend to ensure
the following:
§ 169-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
CUTTING OR REMOVAL OF TREES — The cutting of major branches two
inches or more in diameter as measured next to the trunk, the cutting of
roots and/or the removal of one or more trees. The cutting or removal of
dead trees or branches shall not be considered cutting or removal of trees.
REPAIR, MAINTENANCE, RECONSTRUCTION OR PAVING WORK — Any
work done that involves the cutting or removal of trees or the tearing down
or destruction of stone walls within the town right-or-way by any person
or agency, public or private. Any work on any portion of the town right-ofway
not physically commenced at the time of Town Meeting designation as
a scenic road comes within this definition.
ROAD — The right-of-way of any way used and maintained as a public way,
including the vehicular-traveled way plus necessary appurtenances within
the right-of-way, such as bridge structures, drainage systems, retaining
walls, traffic control devices and sidewalks. When the boundary of the rightof-
way is in issue so that a dispute arises as to whether or not certain trees
or stone walls or portions thereof are within or without the way, the trees
or stone walls shall be presumed to be within the way until the contrary is
shown.
TEARING DOWN OR DESTRUCTION OF STONE WALLS — The
displacement or removal of more than five linear feet of wall material
that exists 12 inches or more above the existing grade, but shall not be
construed to include removal and rebuilding within a reasonable time and
at the same location of such materials.
TREES — Any trees that have a truck diameter of 1 1/2 inches or more as
measured one foot above the ground.
A. That the letter and spirit of the Scenic Roads Act73 be followed;
That roads recommended for designation as scenic roads meet certain
specified criteria;
B.
That roads designated by Town Meeting as scenic roads not be altered
in any way that requires the cutting or removal of trees or the tearing
down or destruction of stone walls unless stated procedures are
followed; and
C.
That the provisions of the Scenic Roads Act and the rules and
regulations contained herein be equitably enforced.
D.
73.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 40, § 15C.
§ 169-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-4
1:503
§ 169-4. Procedures for designating a scenic road.
Filing of petition.
Any person or group of persons may petition the Planning Board,
Conservation Commission and/or Historical Commission to request
that the Board(s) consider recommending that a road or a portion
thereof be designated a scenic road.
(1)
In making the recommendation, the Board(s) shall use the criteria
listed in § 169-5 herein and shall follow the steps enumerated
directly below.
(2)
A.
Site visit and ensuing actions. The Board(s), or a majority of the
members thereof, shall visit the proposed scenic road. After the site
visit, the Board(s) shall determine, by using the criteria stated in
§ 169-5, and at a regular meeting, whether to consider recommending
to Town Meeting designation as a scenic road.
B.
Hearing.
Prior to making such recommendation, the Board(s) shall hold
a public hearing duly advertised according to the established
procedures of the Board.
(1)
In the event that more than one Board will be holding a hearing,
such hearing will be consolidated.
(2)
The Board(s) shall incorporate reasons for the decisions to
recommend or not recommend designation into the written record
of the hearing.
(3)
C.
Scenic layout plan.
If the Board(s), by majority vote of the members, determine(s) that
designation will be recommended, the Chairperson(s) shall cause
to be prepared a scenic layout plan. Such plan shall be drawn
using a current Assessor's Map and shall include the following
information:
(a) Name of way being proposed as a scenic road.
The limits of the proposed scenic road. The town shall make a
good faith effort to determine the width of the road.
(b)
Names of all abuttors as they appear on the most recent tax
list.
(c)
(d) Location of any intersecting ways.
Location of all scenic features, including but not necessarily
limited to trees or stone walls and any other natural or manmade
features of aesthetic, conservationist or historical value
(e)
(1)
D.
§ 169-4 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 169-4
1:504
§ 169-5. Criteria for recommending designation as a scenic road.
as determined by the Board(s) using the criteria established in
§ 169-5 herein.
Optional: photographs and short written descriptions of the
scenic features to provide clarifying information.
(f)
Other information that would be of assistance to the Board(s)
in their deliberations.
(g)
Such plan shall be on public display in the office of the Building
Inspector at least 10 working days prior to the Town Meeting at
which the vote for designation is scheduled.
(2)
Timing of recommendation. If the Board(s), by majority vote of the
members, determine(s) to recommend designation, the Chairperson(s)
shall cause a request for scenic road designation to be placed on the
warrant for the next Town Meeting, provided that such meeting is
scheduled so as to ensure adequate time for the scenic layout plan to
be prepared and viewed.
E.
Role of Town Meeting. Only the voters at Town Meeting, by majority
vote, have authority to designate that a road or any portion thereof be
designated a scenic road.
F.
The Planning Board, the Conservation Commission and/or the
Historical Commission shall consider the following criteria when
determining whether to recommend designation:
Single trees or stands of trees of exceptional quality in terms of
type, age, specimen size or spread.
(1)
Single trees or stands of trees or other unusual vegetation which
has spring flowering or high fall color potential or otherwise
constitutes an aesthetically pleasing near view.
(2)
Single trees, stands of trees or other unusual examples of
vegetation that create an attractive frame of reference for a distant
vista.
(3)
(4) Overhanging branches which create a leaf tunnel effect.
(5) Attractive field/forest patterns.
(6) Bordering stone walls.
Proximity to an historic district, building, local landmark and/or
place of historic significance.
(7)
Proximity to aesthetically pleasing natural topographic features,
such as foothills, rivers, streams, ponds and meadows.
(8)
A.
§ 169-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-5
1:505
§ 169-6. Notification of parties after designation.
§ 169-7. Procedures for doing work on a scenic road.
Proximity to a Recreation/ Conservation District and/or land in
preservation.
(9)
Rural or woodland character, particularly when such setting is in
contrast to more developed adjacent areas.
(10)
Other qualities which, if altered, would lessen the aesthetic,
conservationist or historical value of the way. Such qualities shall
be stated when the Board(s) give(s) reasons for recommending or
not recommending designation.
(11)
Note: A way need not meet all of the above criteria in order to be
recommended.
B.
When Town Meeting has designated any road or portion thereof as a
scenic road, the Planning Board shall take the following steps within 30
days of such designation:
(1) Notify the abuttors.
Notify in writing all municipal departments that may take action
with respect to such road.
(2)
(3) Notify the State Department of Public Works.
Submit to a newspaper of general circulation a public notice stating
which road or roads have been designated as scenic roads.
(4)
Direct the Inspector of Buildings to indicate such designation on
the Zoning Maps housed in the office of the Inspector of Buildings,
and direct the Assessor to indicate designation on the Assessor's
Map.
(5)
Notify by letter all utility companies or other such parties which
may undertake work within or on the border of such road.
(6)
A.
Note: The Planning Board shall make a good faith effort to notify
the above-named parties; however, the provisions of these rules and
regulations shall apply even though express notice has not been
received.
B.
Filing of petition. Any person, organization, public agency or utility
company proposing to perform any repair, maintenance, reconstruction
or paving work which involves the cutting of trees or the tearing
down or destruction of stone walls on a scenic road shall seek written
consent of the Planning Board as provided for in the Scenic Roads Act.
(See Appendix A.) Such request shall be in writing and shall contain
the following information (See Appendix C, Scenic Roads Hearing
Petition.)74:
A.
§ 169-5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 169-7
1:506
A copy of the scenic layout, as described in § 169-4, with proposed
changes clearly specified.
(1)
(2) A statement of purpose for the proposed changes.
(3) A statement describing in reasonable detail the proposed changes.
A statement describing in reasonable detail plans for restoration of
the site.
(4)
A list of all abuttors as they appear on the most current maps
located in the Tax Assessor's office.
(5)
Except in the case of town agencies, payment of a fee sufficient to
cover the cost of advertising and notification of abuttors. Such fee
shall be established by the Selectmen.
(6)
Any additional explanatory material, such as photographs or
diagrams which might be helpful to the Planning Board in its
deliberations.
(7)
Site visit by Planning Board. Within 14 days prior to the duly advertised
public hearing, Planning Board members shall visit the site of the
proposed work.
B.
Public hearing.
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 30 days after
the Town Clerk acknowledges receipt of a properly filed petition.
The date and time of the hearing shall be set outside of the normal
weekday work hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday) so as to encourage maximum citizen participation.
(1)
The Planning Board through the Inspector of Buildings shall notify
abuttors, the Chairperson of the Conservation Commission and the
Chairperson of the Historical Commission.
(2)
Scenic Road Act hearing shall be held in conjunction with those
hearings held by the Tree Warden acting under the Shade Tree
Act. The consent of the Planning Board shall not be regarded as
inferring consent by the Tree Warden, or vice versa. The Planning
Board decision shall contain a condition that no work shall be done
until there has been compliance with all applicable provisions of
the Shade Tree Act. [Amended 3-23-1998]
(3)
Within 21 days of the hearing, the Planning Board shall issue its
decision in a written reasons for decision in accordance with the
criteria which follow.
(4)
C.
74.Editor's Note: Appendix A and Appendix C are on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 169-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-7
1:507
§ 169-8. Enforcement; appeals.
Basis for Planning Board decision. The Planning Board's decision
on any application for proposed action affecting scenic roads shall
be based on consideration of the following:
The degree to which the proposed action would adversely
affect the attributes upon which the scenic road designation
was originally based. (See § 169-4.)
(a)
The necessity for the proposed action in terms of public safety
or welfare.
(b)
The availability of reasonable alternatives to the proposed
action, which alternatives could reduce or eliminate
anticipated damage to trees or stone walls.
(c)
The consistency of the proposed action with the Town Master
Plan.
(d)
The adequacy of compensatory actions proposed, such as
replacement of trees and/or walls.
(e)
Other sound planning considerations which the Board shall
delineate in its written reasons for decision.
(f)
(5)
Performance guaranty. Before approving a plan to do work on a scenic
road, the Planning Board may require that the proposed work to be
done by an individual or group other than the town be secured by a
bond sufficient in form and amount to ensure satisfactory performance
of the proposed changes and restoration.
D.
Exemption.
Nothing in these rules and regulations shall be construed to
diminish the authority of the Tree Warden and his/her deputies as
set forth in the Shade Tree Act.
(1)
Furthermore, nothing in these rules and regulations shall be
construed to abrogate the responsibility of town officials in an
emergency to remove trees or limbs which endanger person on the
way. The procedures for such emergency removal will be governed
by the provision of the Shade Tree Act, Subsection 5, and other
applicable law.
(2)
E.
The Inspector of Buildings is responsible for the enforcement of this
article and shall take appropriate court action to enforce it. [Amended
3-23-1998]
A.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inspector of Buildings may
file a scenic roads hearing petition. (See Appendix C.75)
B.
75.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 169-7 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 169-9
1:508
§ 169-9. Discontinuance of a scenic road.
§ 169-10. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of these rules and regulations
is held invalid because of legislative or judicial action, the validity of
remaining portions shall not be effected.
Chapter 170
SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 17.
Inspection of sewer and water lines — See Ch.
49, Art. I.
Road acceptances — See Ch. 60, Art. III.
Water — See Chs. 67 and 137.
Road construction standards — See Ch. 113.
If it becomes necessary or desirable to rescind designation of a scenic
road, or any portion thereof, 10 or more registered Williamstown voters
may petition the town to discontinue designation by following town
procedures for placing an article on the warrant for Town Meeting.
A.
At the Town Meeting during which discontinuance is to be considered
by the voters, a spokesperson from each of the three Boards, the
Planning Board, the Conservation Commission and the Historical
Commission, shall present the recommendation of his/her respective
Board.
B.
Scenic road designation of a way shall be removed only if the majority
of townspeople present and voting at Town Meetings vote to rescind its
scenic road designation.
C.
§ 169-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-10
1:509

ARTICLE I
Purposes and Authority
§ 170-1.1. Authority.
Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land were originally
adopted by the Williamstown Planning Board and, together with the
Subdivision Control Law,76 became effective in Williamstown on July 27,
1959. These revised rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land
are adopted by the Williamstown Planning Board under authority of MGL C.
41, § 81Q, and shall be effective on and after June 8, 1993.
§ 170-1.2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to guide the development of land into
lots served with adequate roads and utilities, and to assure that all of the
purposes of the Subdivision Control Law, MGL C. 41, §§ 81-A through 81-GG
are served in Williamstown.
76.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 41, §§ 81-A et seq.
§ 170-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1.2
1:511

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 170-2.1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Williamstown.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which handles average daily traffic
equivalent to that generated by 50 homes or more (500 trips or more, based
on the ITE Trip Generation Manual).
DEAD-END STREET — A street, extension of a street or system of streets
connected to other streets only at a single point.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT — The Floodplain District as established in the
Chapter 70, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Williamstown.
HILLSIDE — Areas having average cross-slope exceeding 15% at locations
where streets are being developed.
LANE — A street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by 12 or
fewer dwelling units (120 trips or fewer, based on the ITE Trip Generation
Manual), which provides access to no abutting property either used or
zoned for business or industry, and which is not capable of extension.
§ 170-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2.1
1:513
MINOR LANE — A lane which provides frontage and access for not more
than three lots for single-family use and approved by the Planing Board
under § 70-7.1J of Chapter 70, Zoning.
MINOR STREET — A street which cannot qualify as a lane, but which can
be expected to handle less traffic than a collector street.
NONRESIDENTIAL STREET — A street which serves as access for land in a
Nonresidential District established by Chapter 70, Zoning.
NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — See definition in § 70-9.2 of Chapter
70, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Williamstown.
PLANNING ADMINISTRATOR — That town official designated by the Town
Manager to carry out the duties assigned to that position in this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision no part of which lies within a
nonresidential district established by Chapter 70, Zoning.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract of land into two or more lots
and shall include resubdivision, and when appropriate to the context, shall
relate to the process of subdivision of the land or territory subdivided;
provided, however, that the division of a tract of land into two or more lots
shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the
Subdivision Control Law77 if, at the time when it is made, every lot within
the tract so divided has frontage on a public way or a way which the Clerk of
the Town of Williamstown certifies is maintained and used as a public way,
or a way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in accordance
with the Subdivision Control Law, or a way in existence on July 27, 1959,
having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable
grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular
traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served
thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and
the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at
least such distance as is then required by Chapter 70, Zoning, for erection
of a building on such lot. Conveyance or other instrument adding to, taking
away from, or changing the size and shape of lots in such a manner as not to
leave any lot so affected without the frontage above set forth, or the division
of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were standing on July 27,
1959, into separate lots, on each of which one of such buildings remains
standing, shall not constitute a subdivision.
TOWN CENTER — The portion of the Town of Williamstown zoned General
Residence 1 or 2 in Chapter 70, Zoning, or in a nonresidential district
contiguous with a General Residence District.
§ 170-2.2. Approval or endorsement required.
Necessity. Only those plans which constitute subdivisions, as that term
is defined in MGL C. 41, § 81-L, require the approval of the Planning
Board. However, all plans creating new property lines, whether
A.
77.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 41, § 81-A et seq.
§ 170-2.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-2.2
1:514
§ 170-2.3. Adequacy of access.
subdivisions within the meaning of the law or not, must have either
approval as a subdivision, or endorsement that they do not require
approval, before they will be accepted for recording at the Registry of
Deeds or for registering at the Land Court.
Date of submittal.
Date determination. Plans intended for review at a regular meeting
of the Planning Board shall be forwarded so as to be received by
the Town Clerk not later than 4:00 p.m. one week prior to the
Planning Board meeting. The date of submission for all plans shall
be the date submitted to the Town Clerk, except in the case of
definitive plans mailed to the Town Clerk by registered or certified
mail, the date of receipt shall be the date received by the Town
Clerk.
(1)
Completeness review. No plan submitted for approval or for
endorsement that approval is not required shall be accepted as a
submittal unless and until all materials required herein have been
fully provided or waived in writing by the Board. At the time of
submission, an initial determination of completeness shall be made
by the Planning Administrator, using a checklist, and the Board and
the applicant shall be notified of the result.
(2)
Incomplete submittal. If the submission has been determined by
the Planning Board to be incomplete, the applicant and the Town
Clerk shall be so advised forthwith. A plan shall not be considered
submitted and the review period will not begin until submittals are
determined to be complete.
(3)
B.
General. Plans shall be endorsed as not requiring approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, and subdivision plans shall be approved, only
if each building lot to be created by such plans has adequate access
as intended under the Subdivision Control Law, MGL C. 41 §§ 81-K
through 81-GG.
A.
Standards of adequacy.
Access for land division. Ways which qualify as "access" only
because of having been in existence when the Subdivision Control
Law became effective in the town shall normally be considered to
provide adequate access to proposed lots said not to constitute
a subdivision only if having an all-weather traveled way width
of at least 16 feet at all points, at least 100 feet stopping sight
distance, drainage assuring uninterrupted access and other design
and construction features which, in the judgment of the Planning
Board, similarly provide for basic movement and safety. Other ways
will be determined to provide adequate access only if in physical
reality they are of sufficient width and are suitable to accommodate
(1)
B.
§ 170-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2.3
1:515
§ 170-2.4. Plans believed not to require approval.
motor vehicle traffic and to provide access for fire-fighting
equipment and other emergency vehicles.
Access to subdivisions. Ways shall normally be considered to
provide adequate access to proposed subdivisions only if they
provide connection to a state-numbered highway via roads which
with no more than minor exceptions continuously meet the
standards of Article IV, except for right-of-way width.
(2)
Access within subdivisions. Ways within subdivisions shall be
considered to provide adequate access only if they comply fully
with this chapter.
(3)
Waivers. The Board may waive strict compliance with these access
requirements only upon its determination, following consultation with
the Town Manager, Director of Public Works, Police Chief and Fire
Chief, that the way in fact will be sufficient to serve proposed uses of
land.
C.
Applicability. Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the
Registry of Deeds, or to be filed with the Land Court, a plan of land
and who believes that his plan does not require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, may submit his plan to the Town Clerk, as
provided at § 170-2.2B(1), accompanied by the necessary evidence to
show that the plan does not constitute a "subdivision" as defined in
§ 170-2.1 and therefore does not require approval under Subdivision
Control Law. Said person shall file with the Town Clerk three prints of
the plan and a completed application (Form A), and shall provide notice
of submittal to the Town Clerk by delivery or registered mail (using
Form A)78.
A.
Contents. In order to be considered by the Board, such plans shall, at a
minimum, show all of the following:
Name and stamp of the registered land surveyor responsible for
the plan and the statement that the plan complies with all
requirements of the Registry of Deeds.
(1)
Indication of the length of frontage of any lot or parcel affected by
the plan, including that of adjoining land in the same ownership.
(2)
Present owner of the land shown on the plan, and all owners of land
abutting either that land or adjoining land in the same ownership.
(3)
Indication of the zoning district or districts involved, and their
boundaries, if encountered.
(4)
B.
78.Editor's Note: Form A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-2.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-2.4
1:516
§ 170-2.5. Submission and approval of definitive plan required.
No person shall make a subdivision of any land within the town, or proceed
with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision or the construction of
ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a
definitive plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and approved by
the Planning Board as hereinafter provided.
§ 170-2.6. Border developments.
In order to assure consistency of subdivision streets or utilities which cross
the town line, the portion of such facilities within Williamstown shall meet
the requirements of the adjacent community, where those requirements
are more demanding, unless this requirement is explicitly waived by the
Planning Board.
§ 170-2.7. Ownership of ways and easements.
Location of any physical features potentially interfering with use of
the frontage for access to the lots being created.
(5)
(6) A locus plan at one inch equals 1,000 feet.
A title block containing the name and address of the owner of the
property being divided.
(7)
An endorsement block containing the words "Planning Board
approval under the Subdivision Control Law not required", and
space for the signatures of the members of the Board and the date
of endorsement.
(8)
Endorsement of plan not requiring approval. If the Planning Board
determines that the plan does not require approval, it shall, without a
public hearing and within 14 days of submission, endorse the plan.
C.
Determination that plan requires approval. If the Planning Board
determines that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law, it shall, within 21 days of the submission of the plan, so
inform the applicant in writing and return the plan. The Planning Board
shall also notify the Town Clerk in writing of its action.
D.
Failure of Board to act. If the Planning Board fails to act upon a plan
submitted under this section or fails to notify the Town Clerk and
the person submitting the plan of its action within 21 days after its
submission, it shall be deemed to have determined that approval under
the Subdivision Control Law is not required, and it shall forthwith make
such endorsement of said plan, and on its failure to do so forthwith, the
Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to the same effect.
E.
Except in the case of minor lane residential development, in order to
facilitate any future takings, the subdivider shall retain title to the fee
of each street, path or easement in or appurtenant to the subdivision
A.
§ 170-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2.7
1:517
§ 170-2.8. Consultants fees.
until conveyed to the town, or for at least two years after completion of
improvements, whichever is the lesser. Notation that this is to be done
shall be placed on the definitive plan. This provision may be waived by
the Planning Board for subdivisions where the public interest is served
by retention of private ways, and means of securing such retention and
their maintenance have been agreed upon. (See § 170-4.6D.)
Prior to conveyance of the right-of-way, the developer shall provide to
the town a plan of the street or streets to be accepted, together with
the legal description necessary for street acceptance.
B.
Applicability. The Board may determine that the size or complexity of a
proposed subdivision or its impacts warrant the employment of outside
consultants (such as engineers, planners, lawyers, hydrogeologists or
others) for plan review, impact analysis, inspection or other technical
assistance in relation to the proposal. Such professionals shall be
selected and retained by the Board, with the reasonable costs for their
services to be paid by the applicant.
A.
Selection appeal. The applicant shall be notified of consultant selection
at least seven days prior to initiation of consultant efforts, unless this
notice period is waived in writing by the applicant. As provided in MGL
C. 44, § 53G, the applicant may administratively appeal the selection
of the consultant to the Selectmen, on the grounds that the proposed
consultant has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum
required qualifications. Appeal is initiated by the applicant filing notice
with the Town Clerk within five working days of notice of the selection.
Consultant efforts shall not begin until any appeal has been decided or
until a month passes without Selectmen's decision, in which case the
Planning Board's selection shall stand. Required time limits for action
shall be extended by the duration of the appeal.
B.
Funding. As provided at various locations in this chapter, the applicant
shall file with the Board an amount of money equal to the estimated
cost for the employment of the consultant, as determined by the Board,
to be deposited into a special account to be established by the Town
Treasurer, as provided by MGL C. 44, § 53G. If the unexpended balance
falls below 30% of the initial estimate, the account shall be restored to
its original level or such lower level as determined to be reasonable and
necessary by the Board. Any unexpended balance, including accrued
interest, shall be repaid to the applicant or his successor in interest at
the completion of the consultant's services.
C.
Remedy. Failure of an applicant to pay fees required hereunder (or any
other fees required in other parts of this chapter) shall be grounds for
continuing hearings, plan disapproval or refusal to release development
security.
D.
§ 170-2.7 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-2.8
1:518
ARTICLE III
Submission and Approval of Plans
§ 170-3.1. Review process.
Project types. There are four subdivision types, each with its own set of
procedures:
Minor lane residential development entails simplified procedures
for certain subdivisions of not more than three lots.
(1)
Major residential development requirements of Chapter 70,
Zoning, apply to all residential subdivisions of more than eight lots;
a special permit is required.
(2)
Nonresidential subdivision differs procedurally from residential
subdivision in that Massachusetts law requires nonresidential
subdivisions to go through a preliminary plan, while for residential
developments that is optional.
(3)
A standard project would be one of not more than eight lots in
a residential district, not seeking the minor lane residential
development procedural exemptions.
(4)
A.
Applicant team. All parties benefit if the subdivision is considered in all
its elements from the start. Applicants are encouraged to involve from
the beginning not only the land surveyor and engineer legally required
for subdivision filing, but also related development professionals, such
as wetland scientists, architects and landscape architects, who will
eventually be retained to help in meeting the design guidelines of
this chapter, to assure integration of land planning, site planning and
building design.
B.
Relationship to zoning; major residential developments.
Major residential developments as defined by Chapter 70, Zoning,
(more than eight lots) will require a special permit. The special
permit and the subdivision plan approval under this chapter are
both acted upon by the Planning Board. While there is no mandated
sequencing between the special permit and subdivision actions, in
the usual case the following will be appropriate.
Presubmission review, to discuss informally the entire
approach.
(a)
Preliminary subdivision plan submittal and special permit
application simultaneously. Information requirements for both
are at a comparable level of specificity, and each provides
information for the other.
(b)
Special permit and preliminary plan decisions, each of which
may include conditions which impact how the definitive plan is
to be shaped.
(c)
(1)
C.
§ 170-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.1
1:519
§ 170-3.2. Presubmission review.
Before investing in extensive professional design efforts for subdivision
plans and their formal submittal, it will often prove useful to review
informally the proposed development of a parcel of land with the Planning
Board, in order that general approaches, choice of subdivision type,
possible use of minor lane residential development procedures and
potential problems can be freely explored. Simple sketches, which need not
be professionally prepared, will assist the discussion and might show some
but not all of the information shown on a preliminary plan. In some cases
this presubmission review may eliminate the need for a preliminary plan.
§ 170-3.3. Preliminary plan.
(d) Definitive plan submittal.
(e) Definitive plan decision, which also may impose conditions.
Decision deadline extensions and conditional approvals will be
used to reconcile any relational difficulties imposed by statutory
timing rules.
(2)
Relationship to zoning; minor lane residential development. minor lane
residential developments must obtain a special permit from the
Planning Board prior to definitive plan approval of the minor lane by
the Planning Board. The suggested sequence of special permit and
definitive plan actions are the same as that for major residential
developments, listed in Subsection C above.
D.
When preliminary plan is required. A preliminary plan of a subdivision
must be submitted for any proposed nonresidential subdivision, and
may be submitted for any proposed residential subdivision.
A.
Submittals. Any person who seeks approval of a preliminary plan of a
subdivision shall make submittals as follows:
Application form submittals. Submit one copy of the application
(Form B)79 each to the Planning Board (through the Town Clerk),
the Town Clerk (by delivery or certified mail) and the Board of
Health.
(1)
Plan submittals. Submit nine copies of the preliminary plan to
the Planning Board through the Planning Administrator, who shall
distribute copies to the Board and to the Board of Health,
Conservation Commission, Inspector of Buildings, Fire
Department, Police Department and Department of Public Works
(DPW).
(2)
(3) Other submittals to the Planning Board.
B.
79.Editor's Note: Form B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-3.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-3.3
1:520
A filing fee as specified in the Table of Fees, available from the
Town Manager.
(a)
A consultant fee, if determined necessary by the Board, in
accordance with § 170-2.8.
(b)
Supplementary submittals. In addition to those items required to
be submitted, it is requested that the following be furnished to the
Planning Board:
A narrative statement of project approach, including selection
of the subdivision type (Appendix A)80 or types to be followed.
(a)
A locus plan of the subdivision, showing its street configuration
in relation to the surrounding area and to zoning district
boundaries, at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet.
(b)
Preliminary findings of the environmental analysis, if one is
expected to be required at the definitive plan stage.
(c)
(d) A list of waivers requested.
(4)
Plan contents. The preliminary plan shall be clearly drawn at a suitable
scale, preferably one inch equals 40 feet but not smaller than one
inch equals 60 feet, on sheets not smaller than 81/2 x 11 inches or
larger than 24 x 36 inches. The preliminary plan shall show sufficient
information about the subdivision to form a clear basis for its review
and for the preparation of the definitive plan, and shall show:
The subdivision name, boundaries, North point, date, scale, legend,
designation of subdivision type (see § 170-4.1) and title
"Preliminary Plan."
(1)
The names of the record owner and the applicant and the name of
the designer, engineer or surveyor.
(2)
(3) The names of all abutters from the most recent tax list.
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and
any public or common areas within the subdivision in a general
manner.
(4)
The proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing
natural waterways, in a general manner.
(5)
The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate
areas and dimensions.
(6)
(7) The names, approximate location and widths of adjacent streets.
(8) The topography of the land in a general manner.
C.
80.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.3
1:521
§ 170-3.4. Minor lane residential development.
On-site review. In order to facilitate field inspection and review of the
site of the proposed subdivision, it is desirable that there be temporary
staking along the approximate center line of all proposed roads in the
subdivision, or if that is impractical, some alternative method of guiding
on-site review.
D.
Planning Board Action. Within 45 days after submission of a preliminary
plan, the Board shall notify the applicant and the Town Clerk either that
the plan has been approved, or that the plan has been approved with
modifications suggested by the Board or agreed upon by the person
submitting the plan, or that the plan has been disapproved, and in the
case of disapproval, the Board shall state in detail its reasons therefor.
Approval of the preliminary plan does not constitute approval of the
subdivision.
E.
Applicability. Applicants may request that their proposals be reviewed
under the minor lane residential development requirements, which are
less stringent than those for a standard project. To qualify, a special
permit must be obtained from the Planning Board, in accordance with
§ 70-7.1J of Chapter 70, Zoning, and the subdivision must comply with
the requirements of Subsection B of this section, as well as with all
design and construction standards contained in § 170-4.2 which are
applicable to minor lanes.
A.
Limiting agreements.
Any plan approved under minor lane residential development
procedures must contain statements indicating that:
The way shown on the plan is intended to be a private way
which is to be owned and maintained by the owners of the lots
shown on the plan.
(a)
In the event the town should be requested to either accept
or maintain the way in the future, the owners of the lots may
be subject to betterment assessments for street repairs and/or
improvements.
(b)
The plan has been approved subject to the terms and
conditions of a special permit issued in accordance with
§ 70-7.1J of Chapter 70, Zoning.
(c)
No land shown on the plan may be further subdivided until
the way is improved to meet the applicable public roadway
construction standards of the Williamstown Subdivision Rules
and Regulations then in effect.
(d)
(1)
In addition, the date of the special permit issued under § 70-7.1J
of Chapter 70, Zoning, and the book and page number where the
special permit has been recorded shall be referenced on the plan,
(2)
B.
§ 170-3.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-3.4
1:522
§ 170-3.5. Definitive plan.
as well as deed references to any covenants, deed restrictions
and/or agreements previously recorded or to be recorded with the
definitive plan, relative to the ownership and maintenance of the
private way.
Minor lane residential development submittals. Submittals made for
definitive plan approval under minor lane residential development
procedures may omit as much of the material required under § 170-3.5
as the Planning Board may authorize in any specific case. However, the
definitive plan must be in a form acceptable to the Registry of Deeds, or
Land Court, and that plan or separate submitted documents must show
the proposed center line profile of the proposed minor lane and the
location of any wetlands. Proposed drainage, utilities and road design
and construction must be made explicit.
C.
Submittals. Any person seeking approval of a definitive plan of a
subdivision, except as authorized by the Planning Board under
§ 170-3.4C for minor lane residential development, shall submit
materials as follows.
Basic submittals. Submit eight copies of the following to the Town
Clerk as provided at § 170-2.2B(1). Copies will be distributed to
the Planning Administrator, Conservation Commission, Inspector of
Buildings, Fire Department, Police Department and DPW:
A narrative statement of project approach, including selection
of the subdivision type (Appendix A) or types to be followed,
and the means by which the guidelines of Appendix A81 or types
to be followed are to be implemented or, where they are not,
justification for why not.
(a)
The definitive plan, as described at Subsection B of this
section. The original definitive plan drawing should be
provided only if and when actual signing of the plan takes
place.
(b)
Street plans and profiles of every proposed street, as described
at Subsection B(3) of this section.
(c)
A locus plan of the subdivision, showing all the information
required for such plans at § 70-8.2B(1) of Chapter 70, Zoning.
(d)
At the same scale as the definitive plan, for a nonresidential
subdivision, a development plan, showing all information
required for a site plan under § 70-8.2B(2) of Chapter 70,
Zoning.
(e)
(1)
A.
81.Editor's Note: Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.5
1:523
Drainage plans, calculations and computer printouts (if any),
documenting the adequacy of all proposals, to include water
table data to evaluate the necessity of underdrains and to
determine detention basin bed elevations; soils data to
substantiate curve number determinations for SCS Method
calculations; inflow/outflow hydrographs for pre- and postdevelopment
conditions at all critical locations, including
detention basins; pipe size calculations; and description of onand
off-site effects of a one-hundred-year storm.
(f)
Where connection to the public water system is not proposed,
information indicating why such connection is not feasible,
description of provisions to be made for water for fire fighting,
and information adequate to allow determination of
compliance with requirements regarding potable water quality
and quantity.
(g)
A list of other permits that will be required, e.g. Conservation
Commission order of conditions.
(h)
(i) Any required estimates for utilities.
An erosion control plan, indicating the erosion control
measures to be employed, including description of locations
of temporary stockpiles, spoil areas, temporary drainage
systems, slope stabilization techniques and sediment basins,
and narrative description of how erosion is proposed to be
controlled.
(j)
An environmental analysis, if required [Subsection A(4) of this
section].
(k)
Construction details and specifications and typical road cross
section.
(l)
A statement of all waivers of the regulations which are being
sought.
(m)
Additional submittals to the Planning Board.
If requested, traverse notes, evidence of ownership, language
of any easements, covenants or deed restrictions applying or
proposed to apply to the area being subdivided, and rights
and easements obtained for utilities or drainage outside of the
subdivision.
(a)
Two (2) copies of properly executed application Form C.82 or
types to be followed.
(b)
A filing fee as specified in the Table of Fees available from the
Town Manager.
(c)
(2)
82.Editor's Note: Form C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-3.5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-3.5
1:524
A consultant fee, if determined necessary by the Board, to be
utilized as provided at § 170-2.8.
(d)
A list of names and mailing addresses for all abutters as they
appear on the most recent local tax list, including property
owners on the opposite side of any streets abutting the
subdivision.
(e)
A description of the property and the proposal, suitable for
advertising.
(f)
Certification by an attorney that submittal of the plan by the
applicant has been agreed to by owners of all of the land
included in the plan.
(g)
Town Clerk submittals. Submit to the Town Clerk by delivery or
registered or certified mail a copy of the completed application
Form C.83 or types to be followed.
(3)
Board of Health submittals. File the following with the Board of
Health one copy of a properly executed Form C or types to be
followed.
(4)
Definitive plan contents.
The definitive plan shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer (civil) and a land surveyor licensed to practice in
Massachusetts, and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in media
acceptable to the Registry of Deeds. The plan shall be at a scale
of one inch equals 40 feet, or such other scale as the Board may
authorize prior to submittal to show details clearly and adequately.
Sheet sizes shall be not larger than 24 x 36 inches. If multiple
sheets are used, they shall if feasible show each lot in its entirety
on one sheet, and shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing
the entire subdivision at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet.
(1)
The definitive plan shall contain the following information:
The subdivision name, boundaries, North point, legend, date,
scale and indication of zoning districts.
(a)
The name and address of record owner, applicant, registered
engineer and registered surveyor, their stamps, and the names
(and stamps, if appropriate) of any other professionals
engaged in the design.
(b)
The names of all abutters as they appear in the most recent
certified tax list, including property owners on the opposite
side of any streets abutting the subdivision.
(c)
(2)
B.
83.Editor's Note: Form C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.5
1:525
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, lots, easements
and public or common areas within the subdivision. (The
proposed names of proposed streets shall be shown in pencil
until they have been approved by the Planning Board.)
(d)
Sufficient data to determine the location, direction and length
of every street and way line, lot line, easement and boundary
line and to establish those lines on the ground.
(e)
The location of all permanent monuments, properly identified
as to whether existing or proposed.
(f)
(g) Lot numbers enclosed in a circle.
The location, names and present layout and traveled way
widths of streets bounding, approaching or within reasonable
proximity to the subdivision, and designation whether public or
private.
(h)
Indication of all easements, covenants or restrictions applying
to the land, and any variances or special permits germane to
the development.
(i)
On each sheet of the definitive plan, suitable space to record
the action of the Board and the signatures of the members of
the Board, and the Town Clerk's certification.
(j)
Certification by the preparers of the plan that the plan and
supporting materials were prepared under their direction, and
have been designed in compliance with all applicable zoning
and subdivision regulations.
(k)
Street plans and profiles. For each street there shall be a separate plan
at one inch equals 40 feet, and a profile at one inch equals 40 feet
horizontal and one inch equals four feet vertical, showing the following
data:
Exterior lines of the way, with sufficient data to determine their
location, direction and length.
(1)
Existing center-line profile to be shown as a fine, continuous line.
Existing center-line profile for intersecting streets to be shown
for at least 100 feet each side of the intersection of street center
lines. Existing right side line shall be shown as a light dashed line,
left side line as dots. Elevations shall be based on United States
Geological Survey or other approved datum, to be referenced on
the plans.
(2)
Proposed center-line profile to be heavy, continuous line, with
elevations shown every 50 feet (25 feet on vertical curves).
(3)
C.
§ 170-3.5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-3.5
1:526
Existing and proposed watercourses, ponds and wetlands, and the
one-hundred-foot buffer zone around resources subject to the
Wetlands Protection Act.84
(4)
(5) Road center-line stationing.
All sewer and drainage facilities to be shown on the profiles,
indicating proposed pipe sizes, slopes and rim and invert
elevations; and to be shown on the street plans, indicating pipe
sizes.
(6)
Plan location and size of existing and proposed water mains,
hydrants and main gate valves.
(7)
(8) Location of proposed streetlights.
Location of existing and proposed street paving, sidewalks and
curbs.
(9)
(10)Location of street signs.
Environmental analysis. An environmental analysis as outlined below
shall be submitted for any subdivision creating frontage potentially
allowing a major residential development, as defined by Chapter 70,
Zoning, and for any nonresidential subdivision, and in other cases
where the Board determines it appropriate in light of special
circumstances. The analyses shall contain as much of the following
information as is determined by the Planning Board to be necessary for
plan evaluation:
Impact upon ground- and surface water quality and level, including
estimated phosphate and nitrate loading on groundwater and
surface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer and other activities
within the development. For subdivisions located in whole or in
part within Water Resource Districts established in Chapter 70,
Zoning, this shall include analysis of open and closed drainage
system alternatives, examining effects upon the basin water budget
and upon future contaminant levels.
(1)
Material effects upon important wildlife habitats, outstanding
botanical features and scenic or historic environs, as shown on
appropriate maps.
(2)
Capability of soils, vegetative cover and proposed erosion control
efforts to support proposed development without danger of erosion,
silting or other instability.
(3)
Measures to be taken to assure compliance with the requirements
of MGL C. 131, §§ 40 and 40A (the Wetlands Protection Act).
(4)
D.
84.Editor's Note: See MGL. C. 131, § 40.
§ 170-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.5
1:527
Impact upon the existing water supply system and well capacity of
the town.
(5)
Ability of streets providing access to the subdivision to safely
provide such access, including measurement of sight distances at
each intersection with proposed streets, impact of development
traffic on the traffic level of service, gap acceptance analysis and
analysis of hazards owing to limited sight distances, alignment or
other characteristics of access roads.
(6)
Measures to be taken to assure compliance by future building
permit applicants with Article V, Development Standards, of
Chapter 70, Zoning.
(7)
Performance guaranty.
Form of guaranty. Before the Planning Board endorses its approval
of a definitive plan, the developer shall agree to complete without
cost to the town all improvements required by this regulation,
and shall provide security that he or she will do so, either by
covenanting not to sell or build upon any lots until completion
of the improvements (which covenant must be referred to on the
plan and registered or recorded with it), or by posting bond or
other security which the town can utilize in the event that the
improvements are not completed within two years or such shorter
time as may be agreed, or by some combination of these. Such
security shall provide, among other things, that no structure shall
be occupied until streets or ways serving such structures have been
surfaced with at least the binder course, and also that all utilities
serving it have been satisfactorily installed.
(1)
Security amount. If completion is secured by bond or deposit, the
amount shall be determined by the Board to cover the following
(See Form H.)85:
The cost to the town should it be obliged to install the required
improvements;
(a)
(b) Maintenance for one year;
(c) Inflation over the time allowed for completion of work; and
(d) Ten-percent contingency.
(2)
Release of guaranty. Full or partial release of security shall be
made only as provided in § 170-5.2.
(3)
E.
Review by Board of Health. Within 45 days of the definitive plan being
filed with them, the Board of Health shall report to the Planning Board
in writing its approval or disapproval of the plan. In the event of
disapproval, the Board of Health shall make specific findings as to
F.
85.Editor's Note: Form H is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-3.5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-3.5
1:528
which, if any, areas shown on such plan cannot be used for building
sites without injury to the public health, and shall include specific
findings and the reasons therefor in such report and, where possible,
shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof. The Health
Board or officer shall send a copy of such report, if any, to the person
who submitted the plan. Any approval of the plan by the Planning Board
shall then only be given on condition that no building or structure shall
be built or placed upon the areas so designated without written consent
of the Board of Health. The Planning Board shall endorse on the plan
such condition, specifying the lots or land to which said condition
applies.
Public hearing. Before approval of the definitive plan is given, a public
hearing shall be held by the Planning Board. Notice of such hearing
shall be given by the Board by advertisement in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town, once in each of two successive weeks, the
first publication being not less than 14 days before the day of such
hearing. A copy of said notice shall be mailed to the applicant, and
via certified mail to all owners of land abutting upon the subdivision,
including property owners on the opposite side of any streets abutting
the subdivision, all as appearing in the most recent tax list.
G.
Decision.
Decision criteria. After the public hearing, the Board in due course
will approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the definitive
subdivision plan submitted. Criteria for action by the Board shall
be the following:
(a) Completeness and technical adequacy of all submissions.
Determination that development at this location does not entail
unwarranted hazard to safety, health and convenience of future
residents of the development or of others because of possible
natural disasters, traffic hazard or other environmental
degradation.
(b)
Conformity with the requirements of Article IV, Design and
Construction Requirements.
(c)
Determination, based upon the environmental analysis (where
submitted), that the subdivision as designed will not cause
substantial and irreversible damage to the environment, which
damage could be avoided or ameliorated through an
alternative development plan.
(d)
(e) Adequacy of access as provided at § 170-2.3.
(f) Conformity with the recommendations of the Board of Health.
Conformity with all applicable zoning requirements, including
Article V, Development Standards, of Chapter 70, Zoning.
(g)
(1)
H.
§ 170-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.5
1:529
Determination that any applicable development guidelines of
the appendices have been reflected in the design.
(h)
Determination that traffic impacts meet the standards of
Appendix D, Traffic Impact Guidelines.
(i)
(j) Consistency with the purposes of the Subdivision Control Law.
Deadlines for action. A certificate of the Board's action, or notice of
an agreed extension of the time for such action, must be provided
by the Planning Board to the Town Clerk within 90 days following
the date of submission of the plan if the plan follows action on
(or failure to timefully act on) a preliminary plan. Where no
preliminary plan was submitted, a certificate must be provided
within 135 days following the date of submission. Either deadline
can be extended if an extension is requested in writing by the
applicant and accepted by the Board.
(2)
Certificate of action.
The action of the Board in respect to such plan shall be by vote,
a certificate of which shall be filed by the Board with the Town
Clerk, and a copy sent by registered mail to the applicant. If
the Board modifies or disapproves such plan, it shall state in
its vote the reasons for its action. Final approval, if granted,
shall be endorsed on the original drawing of the definitive plan
by the signatures of a majority of the Board, but not until the
statutory twenty-day appeal period has elapsed following the
filing of the certificate of the action of the Board with the Town
Clerk, and said Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has
been filed.
(a)
After the definitive plan has been approved and endorsed,
the applicant shall furnish the Board with six prints thereof,
together with a copy of final covenants, conditions and
restrictions, noting book, page number and date of recording
for both the plan and the covenants, conditions and
restrictions, and shall furnish three copies of detailed
construction plans.
(b)
Final approval of the definitive plan does not constitute the
laying out or acceptance by the town of streets within a
subdivision.
(c)
(3)
Rescission. Failure of the developer to record the definitive plan within
six months of its endorsement, or to comply with the construction
schedule, if any, incorporated into the performance agreement, or to
initiate construction of improvements or to sell lots in a subdivision or
portion thereof within eight years of the approval of the definitive plan,
shall constitute sufficient reason for the Planning Board to consider
rescission of such approval, in accordance with the requirements of
MGL C. 41, § 81-W.
I.
§ 170-3.5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-3.5
1:530
ARTICLE IV
Design and Construction Requirements
§ 170-4.1. General guidelines.
Basic requirement. All subdivisions shall be designed and
improvements made by the developer consistent with the requirements
of Article IV. Subdivisions shall be designed to be consistent with one
of the following subdivision types, as described further in Appendix
A, or shall be divided into subareas, each of which is designed to be
consistent with one of these types:
Village. Village subdivisions are appropriate within or adjacent
to densely developed areas, or where a future village center is
proposed. They are intended to continue the pattern of traditional
development. In light of relatively small lots and short frontages,
drainage systems will be closed, and sidewalks and granite curbs
will be installed.
(1)
Gathering. Gathering subdivisions are intermediate between
village and dispersed, such as in the developed portion of a
subdivision having low overall density but clustered lots. Drainage
will usually be closed, but sidewalks will be required only in certain
cases. Curbing, if provided, need not be vertical granite. The road
edge may sometimes be a grass berm.
(2)
Dispersed. Dispersed subdivisions involve large lots and long
frontages, so drainage may normally be open, streets may be
without curbs or berms, and sidewalks are required only in special
circumstances.
(3)
A.
General design guidelines. The subdivision plan should reflect the
suggestions of Appendix B,86 which contains general design guidelines.
B.
Conformance with Master Plan. The subdivision plan shall conform
insofar as practical to any elements of the Williamstown Master Plan
which have been adopted by the Planning Board in the same manner
as prescribed for amendments to this chapter and which are made
available along with copies of this chapter.
C.
Standards of construction. Standards of construction not otherwise
specified hereunder shall be those of the Williamstown Department
of Public Works Construction Standards or, where that agency has
no standard, the Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges
of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works (latest edition with
amendments in effect at that time).
D.
Typical cross sections. Design and construction shall conform to the
general configuration shown in the typical cross sections of Appendix
E.
86.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.1
1:531
§ 170-4.2. Streets.
A87 and to the detailed requirements shown on the Street Cross
Sections incorporated into Chapter 113, Road Construction Standards.
Location.
All streets in the subdivision shall be located so that they will
provide safe vehicular travel.
(1)
Streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing streets
as far as is practicable.
(2)
If adjoining property is not subdivided, proper provision for
extending streets shall be made, except in the case of
developments under minor lane residential development of
§ 170-3.4.
(3)
Reserved strips of property prohibiting access to streets or
adjoining property will not be permitted.
(4)
Center-line offsets for intersecting streets shall either be zero or be
more than 150 feet.
(5)
Streets shall intersect with tangent sections of at least 40 feet
length on each street meeting at not less than 60° (ideally at 90°).
(6)
A.
87.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-4.1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-4.2
1:532
Intersections shall provide for block lengths of between 600 and
1,000 feet, and on collector streets shall be spaced not less than
600 feet apart.
(7)
The center line of the paved surface shall coincide as closely as
possible with the right-of-way center line. In no case shall either
edge of the paved surface be closer than 10 feet to the edge of the
right-of-way.
(8)
Street location creating lots with frontage on two streets may
be required by the Planning Board in order to avoid driveways
opening onto collectors.
(9)
Geometric standards. Streets shall be designed to meet the geometric
standards of the following table, except where departure is authorized
or required for minor lanes under §§ 170-3.4 and 170-4.2H. The
Planning Board may impose more demanding requirements, but only
where exceptional conditions make that necessary for public safety.
"Hillside" applies to streets or street segments where average slopes
exceed 15% across the street center line.
Geometric Requirements
Street Type
Requirements
Lane/ Minor
Lane Minor Street
Collector
Street
Nonresidential
Minimum
centerline
radius
(feet)
Basic 125 150 250 250
Hillside 75 100 150 N/A
B.
§ 170-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.2
1:533
Geometric Requirements
Street Type
Requirements
Lane/ Minor
Lane Minor Street
Collector
Street
Nonresidential
Minimum
design
speed
for sight
distance
(mph)*
All
classes
20 20 30 30
Pavement
edge
radius at
corner
(feet)
Village
type
10 10 20 N/A
Others 25 25 30 30
Minimum
right-ofway
(feet)
Basic 45 50 60 50
Hillside 40 45 45 N/A
Minimum
pavement
width
(feet)
Basic 20 24 30 26
Hillside 18 20 22 N/A
Maximum
centerline
grade
(%)
Basic 12% 10% 8% 10%
Hillside 12% 12% 10% N/A
§ 170-4.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-4.2
1:534
Geometric Requirements
Street Type
Requirements
Lane/ Minor
Lane Minor Street
Collector
Street
Nonresidential
Minimum
leveling
area
length
(feet)
[See
§ 170-4.2D(2).]
Basic 40 40 40 50
Hillside 20 20 20 N/A
NOTES:
"N/A" indicates a category which is not allowed.
* Design to based on AASHTO standards and, for intersections, the
highest street category involved.
Dead-end streets.
Permissibility. Dead-end streets shall not be allowed in village
subdivisions unless there is no feasible alternative. Where they
are employed, there or elsewhere, dead-end streets shall provide
access to no more than 12 dwelling units potentially allowable
under current zoning and any restrictions proposed, unless, in the
opinion of the Board, serving a greater number is necessitated
by topography or other local conditions, and any concerns over
emergency access in contingencies have been resolved.
(1)
Minimum length. Dead-end streets shall be no shorter than 100
feet measured from the center of the turnaround to the intersecting
street sideline.
(2)
C.
§ 170-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.2
1:535
Turnaround.
Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a
fourteen-foot wide turning lane providing an outside turning
radius of 40 feet, and a property line diameter of 105 feet,
or an alternative turnaround designed for a vehicle of thirtyfoot
length, eight-foot width, and having an outside turning
radius of 57 feet. Standard or teardrop turnarounds shall have
vegetated islands, with plantings selected and placed to
preserve safe sight distances.
(a)
Except that for minor lanes, right-of-way property line
diameter may be reduced to 80 feet, outside turning radius to
30 feet, and vegetated islands may be omitted.
(b)
(3)
Grades.
Maximum and minimum. Center-line grades of all streets shall
be not greater than indicated in the Geometric Standards Table,
except where, because of unusual conditions, an increase of not
more than 1.0% for distances of not more than 300 feet improves
the degree to which the design guidelines of § 170-4.1B are met.
Center-line grade shall be not less than 1.0%.
(1)
Intersection leveling areas. Center-line grades shall not exceed
4% within leveling areas as specified in the Geometric Standards
Table, with distances measured outwards from the pavement edge
of an intersecting street.
(2)
D.
§ 170-4.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-4.2
1:536
Vertical curves. Changes in grade exceeding 1% shall be connected
by vertical curves of sufficient length to afford a passing sight
distance as specified in the Geometric Standards Table, unless
drainage considerations dictate otherwise for sag vertical curves.
(3)
Cross-slope. The street surface shall have a cross slope of 3/8 inch
per foot on each side of the center line.
(4)
Wetland relationship. Center-line profiles shall be at least three
feet above the grade of adjacent wetlands.
(5)
Volume balance. Street grades shall be so designed that the volume
of cuts and fills made within the subdivision's rights-of-way
approximately balance, except to offset peat, boulders or other
unusable materials to be removed.
(6)
Grade change limitation. Proposed center-line grade shall not be
more than seven feet above or below the existing center-line grade.
(7)
Street construction. Materials and construction for streets shall comply
with Chapter 113, Road Construction Standards, as most recently
revised.
E.
Curbs and berms.
Requirement. Curbs shall be provided on both sides of all streets
in village subdivisions, and curbs or bituminous berms shall be
provided in other subdivisions as follows:
(a) Where curb grade exceeds 8%.
(b) Where street pavement edge radius is less than 75 feet.
Where street center-line averages less than 50 feet per
dwelling unit.
(c)
(d) Where necessitated by unusual needs for stormwater control.
(1)
F.
§ 170-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.2
1:537
Materials. Where curb or berm is required, materials shall be
as follows, in each case complying with Chapter 113, Road
Construction Standards:
Granite curbing type VA 4: frontage average under 50 feet per
housing unit, or village subdivision.
(a)
Grass berm: Frontage average over 100 feet per housing unit;
curb grade does not exceed 8%; street edge radius is at least
75 feet; and area drainage characteristics are demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board to be suitable for such
berms.
(b)
Six-inch bituminous concrete berm: all other cases requiring
curb or berm.
(c)
(2)
Handicapped access. Where sidewalks are constructed, sidewalk
ramps shall be provided at each intersection, designed and
constructed in compliance with Chapter 113, Road Construction
Standards, and the Rules and Regulations of the Architectural
Access Board, 521 CMR, whichever is more stringent.
(3)
Driveways. All driveways must be paved from the completed road
surface to the lot line with at least three inches of bituminous concrete
unless roads are to be gravel. All driveway slopes must end at the street
right-of-way, then continue forward to the completed road surface in
the same grade as the sidewalk strip and/or shoulder in order to allow
proper drainage of surface water.
G.
Minor lanes. The following shall apply to minor lane residential
developments approved under § 170-3.4:
General. Minor lanes shall be designed with consideration for the
natural contours of the landscape, and shall provide adequate
drainage at all points, while minimizing erosion both on and beside
the road. Depressions shall be filled to a grade above that of the
adjacent roadside and, where possible, natural drainage measures
(i.e., swales and retention ponds) shall be employed rather than
storm sewers and catch basins. Where natural drainage is used,
drainage easements shall be provided to permit maintenance and
to provide for possible water accumulation. Appropriate measures
(1)
H.
§ 170-4.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-4.2
1:538
§ 170-4.3. Stormwater management.
shall be taken to reduce siltation and to preserve and restore
roadside vegetation.
Design.
Reductions from the width of the traveled way required for a
lane under § 170-4.2C may be permitted, but in no case shall
the width of the traveled way of a minor lane be less than 12
feet, with an additional two feet in width cleared of branches
and obstructions. The right-of-way width shall be not less than
33 feet.
(a)
Grades shall not exceed 12%, and center-line radius shall be
not less than 75 feet. Where the traveled way is permitted to
be narrower than required at § 170-4.2C for a lane and more
than 300 feet long, there shall be turnouts allowing vehicles to
pass.
(b)
At intersections with paved roads, there shall be a leveling
area as provided by § 170-4.2D(2) unless the Planning Board
authorizes substitution of a paved apron, subject to DPW
approval on a case-by-case basis.
(c)
(2)
Construction. Construction of minor lanes shall conform, at a
minimum, to the requirements of Section II.A.1 of the Williamstown
Department of Public Works Construction Standards for gravel
roads which fall under minor lane status.
(3)
Maintenance. Minor lanes are not intended to be accepted as
public ways or to be otherwise maintained by the Town of
Williamstown. Prior to the endorsement of approval on a minor
lane definitive plan, the applicant shall be required to provide
assurances satisfactory to the Planning Board as to the provision
for permanent maintenance of the approved minor lane at no
expense to the town.
(4)
Design.
Basic requirement. Storm drains, culverts, swales, detention basins
and related facilities shall be designed to permit the unimpeded
flow of all natural watercourses, to ensure adequate drainage at
all low points along the streets, to control erosion, to intercept
stormwater runoff along streets at intervals reasonably related to
the extent and grade of the areas being drained and to control
the location, rate and quality of stormwater discharge from the
development.
(1)
System Approach. In dispersed-type subdivisions an "open"
drainage approach will normally be appropriate, with roadway
design aimed at removing water from paved surfaces continuously
(2)
A.
§ 170-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.3
1:539
rather than at infrequent catch basins or spillways, and using
swales and ponding areas in preference to gutters, catch basins
and piped stormwater. In other subdivision types, drainage
normally will be a "closed" system, with stormwater carried in
gutters to system inlets. The Planning Board will consider
combinations where applicable, and will consider other options
based on the specifics of the particular development plan. No
closed drainage systems shall be used on unpaved roads.
Design basis.
In storm events up to a fifty-year storm, peak flows in
downstream drainage facilities and receiving streams and
sheet runoff onto adjoining properties shall be no higher
following development than prior to development, unless an
increase is authorized by the Planning Board, following
consultation with the Conservation Commission and
consideration of the ability of receiving facilities, wetlands or
water bodies to absorb the increase, and the consequences
of providing detention capacity. Drainage systems shall be
designed based on a ten-year frequency storm, except that
detention facilities shall be based on a fifty-year storm, and in
a one-hundred-year storm streets shall be inundated not more
than six inches deep, and a building site on each building lot
shall remain uninundated. Drainage design shall accommodate
and account for drainage from foundation drains and cellar
sumps.
(a)
In the Floodplain District, drainage systems shall be designed
to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(b)
(3)
Calculations.
Calculation methods and constants shall be as approved by the
Williamstown DPW. Computerized calculation methods will be
accepted, provided that their data and graphic printout are
adequately documented to allow review and evaluation.
(a)
Except where that is shown to be unrealistic, drainage
calculations shall assume all tributary area to be developed
as zoned, with stormwater management provisions as required
under Chapter 70, Zoning, and this chapter.
(b)
(4)
Storm drains.
Catch basin and sewer configuration. Where employed, catch basin
and storm sewer systems shall be configured as required by
Chapter 113, Road Construction Standards.
(1)
Adjacent property. Proper connections shall be made with any
existing drains in adjacent streets or easements where they may
exist and prove adequate to accommodate the drainage flow from
(2)
B.
§ 170-4.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-4.3
1:540
the subdivision. Subdivision plans indicating piped, channeled or
otherwise altered discharge onto property of others shall be
allowed only if documentation is provided demonstrating
authorization from the property owners involved.
Subdrains. Subdrains or interceptor drains are required where
necessary to preclude flowage of groundwater threatening to the
integrity of the road surface.
(3)
Catch basins and manholes. Catch basins shall be provided with grates
installed. Leaching catch basins will not be allowed.
C.
Detention basins. Where employed, detention basins shall be designed
in compliance with the following:
Depth and grading. Basin overspill height shall be not less than
one foot above the highest water surface projected for the design
storm, and shall not exceed five feet above bed elevation. The slope
of detention basin walls shall not exceed one foot vertical in three
feet horizontal.
(1)
Base determination.
The base of the detention basin shall be a minimum of two
feet above the maximum water table as defined by the Town of
Williamstown Board of Health regulations. (Deep tests shall be
made between February 15 and May 15.)
(a)
Groundwater level shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer. The detention basin base must be
entirely below the existing grade, not constructed on fill
material.
(b)
(2)
Inflow. Inflow pipe invert shall be high enough that there will not
be substantial backwater in the pipe with the detention basin at
maximum depth. The downstream end of the inflow pipe shall be
suitably protected against scour and shall protect the bed and sides
of the basin.
(3)
Outflow. An outflow drain with trash interceptor shall be provided,
with a design assuring that outflow will not exceed existing flows
(4)
D.
§ 170-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.3
1:541
§ 170-4.4. Utilities.
for any event up to the design storm, and that the basin will
empty in not more than four days in the design storm. Any outflow
pipe shall be not les than six inches in diameter. Outflow invert
shall be not less than 0.50 foot above bed elevation. An overflow
weir protected against erosion shall be provided for accumulations
exceeding those of the design storm.
Planting. The basin side slopes and bottom shall be provided with
four inches of loam, and seeded.
(5)
Protection. A four-foot fence or wall shall be constructed around
the basin with an eight-foot wide gate for access (may be double
four-foot leaf), with lock, and a key shall be provided to the Town
of Williamstown. However, if the detention facility has slopes not
exceeding one foot vertical to five feet horizontal and a maximum
water depth of not more than 2.5 feet, an alternative barrier, such
as a hedge, may be allowed.
(6)
Maintenance. Maintenance of detention facilities and other offstreet
drainage elements shall be assured at no expense to the
town, as provided at § 170-4.6D(2).
(7)
Water Resource Districts. Within Water Resource Districts as
established in Chapter 70, Zoning, provisions for contaminant removal
shall be made employing detention basins with subsurface drains or
perforated risers, oil and grit separator catch basins or other devices
where appropriate.
E.
Installation. All elements of sewers, water pipes, gas lines, telephone,
electricity and CATV cable which are to be within the traveled way shall
be installed before roadway base course installation.
A.
Water.
Public supply. Whenever feasible, the water supply shall be from
a public water supply system. In such cases, the water supply
system will be considered adequate only if it meets the standards
of § 70-5.2B of Chapter 70, Zoning, as well as applicable state and
federal law.
(1)
System responsibility. If connection to a public water system is
proposed but it is determined by the Board that the above
standards will not be met in part or all of the subdivision for
reasons beyond the reasonable responsibility of the developer, the
Board may nevertheless approve the plan subject to a condition
that any lot not adequately served shall not be built upon until
service has been made adequate.
(2)
Standards. Water system design, equipment, materials and
construction shall meet the Construction Standards of the
(3)
B.
§ 170-4.3 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-4.4
1:542
§ 170-4.5. Other improvements.
Williamstown DPW, and Fire District requirements for hydrant
location.
Dead-end mains. Permanent dead-end water mains shall not
normally be allowed. Easements shall be provided where necessary
to allow for extension or looping of mains through subsequent
development.
(4)
Sewerage.
Public system. Where street laterals in subdivision streets could
connect by gravity to the town sewerage system, provisions shall
be made for town sewerage to serve all lots which potentially can
be so served. Extension of existing sewerage will be required at
the developer's expense to meet this requirement unless either the
Hoosic Water Quality District denies authorization, or connection
would require greater expenditures for facilities outside the
subdivision and not abutting it than for those within or abutting
the subdivision, including house connections, or would require
acquisition of easements across property of others.
(1)
Design. Sewerage system design and construction shall comply
with the Construction Standards of the Williamstown DPW, as well
as applicable requirements of state and federal law.
(2)
C.
Cable utilities.
Wiring. Underground distribution systems shall be provided for any
and all utility services, including electrical, telephone and cable
television services. Poles and any associated overhead structures,
of a design approved by the Planning Board following consultation
with the Fire District, shall be provided for streetlighting.
(1)
Streetlighting. The quantity, type and location of lights within a
proposed subdivision shall be subject to Planning Board approval
following consultation with the Fire District, and shall be shown
on the Street Plan. Streetlighting shall normally be installed at
each intersection, cul-de-sac or other road hazard. In village
subdivisions light spacing normally shall not exceed 350 feet.
(2)
D.
Floodplain District. In the Floodplain District, as established in Chapter
70, Zoning, all public utilities and facilities, such as gas, electrical
and water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
E.
Utility lanes. The applicant may propose location of some or all utilities
in service lanes along rear lot lines if the utility providers involved give
written approval to the access and other provisions being made.
F.
A. Sidewalks.
§ 170-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.5
1:543
Requirement. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all
streets in village subdivisions. In other subdivision types, sidewalks
shall be provided where doing so is determined by the Planning
Board to be appropriate in order to preserve or connect with
existing sidewalks, to provide safe access to schools or recreation
facilities or where unusual conditions require them for safety.
(1)
Design.
Sidewalks shall be five feet in width in village subdivisions,
constructed of concrete. Elsewhere where required, sidewalks
shall be four feet in width, constructed of bituminous concrete,
except where the Board determines that potential use
warrants a sidewalk five feet in width or construction of
concrete. The sidewalk shall be located as indicated on the
cross sections of Chapter 113, Road Construction Standards,
but variations may be authorized by the Board to minimize
disturbance of vegetation or land forms. Sidewalk ramps
conforming to the Construction Standards of the Williamstown
DPW shall be provided at all intersections of sidewalks and
streets, and elsewhere as appropriate.
(a)
Any off-street paths shall provide a clear path not less than five
feet wide and be within rights-of-way not less than eight feet
wide, in both cases unless greater width is required because of
the function of the pathway.
(b)
(2)
Construction. Construction shall comply with Chapter 113, Road
Construction Standards, of the Williamstown DPW.
(3)
Shoulders. Shoulders shall be provided free of obstructions other than
trees approved for preservation by the Board. Width shall be as
indicated on the cross sections in Chapter 113, Road Construction
Standards.
B.
Slope areas.
Slope limitations. No slopes resulting from grading of streets shall
exceed one foot vertical to two feet horizontal, or 3/4 foot vertical
to one foot horizontal in ledge. Slope easements for construction
shall be provided where regrading cannot be contained within
street side lines. Any retaining walls proposed must be located in
easements outside of the street right-of-way, with provisions for
private maintenance.
(1)
Stormwater containment. Driveway entrances and land between
the outside of the layout and the traveled way shall be so graded as
to prevent surface water on the street from draining onto private
land except at designated ponding areas or at drainage easements.
(2)
C.
D. Plantings.
§ 170-4.5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-4.5
1:544
Clearing. The site of a project shall only be cleared to the extent
necessary for construction or for safe sight distances. Trees, shrubs
and ground cover beyond the limits of construction should be
preserved whenever possible, and so marked in the field and
protected against damage during construction.
(1)
Stream protection. A strip of vegetation 10 or more feet wide shall
be preserved along stream banks to stabilize slopes and protect
against erosion.
(2)
Preserved plant materials. Plant materials which require removal
for construction should, when feasible, be salvaged to be replanted
at a later time.
(3)
Ground planting. Unpaved areas within the right-of-way which
have been stripped by the construction shall be restored to
vegetation, except where stone riprap is necessitated for drainage.
That vegetation shall be perennial grasses on at least four inches
(after rolling) of topsoil, with methods and materials as specified
in Chapter 113, Road Construction Standards. Slopes steeper than
2.5:1, or which do not support turf, shall be planted with vines,
ground cover or other low-growing herbaceous or woody plants in
addition to grass.
(4)
Street trees. Tree retention or planting shall provide substantial
microclimate protection (shading, wind interruption) for
subdivision streets, except where not doing so is approved in
advance by the Board in order not to obstruct vistas or because of
localized growing conditions. A plan showing location and species
of trees proposed for retention or planting to accomplish that shall
be submitted to the Board for approval before planting. Where
street trees are to be located outside of the right-of-way, an
easement shall be provided, giving the town both authority
regarding tree planting, maintenance and removal, and
responsibility regarding tree maintenance.
(5)
Tree stock. Trees to be planted as street trees shall be well
branched, nursery grown stock at least 21/2 inches trunk diameter
at four feet above ground, and shall be free of injury, harmful
insects and diseases. Suitability of species must be approved by the
Planning Board, taking into consideration the recommendations of
the Tree Warden and such published guides as Arnoldia, Volume
39, #3, May/June 1979, and American Standards for Nursery
Stock, American Association of Nurserymen, 1990, with
considerations as outlined in Appendix C.88 Planting and
maintenance shall follow guidelines of the American Association of
Nurserymen.
(6)
88.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.5
1:545
§ 170-4.6. Additional requirements.
Existing trees. Existing trees within the right-of-way, if larger than
four inches trunk diameter at four feet above ground and located
outside the shoulders, shall be preserved, unless removal is
authorized by the Planning Board because they are of species
unlikely to survive the environmental change, or are diseased,
weak or easily broken by wind or snow loads when exposed. Trees
to be retained shall be marked in the field, protected as necessary
and not have grade changed over their root areas more than 12
inches.
(7)
Street signs. As soon as a street is paved, street signs conforming to
those placed by the town shall be erected at all street intersections.
E.
Monuments. Monuments shall be installed at all street intersections; at
all points of change in direction or of curvature of the streets; at each
lot corner along the street; and as necessary to locate any easements to
be deeded to the town. Materials and construction shall be as provided
in Chapter 113, Road Construction Standards.
F.
Open space.
Basic requirement. The Planning Board may require the plan to
show a potential park or parks suitably located for recreational
purposes or for providing light and air. The park or parks shall not
be unreasonable in area in relation to the land being subdivided
and to the prospective uses of the land.
(1)
Reservation. The Board may by appropriate endorsement on the
plan require that no building be erected upon such potential park
or parks for a period of not more than three years without its
approval, which provides a period within which the town or a
nonprofit organization has an opportunity to purchase the
designated property.
(2)
A.
Earth removal. Any area within the subdivision used for the extraction
of gravel or borrow shall be regraded, loamed and in sod before final
release is granted by the Planning Board.
B.
Spoil lots. One or more lots or other designated areas in each
subdivision shall be reserved for disposal of stumps and rock resulting
from the development of that subdivision, unless the applicant provides
a written agreement providing for off-premises disposal at an approved
site. Land within the subdivision intended for such use shall be so
identified on the subdivision plan, and further indicated on that plan
as "not a building lot." Notice that such use has been authorized by
the Board of Health shall be posted on the premises until disposal is
completed, and all requirements of the Board of Health are complied
with, at which point the land shall be restored to safe and stable slopes
and grades, and vegetation shall be restored. Such restoration shall be
C.
§ 170-4.5 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-4.6
1:546
included in the items for which bond or other security is provided, and
shall be completed prior to final release of security.
Maintenance.
General. The entire area within the right-of-way shall be properly
maintained by the developer or successor organization, such as a
homeowners association, until accepted by the town. Immediately
prior to such acceptance, all catch basins shall be cleaned, streets
swept and the remainder of the right-of-way and any other areas to
be deeded to the town shall be cleaned, mowed or otherwise put
in first-class order. Snow removal and sanding of the streets shall
be the responsibility of the developer or successor organization
until such acceptance.89 Before sale of any lot, the subdivider
shall clean up any debris thereon caused by construction of public
improvements.
(1)
Permanent responsibilities.
Except for minor lane residential development, whose
maintenance is provided for in § 170-4.2H(4), when private
maintenance of landscaping within streets or off-road
detention facilities or street tree easements are entailed, the
applicant shall be required to provide assurances, satisfactory
to the Planning Board, as to the provision for permanent
maintenance of the improvements at no expense to the town.
(a)
Prior to conveyance of any lots, the applicant shall enter into
an agreement with the town to ensure the continued operation
and maintenance of those elements cited above without
expense to the town.
(b)
(2)
D.
Easements.
Utility easements. Easements for utilities shall be provided where
necessary and shall be at least 20 feet wide.
(1)
Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by an
intermittent watercourse, drainageway, detention area, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way of adequate width to conform substantially to the lines
of such watercourse, drainageway, detention area, channel or
stream and to provide for construction or other necessary purposes
(such as maintenance).
(2)
Off-site Easements. Drainage easements outside of the area of
the subdivision, but occasioned by it, may be required of the
subdivider.
(3)
E.
89.Editor's Note: See also Art. III, Road Acceptances, of Ch. 60.
§ 170-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.6
1:547
§ 170-4.7. Extensions of streets and utilities.
Provisions shall be made for extension of streets and utilities to adjoining
properties, including installation of water gates and manholes, if necessary,
unless the Planning Board determines that such extension would not serve
the public interest. The developer shall not deny others connection to the
water system, sewerage, drainage or cable utilities, provided that those
doing the extension receive prior approval of the Williamstown DPW and
pay all costs of such connection, and comply with all applicable
requirements of the Town of Williamstown.
Slope easements. Slope easements to provide for construction shall
be provided where cut or fill slopes cannot be contained within the
street right-of-way.
(4)
Erosion control. Erosion control efforts shall be made consistent with
the requirements of § 70-5.3C of Chapter 70, Zoning.
F.
As-built plans. Upon completion of construction, and before release
of the performance guaranty, the subdivider shall have prepared and
submitted to the Williamstown DPW as-built plans in accordance with
Chapter 113, Road Construction Standards.
G.
§ 170-4.6 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-4.7
1:548
ARTICLE V
Administration
§ 170-5.1. Inspections.
§ 170-5.2. Release of performance guaranty.
Inspecting agent. At least one week prior to commencement of street
construction, the developer shall notify the Department of Public Works
in writing of the intended commencement. The Department shall, upon
receipt of such notification, appoint an agent and instruct said agent
to make continuing inspections of the work to ensure that the
requirements listed below are adhered to. The reasonable costs for said
agent are to be determined by the Department in accordance with the
accepted Town Pay Schedule and paid to the town by the developer.
A.
Special consultants. The Planning Board may retain independent
consultants at the reasonable expense of the developer, in accordance
with § 170-2.8, to ascertain whether these regulations and construction
specifications have been met.
B.
Checklist. The inspecting agent shall furnish the subdivider with a
checklist (Form I)90 of steps to be completed. The subdivider shall not
proceed with any steps until all prior steps have been signed by the
inspector as satisfactorily completed. Inspections shall be requested in
writing, at least two working days in advance of each inspection, except
as other arrangements have been agreed to by the Inspecting Agent.
The completed checklist is to be returned to the Planning Board. Failure
of the subdivider to submit the completed checklist may be deemed
sufficient cause for the Board to withhold final approval of the roadway
construction.
C.
Request for release. Upon completion of all or part of the foregoing
requirements, security for the performance of which was given by bond,
deposit, or covenant, or upon the performance of any covenant with
respect to any lot, the applicant may request and agree on terms of
release with said Planning Board. Request for such release shall be
initiated with a statement sent registered mail to the Planning Board
and the Town Clerk, as provided at MGL C. 41, § 81-U.
A.
Partial release. The Board may grant partial release from such security
for partial completion of improvements, if it determines that the
completed portion provides a reasonable system for circulation,
drainage and utilities pending completion of the rest.
B.
Completion requirements. To assist in determining whether satisfactory
completion has been made, the Planning Board shall be provided with
C.
90.Editor's Note: Form I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-5.2
1:549
§ 170-5.3. Waivers.
Strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter may be waived
when, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such action is in the public
interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law. When
granting such waivers, the Planning Board shall clearly state its reasons in
writing and make it part of its decision.
§ 170-5.4. Reference to statutes.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is made
to MGL C. 41, §§ 81-K to GG, inclusive.
a properly completed Inspection Form (Form I)91 by the subdivider. The
required improvements will not be considered complete until:
The subdivider has filed with the Planning Board an as-built plan as
required at § 170-4.6G.
(1)
The subdivider has filed street acceptance materials with the
Planning Board, or the Board has waived them, as provided at
§ 170-2.7.
(2)
Any grassed areas have been mown at least twice; all landscaping
and plantings have been through a winter; all other aboveground
improvements, such as paving and sidewalks, have been installed
for at least 12 months subsequent to their final inspection; and all
underground utilities and appurtenances, such as water and sewer
lines, have been installed for at least 24 months subsequent to their
final inspection, and their continued integrity has been verified.
Street acceptance by Town Meeting prior to these periods having
elapsed shall not be reason for release of the portion of security
being held to assure integrity of improvements.
(3)
91.Editor's Note: Form I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 170-5.2 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 170-5.4
1:550
Chapter 185
ACCEPTANCES OF GENERAL LAWS
§ 185-1. List of acceptances.
Statutory
Reference Subject
Adoption
Information
c. 11, § 339 Terms of office for Selectmen 3-25-1912 ATM, Art.
28
c. 32, § 166 Authorizes appointment of
alternate Wiring Inspector
3-8-1993 Board of
Selectmen
c. 32B Contributory insurance 2-19-1958 election
c. 32B, § 16 Authorizes town to make HMO
services available to certain
employees
2-25-1985 Board of
Selectmen
c. 32B, § 18 Medicare supplement insurance
plan requirement
5-16-2000 ATM, Art.
16
c. 32B, § 20 Other Post Employment Benefits
Liability Trust Fund
5-21-2013 ATM, Art.
12
c. 39, § 23 Election of town officers to take
place any time within 7 days
before or after ATM
2-3-1941 ATM, Art. 15
c. 39, § 23D Mullin Rule 5-16-2017 ATM, Art.
33
c. 40, § 6A Appropriate money to advertise
town resources and attractions
2-16-1948 ATM, Art.
28
c. 40, § 6C Appropriate money for snow and
ice removal from private ways
5-10-1988 ATM
c. 40, § 6D Appropriate money for snow and
ice removal from private ways
12-14-1987 Board of
Selectmen
c. 40, § 6N Temporary repair of private
ways
12-14-1987 Board of
Selectmen
c. 40, § 8C Authority to establish
Conservation Commission
2-18-1963 ATM, Art.
20
c. 40, § 8D Establish Historical Commission
of 7 members
7-16-1973 STM, Art. 3
c. 40, § 8G Mutual aid agreement for
Berkshire County Drug Task
Force
5-9-1989 ATM, Art. 32
c. 40, § 8G Authorizes Board of Selectmen
to enter into mutual aid
agreements with surrounding
communities
5-15-2007 ATM, Art.
23
§ 170-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-1
1:551
Statutory
Reference Subject
Adoption
Information
c. 40, § 13D Authorizes establishment of
former employees compensated
reserve fund
5-20-2014 ATM, Art.
24
c. 40, § 22D Authorizes Police Chief to tow
illegally parked vehicles
5-21-1985 ATM, Art.
20
c. 40, § 22F Empowers town to issue
licenses, etc., and to render
services and to retain entire
proceeds of fee for such
5-16-2000 ATM, Art.
19
c. 40, § 39 (Ch.
275 Acts of
1985)
Laying of water pipes through
another town
12-10-1985 STM, Art.
4
c. 40, § 39K Establish Enterprise Fund for
landfill service
5-12-1987 ATM, Art. 6
c. 40, § 42A
through F
Collection of water rates 2-16-1942 ATM, Art.
22
c. 40, § 57 Denial of local licenses for
failure to pay taxes
1-27-1998 STM, Art. 7
c. 41, § 38A Collection of accounts by Tax
Collector
5-23-1989 ATM, Art.
31
c. 41, § 41B Direct deposit of town employee
pay checks into accounts
5-12-1992 ATM, Art. 8
c. 41, § 81A Establish Planning Board of 5
members elected at annual Town
Elections and establishing the
terms thereof
2-24-1959 ATM, Art.
20; amended
5-15-2007 ATM, Art.
33
c. 41, § 100G 1/
4
Binding the Town to pay up to
$15,000 in funeral and burial
expenses for forest firefighters
and police officers killed in the
line of duty
5-19-2009 ATM, Art.
26
c. 41, § 108L Career incentive pay program
for full-time employees of Police
Department
4-1-1974 ATM, Art. 27
c. 41, § 110A Authorizes closing Town offices
on Saturdays
2-13-1967 ATM, Art.
27
c. 44, § 53D Revolving fund for recreation
services
9-20-1988 STM, Art.
11
c. 44, § 53E Authorizes town to have
appropriations offset by
estimated receipts from water
and sewer fees
5-21-1985 ATM, Art. 7
§ 185-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 185-1
1:552
Statutory
Reference Subject
Adoption
Information
c. 44, § 53E1/2 Inspection Services Revolving
Fund
5-16-2017 ATM, Art.
30
c. 44B, §§ 3
through 7
Community Preservation Act 5-14-2002 Annual
Election
c. 49, §§ 1-41 Building and care of drains 2-8-1915 ATM, Art. 21
c. 50, § 121 (Ch.
141 Acts of
1932, § 3
Town caucuses for the
nomination of candidates for
town officers required to be
voted for by official ballot at
ATM
2-6-1933 ATM, Art. 19
c. 54, § 103A Absentee voting for regular town
elections
2-24-1959 ATM, Art.
19
c. 59, § 5 Cl.
17D (Sec. 1, Ch.
73 Acts of 1986)
Real estate tax exemptions for
surviving spouse or minor with
de- ceased parents or persons
over 70
5-12-1987 ATM, Art.
15
c. 59, § 5 Cl.
37A
Allow an increase in the
exemption from real property
taxes from $437.50 to $500 for
certain qualifying blind persons
5-18-2004 ATM, Art.
17
c. 59, § 5 Cl.
41A
Allowing an increase in gross
receipts seniors may have to be
eligible to defer property taxes
5-9-2000 ATM, Art. 27
C 59, § 5 Cl.
41A
Allowing a reduction in the rate
of interest that accrues on
property taxes deferred by
eligible seniors from 8% to 5%
5-9-2006 ATM, Art. 28
c. 59, § 5 Cl.
41B
Allowing an exemption of $500
from real property taxes for
certain qualifying individuals
over the age of 70 years (income
not exceeding $10,000 if single
or $12,000 if married)
5-18-2004 ATM, Art.
19
c. 59, § 5 Allowing an exemption of $500
from real property taxes for
certain qualifying individuals
over the age of 70 years (income
not exceeding $13,000 if single
or $15,000 if married)
5-18-2004 ATM, Art.
18
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-1
1:553
Statutory
Reference Subject
Adoption
Information
c. 59, § 5 (Ch.
743 Acts of
1981)
Real estate tax exemption for
surviving spouse or minor for
tax- able valuation of $2,000 or
$175, whichever would result in
an abatement of the greater
amount
5-18-1982 ATM, Art.
15
c. 59, § 5K Senior citizen property tax workoff
program
5-20-2014 ATM, Art.
23
c. 59, § 57B Issuance of one annual bill for
property taxes of $50 or less
payable in 30 days
5-18-1993 ATM, Art. 4
c. 59, § 59A Allows Board of Selectmen to
establish agreement regarding
abatement of back taxes and
liens on Town property that has
had a release of hazardous
materials
11-9-1999 STM, Art. 2
c. 60, § 3C (Ch.
712 Acts of
1987, § 3)
Municipal Scholarship Fund 5-23-1989 ATM, Art.
33
c. 60A, § 1 (Ch.
597 Acts of
1982)
Exemption from motor vehicle
excise tax for one vehicle owned
by former prisoner of war
5-9-1989 ATM, Art. 34
c. 60A, § 1 (Ch.
182 Acts of
2008, § 16)
Exemption from motor vehicle
excise tax for one vehicle owned
by active and full-time military
service member
5-15-2012 ATM, Art.
21
c. 64G, § 3A Local room occupancy excise tax
at rate of 2%
5-10-1988 ATM, Art.
17
c. 64G, § 3A Local room occupancy excise tax
at rate of 4%
5-22-1990 ATM, Art. 8
c. 64G, § 3A Local room occupancy excise tax
at rate of 6%
5-18-2010 ATM, Art. 6
c. 64L, § 2(a) Local meals excise tax 5-18-2010 ATM, Art. 5
c. 64N, § 3 Local sales tax of 3% of the total
sales price upon the sale or
transfer of marijuana or
marijuana products by a
marijuana retailer operating
within the Town to anyone other
than a marijuana establishment
5-15-2018 ATM, Art.
31
§ 185-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 185-1
1:554
Statutory
Reference Subject
Adoption
Information
c. 71, §§ 16 - 16I Establishment of regional school
district
11-17-1958 STM, Art.
3
c. 71, § 16G 1/2 Mount Greylock Regional School
District stabilization fund
5-17-2011 ATM, Art.
21
c. 71, § 71E Revolving account for funds
from various groups for use of
school buildings
5-21-1985 ATM, Art.
18
c. 71, § 71F Foster care children state
reimbursement; deposit in
separate accounts
5-12-1987 ATM, Art.
24
c. 83, §§ 16A -
16F
Filing of a lien for delinquent
sewer charges
5-17-2011 ATM, Art.
22
c. 85, § 11A Registration and operation of
bicycles
2-25-1957 ATM, Art.
27
c. 90, § 20A1/2 Assessment and collection of
parking fines
5-16-2000 ATM, Art.
17
c. 90, § 20C and
20D; c. 90, § 6A
Parking violations 6-11-1973 STM, Art.
15
c. 94, § 120 Annual fee for slaughterhouses
not to exceed $100 as fixed by
Selectmen
2-12-1945 ATM, Art.
23
c. 94, § 120A Fee of $1 for each animal
slaughtered except for animals
slaughtered under federal
inspection
2-12-1945 ATM, Art.
24
c. 102, §§ 122 to
126
Emissions of dark smoke or
dense gray smoke
3-23-1914 ATM, Art.
23
c. 129, § 15 Nomination of Inspector of
Animals by Board of Health
2-28-1955 ATM, Art.
13
c. 131, § 39A Designates Conservation
Commission to carry out
provisions of section
9-30-1974 STM, Art.
19
c. 136, §§ 7 and
8
Sale of ice cream, confectionery,
soda water or fruit on Sunday if
licensed
2-16-1942 ATM, Art.
20
c. 138, § 12 Allows restaurants with wine
and malt license to sell liqueurs
and cordials
5-17-1994 ATM, Art.
24
c. 138, § 17A Authorizes Selectmen to grant
additional licenses for onpremises
consumption
5-8-1979 ATM, Art. 28
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-1
1:555
Statutory
Reference Subject
Adoption
Information
c. 138, § 33B Sales of alcoholic beverages by
on-premises licensees on
Sundays and certain legal
holidays beginning at 10:00 a.m.
5-8-2006 Board of
Selectmen; 5-17-2011
ATM, Art. 23
c. 139, §§ 1 to 3 Provides method for disposal of
burned, dilapidated or
dangerous buildings and
procedure for recovery of
damages
2-24-1958 ATM, Art.
26
c. 140, § 147A Empowers Town to regulate
dogs and to retain license fees
and fines
5-16-2000 ATM, Art.
18
c. 166, § 14A
(Ch. 291 Acts of
1990)
Enhanced 911 service 6-18-1991 ATM, Art.
31
c. 258, § 13 Indemnification of Town
employees
5-7-1996 Annual
Election
c. 262, § 53C Compensatory time off to police
officers
3-9-1970 ATM, Art. 12
Ch. 69 Acts of
1912, § 2
Establishes a Fire District 3-25-1912 ATM, Art.
27
Ch. 795, Acts of
1914
Provides for better prevention of
fires throughout the
metropolitan district
2-8-1915 ATM, Art. 23
Revoking Ch.
548 Acts of
1898, § 332
Allows appointment of Road
Supervisor by Selectmen
4-25-1916 STM, Art. 3
Revoking Ch.
548 Acts of
1898, § 332
Allows appointment of Road
Supervisor by Selectmen
2-5-1917 ATM, Art. 20
Ch. 639, Acts of
1950
Establishes Department of Civil
Defense
2-26-1951 ATM, Art.
14
Ch. 820 Acts of
1950
Increase in annual amounts of
certain pensions and other
benefits
2-26-1951 ATM, Art.
31
Ch. 624 Acts of
1952
Increase in amount of retirement
allowance to certain pensioners
2-24-1953 ATM, Art.
16
Ch. 180 Acts of
1969
Compensation for unused
vacation time
5-12-1969 STM, Art. 1
Ch. 424 Acts of
1977
3-7-1978 STM, Art. 2
§ 185-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § 185-1
1:556
Statutory
Reference Subject
Adoption
Information
Ch. 416 Acts of
1980, § 2
Acceptance of J. Fred Walden as
certified assessing personnel
9-22-1980 Board of
Selectmen
Ch. 217 Acts of
1980
Reflects several changes in the
enabling legislation of Northern
Berkshire Industrial
Development Commission
10-15-1980 STM, Art.
7
Ch. 326 Acts of
1980
To qualify for state flood
reimbursement for flood
damages of March 22, 1980
10-15-1980 STM, Art.
8
Ch. 55 Acts of
1984
Allows any property tax less
than $25 due and payable in a
single payment
5-21-1985 ATM, Art.
26
Ch. 477 Acts of
1984
Exempts municipal purchases
from certain bidding laws when
purchasing equipment, etc.,
from other governmental
agencies
5-21-1985 ATM, Art.
19
Ch. 133 Acts of
1992, § 48
Early retirement incentive for
municipal employees
10-27-1992 STM, Art.
3
Ch. 170 of the
Acts of 1999
Allows additional compensation
of a Town Clerk or Municipal
Collector or Treasurer upon
certification
5-20-2008 ATM, Art.
19
Ch. 116, Acts of
2002, §§ 1 and 2
Early retirement incentive for
municipal employees
8-19-2002 Board of
Selectmen
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Board of
Health
12-7-1998 Massage establishments
amendment
Ch. 148
Board of
Health
1-4-1999 Manufactured housing
communities amendment
Ch. 147
Board of
Health
1-19-1999 Rental property amendment Ch. 154
Board of
Health
4-5-1999 Floor drains Ch. 142
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:557
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 29 5-18-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 30 5-18-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 31 5-18-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 32 5-18-1999 Administration amendment Ch. 4
STM, Art. 2 11-9-1999 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
Board of
Health
12-20-1999Refuse and recycling Ch. 153
Board of
Selectmen
2-14-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch 130
Board of
Health
2-28-2000 Smoking amendment Ch. 158
Board of
Health
3-13-2000 Smoking amendment Ch. 158
ATM, Art. 20 5-9-2000 Animal control Ch. 10, Art. II
ATM, Art. 21 5-16-2000 Noncriminal disposition
amendment
Ch 1, Art. II
Board of
Health
6-19-2000 Refuse and recycling
amendment
Ch. 153
ATM, Art. 16 5-16-2000 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 17 5-16-2000 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 18 5-16-2000 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 19 5-16-2000 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
Board of
Health
2-26-2001 Body art Ch. 141
Board of
Selectmen
5-14-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 22 5-15-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 23 5-15-2001 Demolition delay amendment Ch. 24
Board of
Health
6-25-2001 Refuse and recycling
amendment
Ch. 153
Board of
Health
6-25-2001 Septic systems Ch. 157
ATM, Art. 19 5-21-2002 Community preservation Ch. 22
ATM, Art. 21 5-21-2002 Zoning amendment (windgenerated
energy production
facilities)
Ch. 70
Board of
Health
6-3-2002 Nuisances and noisome trades Ch. 150
§ DL-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:558
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Board of
Selectmen
6-10-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Annual
Election
5-14-2002 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
Board of
Health
7-8-2002 Rental property amendment Ch. 154
Board of
Selectmen
8-19-2002 General Laws acceptance (early
retirement)
Ch. 185
Board of
Selectmen
9-9-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Selectmen
10-15-2002Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Health
3-3-2003 Body art amendment Ch. 141
Board of
Health
3-3-2003 Massage establishments
amendment
Ch. 148
Board of
Health
3-3-2003 Schedule of Fees Ch. 156
Board of
Health
3-3-2003 Smoking amendment Ch. 158
ATM, Art. 15 5-20-2003 Mobile home rent control Ch. 12
ATM, Art. 24 5-20-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 25 5-20-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 26 5-20-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
Board of
Selectmen
6-23-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Selectmen
9-8-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Selectmen
9-22-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Health
1-5-2004 Rental property amendment Ch. 154
Board of
Health
1-5-2004 Septic systems amendment Ch. 157
Board of
Selectmen
3-8-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Selectmen
4-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 17 5-18-2004 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:559
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 18 5-18-2004 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 19 5-18-2004 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 26 5-18-2004 Mobile home rent control
amendment
Ch. 12
ATM, Art. 27 5-18-2004 Alarm systems Ch. 8
ATM, Art. 28 5-18-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 29 5-18-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 31 5-18-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
Board of
Health
10-4-2004 Body art amendment Ch. 141
Board of
Health
12-14-2004Wells amendment Ch. 164
Board of
Selectmen
3-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 24 5-17-2005 Administration amendment Ch. 4
ATM, Art. 26 5-17-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 27 5-17-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
Board of
Selectmen
7-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Health
11-7-2005 Massage establishments
amendment
Ch. 148
Board of
Selectmen
12-12-2005Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Selectmen
5-8-2006 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 27 5-9-2006 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 28 5-9-2006 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 3 5-16-2006 Administration amendment Ch. 4
ATM, Art. 4 5-16-2006 Administration amendment Ch. 4
ATM, Art. 38 5-16-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 39 5-16-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 42 5-16-2006 Right to farm Ch. 46
Board of
Selectmen
8-14-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 23 5-15-2007 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 29 5-15-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 32 5-15-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
§ DL-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:560
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 33 5-15-2007 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
Board of
Selectmen
4-14-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 19 5-20-2008 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 28 5-20-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
Board of
Health
5-5-2008 Food establishments amendment Ch. 143
Board of
Selectmen
6-9-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Selectmen
6-23-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
Board of
Health
9-8-2008 Massage establishments
repealer
Ch. 148
(reference
only)
Board of
Selectmen
1-12-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 25 5-19-2009 Community preservation
amendment
Ch. 22
ATM, Art. 26 5-19-2009 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 30 5-19-2009 Signs amendment Ch. 53
ATM, Art. 32 5-19-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 33 5-19-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 34 5-19-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
Board of
Health
6-1-2009 Refuse and recycling
amendment
Ch. 153
Board of
Selectmen
12-14-2009Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 5 5-18-2010 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 6 5-18-2010 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 25 5-18-2010 Stretch Energy Code Ch. 26
ATM, Art. 27 5-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 28 5-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 29 5-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 30 5-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 31 5-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 32 5-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:561
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Board of
Health
2-7-2011 Appeals amendment Chs. 141, 142,
143, 147, 150,
153, 156, 157,
158, 164
Board of
Health
2-7-2011 Refuse and recycling
amendment
Ch. 153
ATM, Art. 20 5-17-2011 Capital Planning Committee
amendment
Ch. 20
ATM, Art. 21 5-17-2011 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 22 5-17-2011 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 23 5-17-2011 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 30 5-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 31 5-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 32 5-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 33 5-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 34 5-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 35 5-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 21 5-15-2012 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 22 5-15-2012 Affordable Housing Trust Fund Ch. 6
ATM, Art. 30 5-15-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 31 5-15-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 32 5-15-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 33 5-15-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 12 5-21-2013 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 22 5-21-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 30 5-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 31 5-21-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 32 5-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 33 5-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 34 5-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 35 5-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
Board of
Selectmen
4-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 21 5-20-2014 Handicapped parking Ch. 28
ATM, Art. 22 5-20-2014 General provisions: noncriminal
disposition amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
ATM, Art. 23 5-20-2014 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
§ DL-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:562
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 24 5-20-2014 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 34 5-20-2014 Signs amendment Ch. 53
ATM, Art. 35 5-20-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 36 5-20-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 37 5-20-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Board of
Health
9-8-2014 Smoking and tobacco products Ch. 158
Board of
Health
11-3-2014 Schedule of Fees amendment Ch. 156
Board of
Health
11-3-2014 Septic systems amendment Ch. 157
Board of
Health
5-4-2015 Stables and livestock keeping Ch. 159
ATM, Art. 28 5-19-2015 Affordable Housing Trust Fund
amendment
Ch. 6
ATM, Art. 33 5-19-2015 Signs amendment Ch. 53
ATM, Art. 34 5-19-2015 Signs amendment Ch. 53
ATM, Art. 35 5-19-2015 Signs amendment Ch. 53
ATM, Art. 36 5-19-2015 General provisions: penalty;
repealer; when effective
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
ATM, Art. 37 5-19-2015 Demolition delay amendment Ch. 24
ATM, Art. 38 5-19-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 39 5-19-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 40 5-19-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 41 5-19-2015 Environmental hazards:
reduction of single-use bags
Ch. 27, Art. II
ATM, Art. 42 5-19-2015 Environmental hazards:
reduction of polystyrene
Ch. 27, Art. I
Board of
Health
7-13-2015 Smoking and tobacco products
amendment
Ch. 158
Board of
Selectmen
4-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 30 5-17-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 31 5-17-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 32 5-17-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 33 5-17-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 34 5-17-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:563
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 35 5-17-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
Board of
Health
6-6-2016 Septic systems amendment;
smoking and tobacco products
amendment
Ch. 157; Ch.
158
Board of
Selectmen
7-13-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 30 5-16-2017 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 33 5-16-2017 General Laws acceptance Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 34 5-16-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 35 5-16-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 36 5-16-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 37 5-16-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Board of
Health
5-7-2018 Smoking and Tobacco Products
Amendment
Ch. 158
STM, Art. 5 11-14-2017Zoning Amendment Ch. 70
STM, Art. 6 11-14-2017Zoning Amendment Ch. 70
STM, Art. 7 11-14-2017Zoning Amendment Ch. 70
STM, Art. 8 11-14-2017Zoning Amendment Ch. 70
STM, Art. 9 11-14-2017Zoning Amendment Ch. 70
ATM, Art. 28 5-15-2018 Revolving Funds Ch. 45
ATM, Art. 31 5-15-2018 General Laws Acceptance Ch. 185
§ DL-1 WILLIAMSTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:564