Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-39]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, a Municipal
Corporation, of a general and permanent nature, as amended, revised,
consolidated and codified into certain chapters and sections, namely,
Chapters 1 through and including Chapter 243, together with an Appendix
and Index, and supplements attached hereto, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the general ordinances of the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland, and the same are to be known and designated and
referred to as the "Code of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, 1990." The
same shall hereinafter be known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect on prior ordinances.
§ 1-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Provisions saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal and shall remain
in full force and effect:
A. Each and every ordinance contained in this Code shall be determined to
be effective as of the date of its initial passage as shown and designated
thereon. If no date is designated, then the same shall be considered the
effective date of this ordinance adopting the Code.
B. This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal
or retained in full force and effect.
A. All ordinances providing for bond issues.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Filing of Code.
A copy of the Code of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, 1990, shall be
filed in the office of the City Clerk and with any other agencies as may
be required from time to time pursuant to the provisions of Article 23A of
the Annotated Code of Maryland or any other applicable provisions of said
Annotated Code.
§ 1-6. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-7. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provisions or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the City's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. Any ordinance or resolution establishing water, sewer or electric utility
rates that are not specifically set forth in the Code.
K. Any ordinance adopted since the first day of January 1990.
§ 1-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 1-8
1:4
§ 1-8. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance adopting a code and the Code shall be in full
force and effect on and after July 17, 1990.
§ 1-9. (Reserved)
§ 1-10. (Reserved)
§ 1-11. (Reserved)
§ 1-12. (Reserved)
§ 1-13. (Reserved)
§ 1-14. (Reserved)
§ 1-15. (Reserved)
§ 1-16. (Reserved)
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:5

ARTICLE II
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted as Ch. 2, § 2-9, of the 1967 Code]
§ 1-17. General penalty. [Amended 4-25-1972; 4-1-1974]
A. Any violation of the provisions of the Code of the City of Hagerstown,
Maryland, as adopted, and any other subsequent amendments or
ordinances shall be considered and hereby declared unlawful. Said
violations shall be and are hereby considered misdemeanors.
B. Whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act or the failure
to do an act is declared to be unlawful, as set forth in each and every
ordinance referred to and as set forth in this provision, and where no
specific penalties are provided therefor, the violator of any such
provision of this Code or an ordinance shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding six months in the
county jail, or by both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court. [Amended 8-24-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-14; 1-18-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-2]
C. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:7

ARTICLE III
Municipal Infractions
[Adopted 2-7-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-4]
§ 1-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL INFRACTION —
§ 1-19. Determination of infraction; fines.
§ 1-20. Issuance and contents of citation.
A. Any violation of any provision of the Code of the City of Hagerstown,
hereinafter referred to as "this Code," which violation has been
specifically declared by the Mayor and Council of Hagerstown to be a
"municipal infraction."
B. For purposes of this Code, a "municipal infraction" is a civil offense, and
a finding of guilt thereof is not a criminal conviction for any purpose,
nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed by a
criminal conviction.
A. The Mayor and Council may, by ordinance, declare which violations
shall constitute municipal infractions and may set specific fines which
may be imposed for said infractions.
B. The fines set by the Mayor and Council for municipal infractions shall
be in specific amounts not to exceed $1,000 for each initial violation.
The specific fine amount may be doubled pursuant to Article 23A,
§ 3(b)(5)(ii) or § 3(b)(6)(ii) of the Annotated Code of Maryland to an
amount not to exceed $1,000. Unless otherwise provided, each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
[Amended 7-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-37; 2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-17]
A. Authorized code enforcement officials may deliver a citation to any
person alleged to be committing or to have committed a municipal
infraction. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the City and shall
bear the certification of the issuing official attesting to the truth of the
matter set forth in the citation.
B. The citation shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the person charged.
(2) The nature of the municipal infraction.
(3) The code or ordinance provision being violated.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:9
§ 1-21. Payment of fine.
Payment of the fine imposed by a citation for a municipal infraction shall
be made to the City Treasurer, City Hall, Hagerstown, Maryland, within 20
calendar days from receipt of the citation, unless there is an election to
stand trial no later than 15 days from the receipt of the citation.
§ 1-22. Election to stand trial.
§ 1-23. Failure to respond to citation.
§ 1-24. Court proceedings.
(4) The location and time that the municipal infraction occurred or was
observed.
(5) The amount of the fine assessed for the municipal infraction.
(6) The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid to the
City.
(7) The right of the recipient of the citation to elect to stand trial for
the municipal infraction.
A. A person receiving a citation for a municipal infraction may elect to
stand trial for the offense by notifying the City of said person's intention
to stand trial for the municipal infraction. The notice shall be given in
writing at least five days prior to the date of payment as set forth in the
citation.
B. Upon receipt of a timely notice of intention to stand trial, the City shall
forward to the District Court having venue a copy of the notice from the
person who received the citation indicating the intention to stand trial.
Upon receipt of the citation, the District Court shall schedule the case
for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date.
A. If a person receiving a citation for a municipal infraction fails to pay the
fine imposed for the infraction by the date of payment set forth on the
citation and fails to timely file a notice of intention to stand trial for the
offense, a formal notice shall be sent to the offender's last known
address demanding payment. In the event that the citation has not been
satisfied, the offender shall be obligated to pay a sum equivalent to
twice the amount of the original penalty amount.
B. If, after 35 days from its issuance, the citation has not been satisfied,
the City may request adjudication of the case through the District
Court. The District Court shall thereupon promptly schedule the case
for trial and summon the defendant (the offender) to appear. The
defendant's failure to respond to the summons shall be contempt of
court.
§ 1-20 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 1-24
1:10
§ 1-25. Conflicts with statutory provisions.
In any case where a provision of this article conflicts with a mandatory
provision of Article 23A, § 3, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as
amended, the provisions of Article 23A shall prevail and shall be
incorporated herein as if expressly set forth.
A. Court proceedings for a municipal infraction shall be governed by the
provisions of Article 23A, § 3, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as
amended, relating to municipal infractions, said provisions being
hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
B. Any person found by the District Court to have committed a municipal
infraction shall be required to pay the fine imposed by the citation,
including any additional fine imposed by § 1-23 hereof. Such person
shall also be liable for the cost of the court proceedings.
C. Whenever any defendant has been found guilty of a municipal infraction
and willfully fails to pay the fine imposed by the court, that willful
failure may be treated as a criminal contempt of court.
D. All fines, penalties or forfeitures collected by the District Court for
municipal infractions shall be remitted to the City.
§ 1-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-25
1:11
Chapter 10
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 29.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 33.
Ethics Commission — See Ch. 35.
Police and fire employees' retirement
plan — See Ch. 38.
Police Department — See Ch. 39.
Discriminatory practices — See Ch. 82.
Excessive use of City services — See Ch. 95.
§ 1-25 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 1-25
1:12
Part 1
General Provisions; Elected Officials; Administration
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 10-1. Establishment.
There is established by this chapter and any amendments thereto a code
for the government of the City of Hagerstown, a political subdivision of the
State of Maryland, pursuant to its Charter, drawn and approved as provided
by the Mayor and Council, effective April 6, 1983, which code shall be
known and referred to as the "Administrative Code" and which shall be
the rules and regulations prescribing the duties of officials and employees,
the system of office and the management of the offices, departments and
institutions of the City of Hagerstown.
§ 10-2. Effective date.
This Administrative Code shall take effect on July 1, 1990.
§ 10-3. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this Administrative Code, shall, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, mean or indicate as follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE — The Administrative Code of the City, as set forth
in this chapter, and any and all amendments and supplements thereto and
modifications thereof.
CITY, MUNICIPALITY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION — The City of
Hagerstown, Maryland.
LAW — All applicable acts of the Maryland General Assembly and the
Congress of the United States.
§ 10-4. Amendments.
This Administrative Code may be amended by the Mayor and Council in
accordance with provisions prescribed in § 208 of the Charter.
§ 10-4.1. Exemption from Washington County Code provisions.
[Added 7-16-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-11]
The City of Hagerstown does hereby declare itself, pursuant to Article 23A,
§ 2B, of the Annotated Code of the Public General Laws of Maryland, 1957,
as subsequently amended, to be specifically exempt from applicability of
any and all Washington County legislation within the corporate boundaries
of the City of Hagerstown, except the following:
A. Those ordinances already adopted by the City of Hagerstown which are
Washington County ordinances.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4.1
1:13
B. Those ordinances which the City of Hagerstown by ordinance has
requested and authorized Washington County to administer or enforce
within its corporate boundaries as of January 1, 1984.
C. Any other Washington County legislation which is specifically provided
for as being applicable within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Hagerstown under Article 23A, § 2B, of the Annotated Code of the
Public General Laws of Maryland, 1957, as subsequently amended.
§ 10-4.1 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 10-4.1
1:14
ARTICLE II
Elected Officials
§ 10-5. Mayor.
The Mayor shall be the chief elected officer of the City. The selection and
term, qualifications and powers and duties shall be as provided by the
Charter.
§ 10-6. City Council.
The City Council shall be the chief legislative body of the City. The selection
and term, qualifications and powers and duties shall be as provided by the
Charter.
§ 10-7. Salaries and compensation. [Amended 5-19-1992 by Ord.
No. 1992-29; 12-17-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-30]
§ 10-8. Benefits.
A. The following salaries shall apply to elected officials of the City:
(1) Mayor. The Mayor shall receive the sum of $28,000 per annum,
payable from the date of commencement of his term of office.
(2) Council members. Each Council member elected to the City
Council of the City of Hagerstown shall receive the sum of $8,000
per annum, payable from the commencement of the term of office.
B. The method of payment for the Mayor and members of the City Council
shall be in the manner defined by the Charter of the City of Hagerstown
and in accord with the accounting practices and procedures currently
employed by the City.
C. The salary schedule set forth in this section shall become effective on
the 2nd day of June 1997. The salary schedule set forth herein shall be
applicable only to the Mayor and Council members elected or reelected
thereafter and shall not be applicable to incumbents.
A. Elected officials shall receive an expense account reimbursement up to
a maximum of $3,000 annual reimbursement for the Mayor and $1,000
annual reimbursement for each Council member. The expense account
shall be disbursed and managed in accordance with the policies
established by the Mayor and Council.
B. Elected officials shall also have the option of receiving health insurance
and retirement benefits afforded to the general City employee
workforce.
C. Elected officials shall receive no other benefits except those provided in
this section.
§ 10-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-9
1:15
§ 10-9. Indemnification.
The City shall indemnify each member of the Mayor and Council who was or
is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or
completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative
or investigative (other than an action by or in the right of the municipality),
by reason of the fact that he is or was an elected official, against expenses
(including attorney's fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement
actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection with such action,
suit or proceeding if he acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably
believed to be in, or not opposed to, the best interest of the municipality
and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable
cause to believe his conduct was unlawful. The municipality shall provide
insurance for the benefit of the Mayor and Council insuring each such
person from any liability asserted against him or incurred by him in any
such capacity, in such amounts and with such limitations as the Mayor and
Council deem appropriate.
§ 10-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 10-9
1:16
ARTICLE III
City Attorney
§ 10-10. Powers and duties.
The City Attorney is the legal advisor of the City and shall perform duties in
accordance with § 801 of the Charter.
§ 10-11. Appointment; unclassified position; compensation.
A. The City Attorney shall be appointed or removed with or without cause
at the absolute discretion of the Mayor and Council.
B. Section 804 of the Municipal Charter provides that the City Attorney is
an unclassified position.
C. Compensation shall be determined by the Council.
§ 10-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-11
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Administrative Organization
§ 10-12. General provisions.
Functional departments of the municipal organization shall be created or
abolished by the Mayor and Council as provided by the Charter or other
applicable law. Within these departments, the organization of specific
functions shall be the responsibility of each department manager, subject
to the approval of the City Administrator. The highest ranking employee of
each department shall be designated the "manager."
§ 10-13. City Administrator.
The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the
municipality. He shall be subject to appointment and removal by the Mayor
and Council. During the tenure of his appointment, he shall possess and
exercise the powers and duties prescribed by the Charter.
§ 10-14. Administrative staff.
§ 10-15. Department managers.
A. The City Administrator, department managers and designated
employees in charge of staff functions under the City Administrator
shall comprise the administrative staff of the municipality.
B. The administrative staff shall serve under the direction of the City
Administrator and shall advise and consult with him upon all matters
affecting the welfare of the municipality or relating to any phase of the
municipal administration.
C. The administrative staff shall deal with the Mayor and Council through
the City Administrator, except in response to routine inquiries or in
connection with investigation under § 603 of the Charter. Employees in
the various departments, except in response to routine inquiries or in
connection with investigation under § 603 of the Charter, shall deal with
the Mayor and Council only through their department managers and
the City Administrator.
A. Managers of departments of the municipality shall be appointed by the
City Administrator, with the advice and consent of the Mayor and
Council, solely on the basis of executive, administrative and technical
qualifications appropriate to the duties of each department.
B. A member of the administrative staff may serve as manager of more
than one department.
C. Managers of departments may be removed by the City Administrator
with the advice and consent of the Mayor and Council.
D. Each department manager shall:
§ 10-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-15
1:19
§ 10-16. Unclassified service.
Section 804 of the Municipal Charter of Hagerstown provides that the
City Administrator and all department managers shall be designated as
unclassified employees. As such, the City Administrator and all department
managers shall not be subject to the merit system as authorized by § 803
of the Charter and shall not be entitled to the protections, procedures and
grievance rights detailed in the City's Personnel Manual.
§ 10-17. Department organization.
The City shall have the following departments, with the functions, duties
and responsibilities hereinafter described for each department. The City
Administrator shall have the authority to assign temporarily duties and
responsibilities among such departments.
(1) Cooperate with other departments in furnishing them such service,
labor and material as may be requested by the manager of such
other department, subject to such regulations as the City
Administrator may prescribe.
(2) Manage and supervise the activities and personnel of his
department, establish objectives and standards for the
performance of work and administer the operations of the
department in an efficient manner for the effective providing of
services.
(3) Develop and recommend an annual budget and program plan for
his department, approve and control the expenditure of funds
within the department's approved budget and report to the City
Administrator on the operations and activities of the department.
(4) Consult with and advise the City Administrator on the operation of
the municipality as it relates to his department and perform such
other duties, activities and functions as the City Administrator may
direct.
A. Fire Department. The Fire Department shall be responsible for all
activities related to fire suppression, fire inspection and prevention,
including the enforcement of the Fire Prevention Code, and
maintenance of fire apparatus and facilities. The Department also
serves as a liaison to the volunteer fire companies.
B. Police Department. The Police Department shall be responsible for all
activities related to the prevention and suppression of crime,
apprehension of violators of the law, protection of life and property, and
traffic and pedestrian safety.
C. Department of Finance. The Department of Finance shall be
responsible for all activities related to the management of and
accounting for municipal funds, including disbursements, collections,
investment of funds, the accurate reporting of the municipality's
§ 10-15 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 10-17
1:20
finances and supervision of personnel engaged in accounting, tax
collection, utility collections, data processing and parking fund
collections.
D. Department of City Clerk. The City Clerk shall be responsible for
maintaining accurate minutes of Mayor and Council meetings and
maintaining all official documents.
E. Department of Human Resources. The Department of Human
Resources shall be responsible for various personnel functions,
including recruitment and staffing, selection, employee development
and training, employee assistance programs, benefits consulting, labor
relations and administration of grievance and disciplinary procedures.
[Amended 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-2]
F. Purchasing Department. The Department of Purchasing shall be
responsible for monitoring and reviewing all City purchases for Code
and policy conformity and maintaining inventories for the general
stores stockroom.
G. Special Projects Department. The Department of Special Projects shall
be responsible for the City's insurance, risk management, safety and
enterprise zone programs.
H. Planning Department. The Department of Planning shall be responsible
for site plan review, coordination of annexation procedures, historic
preservation, Comprehensive Plan update and administration of the
Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances.1
I. Community Development Department. The Department of Community
Development shall be responsible for managing the City's rehabilitation
loan program, coordinating the use of Federal Community Development
Block Grant funds and administering other Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) related programs.
J. Department of Engineering. The Department of Engineering shall be
responsible for coordinating and inspecting construction contracts,
providing design services to City departments and enforcing City
ordinances, including issuing permits for building, plumbing, electrical,
grading and curb and sidewalk construction.
K. Department of Public Works. The Department of Public Works shall be
responsible for maintaining City streets, vehicles and equipment,
buildings, traffic signals, signs and parks and recreation facilities.
[Amended 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-49]
L. Light Department. The Light Department shall be responsible for
providing purchased power through an electric transmission and
distribution system.
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Land Management.
§ 10-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-17
1:21
§ 10-18. Administrative staff offices.
The City Administrator may, within the budget appropriations approved by
the Mayor and Council, create such administrative staff offices as may be
required to administer the operations and affairs of the municipality.
M. Water and Sewer Department. The Water and Sewer Department shall
be responsible for all aspects of sewage collection, treatment and
disposal.
N. Water and Sewer Department. The Water and Sewer Department shall
be responsible for coordinating all activities of the public water system,
including treatment, pumping and distribution.
O. Department of Recreation. The Department of Recreation shall be
responsible for the operation and management of all City recreation
facilities including Potterfield Pool, the Municipal Golf Course, the
Jonathan Hager House, the Fairgrounds and any future or similar
facilities, and all City recreational programs including summer youth
camps, and other recreational programs. [Added 9-26-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-40]
§ 10-17 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 10-18
1:22
Part 2
Boards, Commissions And Authorities
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
[Amended 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-23]
§ 10-19. Purpose; creation of new boards or authorities.
§ 10-20. Appointment and removal from boards, commissions and
authorities.
§ 10-21. Term of office.
§ 10-22. Meetings.
A. The boards and authorities specified in this Code are created by the
Mayor and Council for the purpose of providing advice, guidance and
recommendations to assist in the conduct of City business and serving
as a board of appeals where specified to do so.
B. Before the creation of any authority, commission or board not in
existence at the time this Administrative Code is enacted, the Mayor
and Council first shall ascertain the feasibility of carrying out such
special purpose by an existing department, board or authority.
A. Members of boards, commissions and authorities shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council through a vote at a
public meeting. The Mayor and Council shall publicize vacancies on
boards, commissions and authorities and solicit indications of interest
from residents desiring to serve.
B. Except as otherwise provided by the applicable law, a member of a
board may be removed by the City Council at any time with or without
cause.
A. Except as otherwise required by state law or the City Code, a member
of a board, commission or authority shall serve a term of four years or
until their successor is approved, whichever is later.
B. At least 60 days prior to the expiration of a member's term, the City
Clerk shall notify the Mayor and Council of the pending expiration. The
Mayor shall in accordance with the City Code either reappoint the
member or shall appoint a replacement member subject to Council
approval prior to the expiration of the term.
A. All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Maryland Open
Meetings Act,2 including all documentation requirements. The Open
Meetings Act requires that public bodies keep written minutes of all of
2. Editor's Note: See the Annotated Code of Maryland, State Government, § 10-501 et seq.
§ 10-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-22
1:23
§ 10-23. Expenditure of municipal funds; liaison and staff services.
§ 10-23.1. Ethics.
The provisions of Chapter 33 of the City Code, Code of Ethics, shall apply to
members of all boards, commissions and authorities.
§ 10-23.2. Boards, commissions and authorities.
The following are the boards, commissions and authorities of the City of
Hagerstown:
their meetings, open and closed, and retain them for at least three
years. A copy of all minutes shall be kept in the office of the City, Clerk.
B. A quorum shall constitute a majority of the appointed members.
[Amended 4-28-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-08]
C. The boards, commissions and authorities shall hold such regular
meetings as, in its discretion, are necessary to discharge its duties.
Each board shall attempt to establish a regular meeting schedule
indicating the date and time of the meetings. Additional meetings may
be called either by the Chairman or a majority of the appointed
members or upon request of the Mayor and City Council.
A. All members of boards, commissions and authorities shall serve without
compensation. Except as otherwise provided by the Charter, this
Administrative Code or other applicable law, no board or authority shall
either expend municipal funds or incur obligations respecting such
funds without specific prior appropriation by the Mayor and Council.
B. The City Administrator shall assign employees of the municipality to
serve as liaison to boards or authorities and shall provide staff services
to such agencies.
A. Board of Election Supervisors (Chapter 10, Article VIII).
B. Board of Parks and Recreation (Chapter 10, Article IX).
C. Board of Public Safety (Chapter 10, Article X).3
D. Board of Traffic and Parking (Chapter 10, Article XII).
E. Hagerstown Redevelopment Authority (Chapter 10, Article XIII).
F. Board of Technical Appeals (Chapter 10, Article XIV).
G. Planning Commission (Land Management Code, Article II, § 140-13).
H. Historic District Commission (Land Management Code, Article II,
§ 140-14).
3. Editor's Note: Said article was repealed 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-19.
§ 10-22 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 10-23.2
1:24
I. Board of Zoning Appeals (Land Management Code, Article II, § 140-15).
§ 10-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-23.2
1:25

ARTICLE VI
Ad Hoc Boards
§ 10-24. Appointment.
The Mayor and Council may, when it deems appropriate, appoint an ad hoc
board to advise it on a specific matter.
§ 10-25. Term of board and members.
Such boards shall be created for a definite term not to exceed one year.
Members of an ad hoc board shall be appointed for the life of the board.
§ 10-26. Dissolution.
At the completion of its term, the board shall dissolve and the terms of its
members expire unless the board is re-created and its members reappointed
for a definite period not to exceed one year.
§ 10-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-26
1:27

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)4
§ 10-27. through § 10-39. (Reserved)
4. Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, Hagerstown - Washington County Economic Development
Commission, was repealed 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-44.
§ 10-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-27
1:29

ARTICLE VIII
Board of Election Supervisors
§ 10-40. Establishment; powers and duties.
The Board of Election Supervisors will be established and governed and
shall have the powers and duties as set forth in Article V of the Charter.
§ 10-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-40
1:31

ARTICLE IX
Board of Parks and Recreation
[Amended 2-27-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-6]
§ 10-41. Establishment; purpose.
There is hereby established a Board of Parks and Recreation, which is
an advisory board to the City Administrator and to the Mayor and City
Council pertaining to the development, maintenance and use of park and
recreational facilities in the City.
§ 10-42. Membership; terms of office.
§ 10-43. Chairperson; staff assistance.
§ 10-44. Meetings.
The Board shall meet at least once a month or at the request of the
Chairperson.
§ 10-45. Responsibilities.
A. There shall be established a Board of Parks and Recreation of the City
of Hagerstown, which shall consist of seven members. The Mayor shall
appoint, subject to confirmation by the City Council, seven voting
members, who shall be residents, taxpayers or those who conduct
business in the City of Hagerstown.
B. Four members shall be appointed for two years, and three members
shall be appointed for one year, and thereafter, each new voting
member shall serve for two years or until a successor has been duly
appointed and qualified.
A. The Board shaft select a Chairperson, who will:
(1) Act as spokesperson for the Board; and
(2) Conduct meetings and ensure that detailed records are maintained,
or designate a member of the City staff to do so.
B. The City Administrator shall see that staff assistance is provided for the
Board, as may be required in his discretion.
A. It is the responsibility of the Board of Parks and Recreation to make
recommendations to the Mayor and City Council, City Administrator,
Department of Public Works and Department of Recreation in reference
to:
(1) New park planning and development.
(2) Park facility needs and capital improvements.
§ 10-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-45
1:33
(3) Park maintenance.
(4) The operation and management of all City recreation facilities.
(5) City recreational programs.
B. The Board shall serve solely in an advisory, planning capacity and shall
have the authority to make recommendations to the Mayor and City
Council for its review and consideration.
§ 10-45 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 10-45
1:34
ARTICLE X
(Reserved)5
§ 10-46. through § 10-50. (Reserved)
5. Editor's Note: Former Art. X, Board of Public Safety, as amended, was repealed 10-25-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-19.
§ 10-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-46
1:35

ARTICLE XI
(Reserved)6
§ 10-51. through § 10-55. (Reserved)
6. Editor's Note: Former Art. XI, Board of Utilities, was repealed 10-26-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-24.
§ 10-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-51
1:37

ARTICLE XII
Board of Traffic and Parking
[Amended 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-31]
§ 10-56. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Board of Traffic and Parking, which is an
advisory Board to the Mayor and City Council and City staff as applicable.
§ 10-57. Membership; terms of office.
§ 10-58. Chairman; staff assistance.
A. There shall be established a Board of Traffic and Parking of the City of
Hagerstown, which shall consist of five members. One of the five
members shall be the chairperson. The City will publicly advertise
openings on the Board. The City Administrator and/or his designee shall
review the list of applicants and provide recommendations to the Mayor
and City Council. The members of the Board of Traffic and Parking shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council
through a vote at a public meeting. The members shall be residents,
taxpayers or those who conduct business in Hagerstown. One member
of City Council shall be an ex officio member.
B. The Board of Traffic and Parking shall consist of five members with
staggered terms. Each new member shall serve for four years or until a
successor has been appointed. No member shall serve more than two
consecutive four-year terms, unless the Mayor and City Council
determine it is in the best interest of the City to extend the appointment
beyond two terms.
C. Preferred candidates for membership should have proof of experience
in traffic management, parking management, law enforcement,
leadership in neighborhood groups, or engineering.
D. At least 60 days prior to the expiration of a member's term, the City
Clerk shall notify the Mayor and Council of the pending expiration. The
Mayor shall, in accordance with the City Code, either reappoint the
member or shall appoint a replacement member subject to Council
approval prior to the expiration of the term.
E. Except as otherwise provided by the applicable law, a member of a
board may be removed by the City Council at any time with or without
cause.
A. The Board shall select a Chairman, who will conduct meetings and
ensure that records are maintained. The Chairman remains a voting
member of the Board. The Chairman shall serve no more than two
consecutive calendar years.
§ 10-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-58
1:39
§ 10-59. Meetings.
The Board shall meet at least once each month or at the request of the
Chairman.
§ 10-60. Responsibilities.
B. The City Engineer shall see that staff assistance is provided for the
Board, as may be required in his direction. The Department of Parks
and Engineering and the Department of Police shall provide staff
support as needed at each meeting.
A. It is the responsibility of the Board to review matters pertaining to
parking and traffic issues in the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, and to
provide recommendations to staff. The Board shall provide
recommendations to City Council on matters that require Council
authorization for implementation (a list of which shall be maintained in
Department policy).
B. The Board may review such information as is available concerning
transportation planning, assessments of parking demands and needs
and major proposed changes to traffic circulation patterns and
regulations within the corporate limits of the City.
C. The Board shall host public meetings when necessary to provide a
forum for public discernment of traffic issues and to discuss and
mediate traffic and parking conflicts.
D. The Board may make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
and City Administrator concerning long-range transportation planning.
The Board shall serve solely in an advisory, planning capacity and shall
have the authority to make recommendations to the Mayor and City
Council for its review and consideration.
E. Advise the Board of Zoning Appeals regarding the potential impact of
upcoming zoning appeal requests on either traffic or parking.
§ 10-58 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 10-60
1:40
ARTICLE XIII
Hagerstown Loan Review Authority
[Added 8-27-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-237]
§ 10-61. Establishment.
There is hereby established for the City of Hagerstown an authority known
and designated as the "Hagerstown Loan Review Authority," hereinafter
referred to for the purposes of this article as the "Authority." The Authority
shall be considered the successor to the Hagerstown Redevelopment
Authority ("HRA").
§ 10-62. Membership; terms of office.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the Council, five members and
one alternate to serve on the Authority for terms not to exceed three years
each, or until a successor is duly appointed. The members and alternate
serving on the HRA upon the effective date of the Authority shall continue
to serve out their respective terms as members of the Authority.
§ 10-63. Powers and duties.
§ 10-64. (Reserved)
A. It shall be the duty of the Authority to review loan applications and
supporting documentation and approve or deny loan applications for
the various loan programs administered by the City of Hagerstown. The
Authority shall also exercise all powers specifically conferred upon it or
its predecessor in the guidelines of the individual loan programs,
including but not limited to the review of requests to modify, amend,
reconsider, or appeal a prior decision of the Authority or its
predecessor. The Authority shall make written determinations to City
staff for all matters submitted to the Authority.
B. In addition to applying the standards, requirements, and guidelines
applicable to the particular loan program(s) of the City, the Authority
may promulgate rules, regulations, procedures, criteria and guidelines
necessary for the proper and timely review of loan applications and to
facilitate the exercise of its powers and duties and any necessary
function directly related thereto.
7. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. XIII, Hagerstown
Redevelopment Authority.
§ 10-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-64
1:41

ARTICLE XIV
Board of Code Appeals
[Amended 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-31]
§ 10-65. Establishment; membership.
There shall be established a Board of Code Appeals of the City of
Hagerstown, which shall consist of five members. One of the five members
shall be the Chairperson. The City will publicly advertise openings on the
Board. The City Administrator and/or his designee shall review the list of
applicants and provide recommendations to the Mayor and City Council.
The members of the Board of Code Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council through a vote at a public meeting.
The members shall be residents, taxpayers or those who conduct business
in Hagerstown.
§ 10-66. Application for appeal.
The owner of a building or structure or any other person may appeal
to the Board of Code Appeals a decision of the staff refusing to grant
a modification of the provisions of the applicable building, sidewalk, and
property maintenance codes of the City of Hagerstown. Application for
appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true intent of this code or
the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, that
the provisions of the code do not fully apply or that an equally good or better
form of construction can be used.
§ 10-67. Membership; terms of office.
§ 10-68. Qualifications of members.
The Board shall include:
A. The Board of Code Appeals shall consist of five members with staggered
terms. Each new member shall serve for four years or until a successor
has been appointed. No member shall serve more than two consecutive
four-year terms, unless the Mayor and City Council determine it is in
the best interest of the City to extend the appointment beyond two
terms.
B. At least 60 days prior to the expiration of a member's term, the City
Clerk shall notify the Mayor and Council of the pending expiration. The
Mayor shall, in accordance with the City Code, either reappoint the
member or shall appoint a replacement member subject to Council
approval prior to the expiration of the term.
C. Except as otherwise provided by the applicable law, a member of a
board may be removed by the City Council at any time with or without
cause.
A. One licensed architect.
§ 10-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-68
1:43
§ 10-69. Officers.
§ 10-70. Conflicts of interest.
A member of the Board shall not pass on any question in which that member
is engaged as contractor or material dealer or in the preparation of plans or
specifications or in which that member has personal interest.
§ 10-71. Hearings; meetings.
§ 10-72. Action of Board.
The Board shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the code official
consistent with the Board bylaws by a concurring vote of three members.
Every action of the Board shall be by resolution, and certified copies shall
be furnished to the appellant and to the code official.
§ 10-73. Decision of Board; enforcement of decision.
B. One licensed professional engineer with civil or structural experience.
C. One person with knowledge and experience in fire prevention and life
safety codes.
D. One attorney.
E. One contractor licensed by the State of Maryland as an electrician,
plumber or general contractor.
A. The Board shall select one of its members to serve as Chairman. The
Chairman remains a voting member of the Board. The Chairman shall
serve no more than two consecutive calendar years.
B. The City Engineer shall designate a Clerk from the Department of Parks
and Engineering to serve as Secretary to the Board, who shall keep a
detailed record of all proceedings on file in the Department.
C. A quorum shall consist of four members. Any decision of the Board
requires three affirmative votes.
A. All hearings shall be public. The appellant, the appellant's
representative, the official of the jurisdiction and any other person
whose interests may be affected by the matter on appeal shall be given
an opportunity to be heard.
B. The Board shall have regularly scheduled monthly meetings, but only as
appeals are submitted.
A. Failure to secure three concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation
of the decision of the code official.
B. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the
decision of the Board.
§ 10-68 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 10-74
1:44
§ 10-74. Court review.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Code Appeals,
including the City of Hagerstown, may appeal to the Circuit Court for
Washington County, Maryland. Said appeal shall be filed in the Circuit Court
within 30 days after the filing of the board's decision in the office of the City
Engineer. Said appeal shall be an appeal on the record.
§ 10-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-74
1:45
Chapter 21
(RESERVED)
Chapter 25
DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land management — See Ch. 140.
§ 25-1. Legislative authority; adoption of map. [Amended 9-30-2014
by Ord. No. O-14-15]
Pursuant to the provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Charter
of the City of Hagerstown and in particular, but not limited thereto, the
provisions of § 5-627 of the Criminal Law Article and § 4-122 of the
Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Mayor and
Council of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, do hereby declare that the
Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about December 9, 2013, by
the Engineering Department for the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, a copy
of which is attached hereto, incorporated herein and made a part hereof8
and is designated as "City of Hagerstown Engineering Department Drawing
No. 73-045-01," is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and
record of the location and areas within the municipality of property which
is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any private
or public elementary or secondary school or school board and of the areas
on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 25-2. Map to constitute official finding.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 25-1
of this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any private or public elementary or secondary school
or school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
that this chapter shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drug-free
school zones.
§ 25-3. Notification of changes.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the City Engineer and the City Attorney of
8. Editor's Note: The Drug-Free School Zone Map is on file in the City offices.
§ 10-74 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 25-3
1:46
any changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of
any property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 25-4. Filing of map; availability of copies.
The City Clerk of the City of Hagerstown is hereby directed to receive and
to keep on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 25-1 of this chapter and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof
to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request such
a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map
approved and adopted herein and kept on file and the date thereof. It is
hereby further directed that a true copy of such map and of this chapter
shall be provided without cost to the County Clerk, to the Clerk of the
Circuit Court for Washington County, Maryland, and to the office of the
States Attorney for Washington County, Maryland.
§ 25-5. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 25-1
of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map which is incorporated herein, all of the property depicted
on the map approved and adopted herein as school property was owned
by, occupied by, leased to or utilized for school purposes to a school or
school board, as defined herein, and was being used for school
purposes as of December 1, 2013. [Amended 9-30-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-15]
C. Pursuant to the provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland, a
prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other
evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that statute, including the use of a map or diagram other than the one
§ 25-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5
1:47
§ 25-6. Applicability of state statutes.
Chapter 29
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 10. Code of Ethics — See Ch. 33.
approved and adopted pursuant to § 25-1 of this chapter. The failure of
the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, as
defined herein, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or
school board or that such property is not used for school purposes.
A. All of the requirements set forth in § 4-122 of the Education Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, concerning the preparation, approval
and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map have been complied with
and, insofar as applicable, are incorporated herein and made a part
hereof by reference. [Amended 7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-39]
B. All other provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland applicable to
the subject of this chapter are incorporated herein and made a part
hereof insofar as the same are pertinent and applicable.
§ 25-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 25-6
1:48
ARTICLE I
Registration and Voting
[All elections in the City of Hagerstown shall be governed by the
City Charter and Article 33, the Election Code of the State of
Maryland.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6
1:49

ARTICLE II
Fair Practices
[Adopted 1-8-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-1]
§ 29-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fair Election Practices
Ordinance."
§ 29-2. Definitions.
As used in this article or in the State Fair Election Practices Law herein
adopted, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COUNTY — The City of Hagerstown.
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD OF ELECTION LAWS — The City of
Hagerstown Board of Election Supervisors.
STATE OF MARYLAND — The City of Hagerstown.
§ 29-3. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared and ordained by the Council of the City of Hagerstown
to be the public policy of the City to regulate fair election practices for
candidates for office of the City of Hagerstown.
§ 29-4. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all elections in which ballots
shall be cast for the election of a candidate or person to hold an office as
Mayor, Councilman or any other elective office for the City of Hagerstown,
a municipal corporation.
§ 29-5. Adoption of state standards by reference.
All that portion of the Annotated Code of the Public General Laws of
Maryland, 1957, as subsequently amended, known and designated as
"Article 33, Election Code, Fair Election Practices, § 26-2 through and
including § 26-20," and the whole thereof and any and all subsequent
amendments, deletions or additions thereof, is hereby adopted. A copy of
said code shall be filed and is filed in the office of the Clerk of the City of
Hagerstown. Said fair election practices are adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set forth at length herein.
§ 29-6. through § 29-9. (Reserved)
§ 29-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-6
1:51

ARTICLE III
Campaign Financing
[Adopted 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-18]
§ 29-10. Adoption of state law by reference.
The City of Hagerstown adopts the provisions of Title 13, Campaign
Finance, of the Election Law Article of the Annotated Code of the Public
General Laws of Maryland as from time to time amended and the same
is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein,
subject to the revisions set forth in the following section.
§ 29-11. Revisions.
The following sections of Title 13, Campaign Finance, are revised as follows:
A. All references in the State Law to "State Board" or "Secretary of State"
are changed to "City Clerk."
B. Section 13-101(a) is amended to read as follows:
(a) In general. This article applies to each City election.
C. Section 13-103 is hereby amended to delete (b).
D. Section 13-104, Electronic signatures, is hereby deleted.
E. Section 13-210, Lobbyist, is hereby deleted.
F. Subtitle 2, Part VI, Contributions-Prohibitions, is hereby deleted.
G. Section 13-239, Anonymous contributions, Subsection 2 is hereby
amended to change the reference from "State Treasurer" to "City
Finance Director."
H. Section 13-241 and 13-242 dealing with payroll deductions are hereby
deleted.
I. Section 13-243, Collection by Membership Entities, is hereby deleted.
J. Section 13-313, Termination of Campaign Finance Entity by State
Board, is hereby deleted.
K. Section 13-324, Electronic Filing of Campaign Reports, is hereby
deleted.
L. Section 13-335(a)(3), dealing with referral of prosecution to the
Maryland Central Collections Unit, is hereby deleted.
M. Section 13-340 is hereby amended to read as follows: "Fees relating to
campaign finance reports shall be paid to the City of Hagerstown to
cover administrative costs."
§ 29-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-11
1:53
N. Section 13-341(c) and (d), referring to the transfer of campaign finance
reports to the state archives, is hereby deleted.
O. Section 13-402, Advertising Rates, is hereby deleted.
P. Sections 13-406, 407, 408 and 409 relating to General Assembly
Legislative Newsletters, are hereby deleted.
Q. Subtitle 5, Local Provisions, dealing with other jurisdictions, is hereby
deleted.
R. Section 13-602, Subsection (c), is hereby modified to change the
reference to "State Prosecutor" to "State's Attorney."
§ 29-11 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 29-11
1:54
Chapter 33
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 10.
Elections — See Ch. 29.
Ethics Commission — See Ch. 35.
§ 33-1. Purpose.
§ 33-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise herein provided, shall be
applicable to all elected officials, employees and members of boards and
commissions of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
§ 33-3. Prohibited acts. [Amended 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-16;
8-27-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-22; 4-28-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-07;
9-11-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-18]
A. The Mayor and Council, recognizing that our system of representative
government is dependent in part upon the people maintaining the
highest trust in their public officials and employees, finds and declares
that the people have a right to be assured that the impartiality and
independent judgment of public officials and employees will be
maintained.
B. It is evident that this trust is eroded when the conduct of the City's
business is subject to improper influence and can be eroded where
there is even the appearance of improper influence.
C. To guard against improper influence, the Mayor and Council enact this
chapter to require City officials and employees to disclose their
financial affairs and to set minimum standards for the conduct of City
business.
D. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that this chapter, except for
criminal sanctions, be liberally construed to accomplish this purpose.
E. It is also the intention of the Mayor and Council that regular education
and communication concerning this chapter be provided to all
applicable individuals on a regular basis.
F. An additional purpose of this chapter is to comply with Title 15 of the
State Government Article of the Annotated Code of the State of
Maryland. [Amended 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-16]
A. Participation prohibitions.
§ 29-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:55
(1) Except as permitted by Commission regulation or opinion, an
official or employee may not participate in:
(a) Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty
that does not affect the disposition or decision of the matter,
any matter in which, to the knowledge of the official or
employee, the official or employee or the spouse, children,
(dependent or otherwise), parents, siblings, in-laws or any
person who shares a household with the official or employee (a
"qualified relative") has an interest.
(b) Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty
that does not affect the disposition or decision with respect to
the matter, any matter in which any of the following is a party:
[1] A business entity in which the official or employee has a
direct financial interest of which the official or employee
may reasonably be expected to know;
[2] A business entity for which the official, employee, or a
qualified relative of the official or employee is an officer,
director, trustee, partner, or employee;
[3] A business entity with which the official or employee or, to
the knowledge of the official or employee, a qualified
relative is negotiating employment or has any
arrangement concerning prospective employment;
[4] If the contract reasonably could be expected to result in a
conflict between the private interests of the official or
employee and the official duties of the official or employee,
a business entity that is a party to an existing contract with
the official or employee, or which, to the knowledge of the
official or employee, is a party to a contract with a
qualified relative;
[5] An entity, doing business with the City, in which a direct
financial interest is owned by another entity in which the
official or employee has a direct financial interest, if the
official or employee may be reasonably expected to know
of both direct financial interests; or
[6] A business entity that:
[a] The official or employee knows is a creditor or obligee
of the official or employee or a qualified relative of the
official or employee with respect to a thing of
economic value; and
[b] As a creditor or obligee, is in a position to directly and
substantially affect the interest of the official or
§ 33-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 33-3
1:56
employee or a qualified relative of the official or
employee.
[7] Former regulated lobbyists. A former regulated lobbyist
who is or becomes subject to regulation under this title as
an official or employee may not participate in a case,
contract, or other specific matter as an official or employee
for one calendar year after the termination of the
registration of the former regulated lobbyist, if the former
regulated lobbyist previously assisted or represented
another party for compensation in this matter. This section
does not apply to nominally compensated (or
uncompensated) board/commission members.
(2) A person who is disqualified from participating under Subsection
A(1) of this section shall disclose the nature and circumstances of
the conflict and may participate or act if:
(a) The disqualification leaves a body with less than a quorum
capable of acting;
(b) The disqualified official or employee is required by law to act;
or
(c) The disqualified official or employee is the only person
authorized to act.
(3) The prohibitions of Subsection A(1) of this section do not apply if
participation is allowed by regulation or opinion of the Commission.
B. Employment and financial interest restrictions.
(1) Except as permitted by regulation of the Commission when the
interest is disclosed or when the employment does not create a
conflict of interest or appearance of conflict, an official or employee
may not:
(a) Be employed by or have a financial interest in any entity:
[1] Subject to the authority of the official or employee or the
City agency, board, or commission with which the official
or employee is affiliated; or
[2] That is negotiating or has entered a contract with the
agency, board, or commission with which the official or
employee is affiliated; or
(b) Hold any other employment relationship that would impair the
impartiality or independence of judgment of the official or
employee.
(2) The prohibitions of Subsection B(1) of this section do not apply to:
§ 33-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:57
(a) An official or employee who is appointed to a regulatory or
licensing authority pursuant to a statutory requirement that
persons subject to the jurisdiction of the authority be
represented in appointments to the authority;
(b) Subject to other provisions of law, a member of a board or
commission in regard to a financial interest or employment
held at the time of appointment, provided the financial interest
or employment is publicly disclosed to the appointing authority
and the Commission;
(c) An official or employee whose duties are ministerial, if the
private employment or financial interest does not create a
conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest, as
permitted and in accordance with regulations adopted by the
Commission; or
(d) Employment or financial interests allowed by regulation of the
Commission if the employment does not create a conflict of
interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest or the
financial interest is disclosed.
C. Post-employment limitations and restrictions.
(1) A former official or employee may not assist or represent any party
other than the City for compensation in a case, contract, or other
specific matter involving the City if that matter is one in which the
former official or employee significantly participated as an official
or employee.
(2) For one year after the elected official leaves office, a former
member of the Mayor and Council may not assist or represent
another party for compensation in a matter that is the subject of
legislative action.
D. Contingent compensation. Except in a judicial or quasi-judicial
proceeding, an official or employee may not assist or represent a party
for contingent compensation in any matter before or involving the City.
E. Use of prestige of office.
(1) An official or employee may not intentionally use the prestige of
office or public position for the private gain of that official or
employee or the private gain of another.
(2) This subsection does not prohibit the performance of usual and
customary constituent services by an elected official without
additional compensation.
F. Solicitation and acceptance of gifts.
(1) "Gift" shall mean the transfer of anything of economic value,
regardless of the form, without adequate and lawful consideration.
§ 33-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 33-3
1:58
"Gift" does not include a political campaign contribution regulated
under the Election Law Articles of the Annotated Code of Maryland
or any other provision of state or local law regulating the conduct
of elections or the receipt of political campaign contributions.
(2) An official or employee may not solicit any gift.
(3) An official or employee may not directly solicit or facilitate the
solicitation of a gift on behalf of another person from a regulated
lobbyist.
(4) An official or employee may not knowingly accept a gift, directly or
indirectly, from a person or entity that the official or employee
knows or has reason to know:
(a) Is doing business with or seeking to do business with the City
office, agency, board, or commission with which the official or
employee is affiliated;
(b) Has financial interests that may be substantially and materially
affected, in a manner distinguishable from the public generally,
by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of
the official or employee;
(c) Is engaged in an activity regulated or controlled by the
official's or employee's governmental unit; or
(d) Is a lobbyist with respect to matters within the jurisdiction of
the official or employee.
(5) Exceptions; acceptable items.
(a) This subsection does not apply to a gift:
[1] That would tend to impair the impartiality and the
independence of judgment of the official or employee
receiving the gift;
[2] Of significant value that would give the appearance of
impairing the impartiality and independence of judgment
of the official or employee; or
[3] Of significant value that the recipient official or employee
believes or has reason to believe is designed to impair the
impartiality and independence of judgment of the official
or employee.
(b) Notwithstanding Subsection F(4) of this subsection, an official
or employee may accept the following:
[1] Meals and beverages consumed in the presence of the
donor or sponsoring entity;
§ 33-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:59
[2] Ceremonial gifts or awards that have insignificant
monetary value;
[3] Unsolicited gifts of nominal value that do not exceed $20
in cost or trivial items of informational value;
[4] Reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, and
scheduled entertainment of the official or the employee at
a meeting which is given in return for the participation of
the official or employee in a panel or speaking engagement
at the meeting;
[5] Gifts of tickets or free admission extended to an elected
official to attend a charitable, cultural, or political event, if
the purpose of this gift or admission is a courtesy or
ceremony extended to the elected official's office;
[6] A specific gift or class of gifts that the Commission
exempts from the operation of this subsection upon a
finding, in writing, that acceptance of the gift or class of
gifts would not be detrimental to the impartial conduct of
the business of the City and that the gift is purely personal
and private in nature;
[7] Gifts from a person related to the official or employee by
blood or marriage, or any other individual who is a
member of the household of the official or employee; or
[8] Honoraria for speaking to or participating in a meeting,
provided that the offering of the honorarium is in no way
related to the official's or employee's official position.
G. Disclosure of confidential information. Other than in the discharge of
official duties, an official or employee may not disclose or use
confidential information that the official or employee acquired by
reason of the official's or employee's public position and that is not
available to the public for the economic benefit of the official or
employee or that of another person.
H. Participation in procurement.
(1) An individual or a person that employs an individual who assists a
City agency or unit in the drafting of specifications, an invitation for
bids, or a request for proposals for a procurement may not submit a
bid or proposal for that procurement, or assist or represent another
person, directly or indirectly, who is submitting a bid or proposal
for the procurement.
(2) The Commission may establish exemptions from the requirements
of this section for providing descriptive literature, sole source
procurements, and written comments solicited by the procuring
agency.
§ 33-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 33-3.1
1:60
§ 33-3.1. Financial disclosure — elected officials. [Added 8-23-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-16; 8-27-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-22; 4-28-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-07; 9-11-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-18]
A. This section applies to all elected officials and all candidates to be
elected officials.
B. Except as provided in Subsection D of this section, an elected official or
candidate to be an elected official shall file the financial disclosure
statement required under this subsection:
(1) On a form provided by the Ethics Commission for the City of
Hagerstown (the "Commission");
(2) Under oath or affirmation; and
(3) With the Commission.
C. Deadlines for filing statements.
(1) An incumbent official shall file a financial disclosure statement
annually no later than April 30 of each year for the preceding
calendar year.
(2) An official who is appointed to fill a vacancy in an office for which a
financial disclosure statement is required and who has not already
filed a financial disclosure statement shall file a statement for the
preceding calendar year within 30 days after appointment.
(3) An individual who, other than by reason of death, leaves an office
for which a statement is required, shall file a statement within 60
days after leaving the office.
(4) The statement shall cover:
(a) The calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the
individual left office, unless a statement covering that year has
already been filed by the individual; and
(b) The portion of the current calendar year during which the
individual held the office.
D. Candidates to be elected officials.
(1) Except for an official who has filed a financial disclosure statement
under another provision of this section for the reporting period, a
candidate to be an elected official shall file a financial disclosure
statement each year beginning with the year in which the
certificate of candidacy is filed through the year of the election.
(2) A candidate to be an elected official shall file a statement required
under this section:
§ 33-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3.1
1:61
(a) In the year the certificate of candidacy is filed, no later than
the filing of the certificate of candidacy;
(b) In the year of the election, on or before the earlier of April 30
or the last day for the withdrawal of candidacy; and
(c) In all other years for which a statement is required, on or
before April 30.
(3) A candidate to be an elected official:
(a) May file the statement required under Subsection D(2)(a) of
this section with the City Clerk or Board of Election
Supervisors with the certificate of candidacy or with the
Commission prior to filing the certificate of candidacy; and
(b) Shall file the statements required under Subsection D(2)(b)
and (c) of this section of this chapter with the Commission.
(4) If a candidate fails to file a statement required by this section after
written notice is provided by the City Clerk or Board of Election
Supervisors at least 20 days before the last day for the withdrawal
of candidacy, the candidate is deemed to have withdrawn the
candidacy.
(5) The City Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors may not accept any
certificate of candidacy unless a statement required under this
section has been filed in proper form.
(6) Within 30 days of the receipt of a statement required under this
section, the City Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors shall
forward the statement to the Commission.
E. Public record.
(1) The Commission shall maintain all financial disclosure statements
filed under this section. Home addresses shall be redacted from
public disclosure.
(2) The Commission shall make financial disclosure statements
available during normal office hours for examination and copying
by the public, subject to reasonable fees and administrative
procedures established by the Commission.
(3) If an individual examines or copies a financial disclosure statement,
the Commission shall record:
(a) The name and home address of the individual reviewing or
copying the statement; and
(b) The name of the person whose financial disclosure statement
was examined or copied.
§ 33-3.1 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 33-3.1
1:62
(4) Upon request by the individual whose financial disclosure
statement was examined or copied, the Commission shall provide
the official with a copy of the name and home address of the person
who reviewed the official's financial disclosure statement.
F. Retention requirements. The Commission shall retain financial
disclosure statements for four years from the date of receipt.
G. Contents of statement.
(1) Interests in real property.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in real property wherever located.
(b) For each interest in real property, the schedule shall include:
[1] The nature of the property and the location by street
address, mailing address, or legal description of the
property;
[2] The nature and extent of the interest held, including any
conditions and encumbrances on the interest;
[3] The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of
the person from whom the interest was acquired;
[4] The nature and amount of the consideration given in
exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by
purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the time
acquired;
[5] If any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, at any
time during the reporting period, a description of the
interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received for the interest, and the identity of
the person to whom the interest was transferred; and
[6] The identity of any other person with an interest in the
property.
(2) Interests in corporations and partnerships.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in any corporation, partnership, limited-liability
partnership, or limited-liability corporation, regardless of
whether the corporation or partnership does business with the
City.
(b) For each interest reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
§ 33-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3.1
1:63
[1] The name and address of the principal office of the
corporation, partnership, limited-liability partnership, or
limited-liability corporation;
[2] The nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions and encumbrances on the interest;
[3] With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in
part, at any time during the reporting period, a description
of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received for the interest, and, if known, the
identity of the person to whom the interest was
transferred; and
[4] With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
[a] The date when, the manner in which, and the identity
of the person from whom the interest was acquired;
and
[b] The nature and the amount of the consideration given
in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than
by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at
the time acquired.
(c) An individual may satisfy the requirement to report the amount
of the interest held under Subsection G(2)(b)[2] of this section
by reporting, instead of a dollar amount:
[1] For an equity interest in a corporation, the number of
shares held and, unless the corporation's stock is publicly
traded, the percentage of equity interest held; or
[2] For an equity interest in a partnership, the percentage of
equity interest held.
(3) Interests in business entities doing business with City.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in any business entity that does business with the
City, other than interests reported under Subsection G(2) of
this section.
(b) For each interest reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
[1] The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity;
[2] The nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions to and encumbrances on the interest;
§ 33-3.1 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 33-3.1
1:64
[3] With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in
part, at any time during the reporting period, a description
of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received in exchange for the interest, and, if
known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was
transferred; and
[4] With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
[a] The date when, the manner in which, and the identity
of the person from whom the interest was acquired;
and
[b] The nature and the amount of the consideration given
in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than
by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at
the time acquired.
(4) Gifts.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
each gift, as defined in § 33-3 hereof, in excess of $20 in value
or a series of gifts totaling $100 or more received during the
reporting period from or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any
one person or entity who does business with the City.
(b) For each gift reported, the schedule shall include:
[1] A description of the nature and value of the gift; and
[2] The identity of the person or entity from whom, or on
behalf of whom, directly or indirectly, the gift was
received.
(5) Employment with or interests in entities doing business with the
City.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all offices, directorships, and salaried employment by the
individual or member of the immediate family of the individual
held at any time during the reporting period with entities doing
business with the City.
(b) For each position reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
[1] The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity;
[2] The title and nature of the office, directorship, or salaried
employment held and the date it commenced; and
§ 33-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3.1
1:65
[3] The name of each City agency with which the entity is
involved as indicated by identifying one or more of the
three categories of "doing business," as defined in § 3(d) of
this chapter.9
(6) Indebtedness to persons or entities doing business with the City.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all liabilities, excluding retail credit accounts, to persons or
entities doing business with the City, owed at any time during
the reporting period:
[1] By the individual; or
[2] By the spouse or dependent children ("immediate family
members") of the individual if the individual was involved
in the transaction giving rise to the liability.
(b) For each liability reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
[1] The identity of the person or entity to whom the liability
was owed and the date the liability was incurred;
[2] The amount of the liability owed as of the end of the
reporting period;
[3] The terms of payment of the liability and the extent to
which the principal amount of the liability was increased
or reduced during the year; and
[4] The security given, if any, for the liability.
(7) Employment with City. A statement filed under this section shall
include a schedule of the immediate family members of the
individual employed by the City in any capacity at any time during
the reporting period.
(8) Sources of earned income.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
the name and address of each place of employment and of each
business entity of which the individual or a member of the
individual's immediate family was a sole or partial owner and
from which the individual or member of the individual's
immediate family received earned income at any time during
the reporting period.
(b) A minor child's employment or business ownership need not be
disclosed if the agency that employs the individual does not
9. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 33-3.1 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 33-3.1
1:66
§ 33-4. Financial disclosure - employees and appointed officials.
[Amended 8-27-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-22; 4-28-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-07; 9-11-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-18]
regulate, exercise authority over, or contract with the place of
employment or business entity of the minor child.
(9) For a statement filed on or after January 1, 2019, if the individual's
spouse is a regulated lobbyist, any entity that has engaged the
spouse for lobbying purposes; and
(10) A statement filed under this section may also include a schedule of
additional interests or information that the individual making the
statement wishes to disclose.
H. For the purposes of Subsection G(1), (2), and (3) of this chapter, the
following interests are considered to be the interests of the individual
making the statement:
(1) An interest held by a member of the individual's immediate family,
if the interest was, at any time during the reporting period, directly
or indirectly controlled by the individual.
(2) An interest held by a business entity in which the individual held a
30% or greater interest at any time during the reporting period.
(3) An interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any time during
the reporting period:
(a) The individual held a reversionary interest or was a
beneficiary; or
(b) If a revocable trust, the individual was a settler.
I. Review of disclosure statements; enforcement.
(1) The Commission shall review the financial disclosure statements
submitted under this section for compliance with the provisions of
this section and shall notify an individual submitting the statement
of any omissions or deficiencies.
(2) The City Ethics Commission may take appropriate enforcement
action to ensure compliance with this section.
A. This section applies to the following, provided that the offices exist:
(1) The City Administrator;
(2) The City Clerk;
(3) The City Treasurer;
(4) The City Finance Director;
(5) The City Attorney;
§ 33-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:67
(6) All City department heads; and
(7) Members of all boards, commissions and committees of the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland, and City appointees to non-City boards,
commissions, and committees.
B. An employee or an official shall file the financial disclosure statement
required under this subsection:
(1) On a form provided by the Ethics Commission for the City of
Hagerstown (the "Commission");
(2) Under oath or affirmation; and
(3) With the Commission.
C. Deadlines for filing statements.
(1) An employee or official shall file a financial disclosure statement
annually no later than January 31 of each year for the preceding
calendar year.
(2) An official who is hired or appointed to fill a vacancy in an office for
which a financial disclosure statement is required and who has not
already filed a financial disclosure statement shall file a statement
for the preceding calendar year within 30 days after appointment.
D. Public record.
(1) The Commission shall maintain all financial disclosure statements
filed under this section. Home addresses shall be redacted from
public disclosure.
(2) The Commission shall make financial disclosure statements
available during normal office hours for examination and copying
by the public, subject to reasonable fees and administrative
procedures established by the Commission.
(3) If an individual examines or copies a financial disclosure statement,
the Commission shall record:
(a) The name and home address of the individual reviewing or
copying the statement; and
(b) The name of the person whose financial disclosure statement
was examined or copied.
(4) Upon request by the individual whose financial disclosure
statement was examined or copied, the Commission shall provide
the official with a copy of the name and home address of the person
who reviewed the employee's or official's financial disclosure
statement.
§ 33-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 33-4
1:68
E. Retention requirements. The Commission shall retain financial
disclosure statements for four years from the date of receipt.
F. Contents of statement.
(1) Interests in real property.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in real property located in Washington County,
Maryland.
(b) For each reported interest in real property, the schedule shall
include:
[1] The nature of the property and the location by street
address, mailing address, or legal description of the
property;
[2] The nature and extent of the interest held, including any
conditions and encumbrances on the interest;
[3] The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of
the person from whom the interest was acquired;
[4] The nature and amount of the consideration given in
exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by
purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the time
acquired;
[5] If any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, at any
time during the reporting period, a description of the
interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received for the interest, and the identity of
the person to whom the interest was transferred; and
[6] The identity of any other person with an interest in the
property.
(2) Interests in corporations and partnerships.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in any corporation, partnership, limited-liability
partnership, or limited-liability corporation, which is
authorized to do business in the State of Maryland and has a
place of business in Washington County, Maryland.
(b) For each interest reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
[1] The name and address of the principal office of the
corporation, partnership, limited-liability partnership, or
limited-liability corporation;
§ 33-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:69
[2] The nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions and encumbrances on the interest;
[3] With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in
part, at any time during the reporting period, a description
of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received for the interest, and, if known, the
identity of the person to whom the interest was
transferred; and
[4] With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
[a] The date when, the manner in which, and the identity
of the person from whom the interest was acquired;
and
[b] The nature and amount of the consideration given in
exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by
purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the
time acquired.
(c) An individual may satisfy the requirement to report the amount
of interest held under Subsection F(2)(b)[2] of this section by
reporting, instead of a dollar amount:
[1] For an equity interest in a corporation, the number of
shares held and, unless the corporation's stock is publicly
traded, the percentage of equity interest held; or
[2] For an equity interest in a partnership, the percentage of
equity interest held.
(3) Interests in business entities doing business with the City.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in any business entity that does business with the
City.
(b) For each interest reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
[1] The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity;
[2] The nature and amount of interest held, including any
conditions to and encumbrances on the interest;
[3] With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in
part, at any time during the reporting period, a description
of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received in exchange for the interest, and, if
§ 33-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 33-4
1:70
known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was
transferred; and
[4] With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
[a] The date when, the manner in which, and the identity
of the person from whom the interest was acquired;
and
[b] The nature and amount of the consideration given in
exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by
purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the
time acquired.
(4) Employment with entities doing business with the City.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all salaried employment by the individual or member of the
immediate family of the individual held at any time during the
reporting period with entities doing business with the City.
(b) For each position reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
[1] The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity;
[2] The title and nature of the salaried employment held and
the date it commenced; and
[3] The name of each City agency with which the entity is
involved or by which the entity is regulated.
(5) Indebtedness to persons or entities doing business with the City.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all liabilities, excluding retail credit accounts, to persons or
entities doing business with the City owed at any time during
the reporting period:
[1] By the individual; or
[2] By the spouse or dependent children ("immediate family
members") of the individual if the individual was involved
in the transaction giving rise to the liability.
(b) For each liability reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
[1] The identity of the person to whom the liability was owed
and the date the liability was incurred;
§ 33-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:71
[2] The amount of the liability owed as of the end of the
reporting period;
[3] The terms of payment of the liability and the extent to
which the principal amount of the liability was increased
or reduced during the year; and
[4] The security given, if any, for the liability.
(6) Employment with City. A statement filed under this section shall
include a schedule of the immediate family members of the
individual employed by the City in any capacity at any time during
the reporting period.
(7) Gifts.
(a) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
each gift, as defined in § 33-3 hereof, in excess of $20 in value
or a series of gifts totaling $100 or more received during the
reporting period from or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any
one person or entity who does business with the City.
(b) For each gift reported, the schedule shall include:
[1] A description of the nature and value of the gift; and
[2] The identity of the person or entity from whom, or on
behalf of whom, directly or indirectly, the gift was
received.
(8) For a statement filed on or after January 1, 2019, if the individual's
spouse is a regulated lobbyist, any entity that has engaged the
spouse for lobbying purposes; and
(9) A statement filed under this section may also include a schedule of
additional interests or information that the individual making the
statement wishes to disclose.
G. For the purposes of Subsection F(1), (2), and (3) of this chapter, the
following interests are considered to be the interests of the individual
making the statement:
(1) An interest held by a member of the individual's immediate family,
if the interest was, at any time during the reporting period, directly
or indirectly controlled by the individual.
(2) An interest held by a business entity in which the individual held a
30% or greater interest at any time during the reporting period.
(3) An interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any time during
the reporting period:
(a) The individual held a reversionary interest or was a
beneficiary; or
§ 33-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 33-4
1:72
§ 33-5. Lobbying disclosure.
§ 33-6. (Reserved)10
(b) If a revocable trust, the individual was a settler.
H. Board members - modified requirements. An appointed member of a
City board, commission or committee, and City appointees to non-City
boards, commissions or committees, shall file the statement required by
this section and shall be required to disclose the information specified
only with respect to those interests, gifts, compensated positions, and
liabilities that may create a conflict between the member's personal
interests and the member's duties on the board.
I. Review of disclosure statements; enforcement.
(1) The Commission shall review the financial disclosure statements
submitted under this section for compliance with the provisions of
this section and shall notify an individual who submitted the
statement of any omissions or deficiencies.
(2) The City Ethics Commission may take appropriate enforcement
action to ensure compliance with this section.
A. Any person who personally appears before any City official or employee
with the intent to influence that person in performance of his official
duties and who, in connection with such intent, expends or reasonably
expects to expend in a given calendar year in excess of $100 on food,
entertainment or other gifts for such official shall file a registration
statement with the Commission not later than January 15 of the
calendar year or within five days after first making these appearances.
B. The registration statement shall include complete identification of the
registrant and of any other person on whose behalf the registrant acts.
It shall also identify the subject matter on which the registrant proposes
to make these appearances and shall cover a defined registration
period not to exceed one calendar year.
C. Registrants under this section shall file a report within 30 days after the
end of any calendar year during which they were registered, disclosing
the value, date and nature of any good, entertainment or other gift
provided to a City official, employee, or appointee. When a gift to a
single official, employee, or appointee exceeds $20 in value, or a series
of gifts to a single official or employee exceeds $100 in value, the
official, employee, or appointee shall also be identified. [Amended
8-27-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-22]
D. The registrations and reports filed pursuant to this section shall be
maintained by the Commission as public records available for public
inspection and copying.
§ 33-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-7
1:73
§ 33-7. Enforcement; disciplinary actions; violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-27-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-22]
Chapter 35
ETHICS COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 10. Code of Ethics — See Ch. 33.
§ 35-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Ethics Commission for the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland.
§ 35-2. Membership.
The Ethics Commission shall be comprised of five City residents, who shall
be and are charged with the responsibilities set forth in Chapters 33 and
35 of the City Code. Membership of the Ethics Commission shall consist
of two members nominated and appointed by the Mayor, with advice and
consent of Council; two members appointed by the Mayor from a pool
of candidates nominated by the Council; and one member appointed by
the Mayor from a pool of candidates nominated by the City Administrator.
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy on the Ethics Commission, a replacement
member shall be appointed by the Mayor from newly recommended
candidates nominated by the original nominating body for said vacant
position. The minimum number of nominees proposed by the Council and
A. The Commission may issue a cease-and-desist order against any person
found to be in violation of this chapter and may seek enforcement of this
order in the Circuit Court of Washington County. The court may issue a
cease-and-desist order and may also impose a fine up to $500 for any
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
B. A City official, employee, or appointee found to have violated this
chapter may be subject to disciplinary or other appropriate action,
including but not limited to reprimand, probation, suspension of City
employment, with or without suspension of salary or other
compensation, or termination or removal. The Commission shall make
recommendations to the appropriate City authority.
C. Violation of the lobbying disclosure requirements contained in § 33-5 of
this chapter shall be a misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to $500 or
imprisonment of up to one year. The Commission shall make
recommendations to the appropriate prosecuting authority.
10.Editor's Note: Former § 3-6, Grant of exemptions or modifications, was repealed 8-23-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-16.
§ 33-7 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 35-2
1:74
City Administrator for membership on the Ethics Commission shall be a
minimum of twice the number of currently vacant positions for which the
respective nominator is responsible.
§ 35-3. Terms.
Each member of the Commission, other than the initial members, shall
serve a five-year term, with no member serving more than two consecutive
terms. To allow for staggered terms, of the initial members nominated, one's
initial term shall be five years, one's initial term shall be four years, one's
initial term shall be three years, one's initial term shall be two years, and
one's initial term shall be one year.
§ 35-4. Responsibilities.
The Commission referred to herein shall be advised by the City Attorney
and shall have the following responsibilities:
A. To devise, receive and maintain all forms generated by this chapter and
Chapter 33, Ethics, Code of.
B. To provide published advisory opinions to persons subject to this
chapter and Chapter 33, Ethics, Code of, as to applicability of the
provisions of those chapters to them.
C. To process and make determinations as to complaints filed by any
person alleging violations of this chapter and Chapter 33, Ethics, Code
of.
D. To conduct a public information program regarding the purposes and
application of this chapter and Chapter 33, Ethics, Code of.
E. To recommend and coordinate ongoing education for the applicable
individuals regarding the purposes and application of this chapter and
Chapter 33, Ethics, Code of.
F. To grant exceptions to the prohibitions of § 33-3 as permitted therein,
and exercise all powers conferred upon the Commission by the Code of
Ethics of the City of Hagerstown. [Added 8-23-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-17]
G. To certify to the State Ethics Commission that the City of Hagerstown is
in compliance with all Code of Ethics requirements for elected officials,
on or before October 1 of each year. [Added 8-23-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-17]
H. To meet regularly, at least quarterly, to conduct the business listed
above.
§ 35-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-4
1:75
Chapter 37
POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police and Fire Employees' Retirement
Plan — See Ch. 38.
Police Department — See Ch. 39.
§ 35-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 35-4
1:76
ARTICLE I
Binding Interest Arbitration
[Adopted 7-25-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-10]
§ 37-1. Applicability.
This article governs the procedure for resolving an impasse between:
§ 37-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARBITRATION — A process for resolving labor disputes in which a neutral
third party (arbitrator), chosen according to the provisions of this article,
renders a binding decision after permitting both parties the opportunity to
be heard according to the provisions of this article.
FACT FINDING — A process for resolving labor disputes in which a neutral
third party, chosen according to the provisions of this article, renders a
nonbinding recommendation as to what terms and conditions should be
contained in a new collective bargaining agreement.
IMPASSE — A point in labor negotiations at which both parties agree
in writing that no further progress can be made toward reaching an
agreement because neither party is willing to change its collective
bargaining position with respect to wages, fringe benefits, or other terms
and conditions of a proposed collective bargaining agreement or labor
dispute.
LABOR DISPUTE — A conflict or controversy during labor negotiations
regarding wages and benefits between:
MEDIATION — A process for resolving labor disputes in which a neutral
third party (mediator), chosen according to the provisions of this article,
assists the parties to reach an agreement. The mediator has no power to
impose a decision on the parties.
NON-MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE OF THE POLICE AND FIRE
DEPARTMENTS — A full-time employee of:
A. The City and the non-management employees of the Police Department
or their exclusive representative; and
B. The City and the non-management employees of the Fire Department or
their exclusive representative.
The City and the non-management employees of the Police Department
or their exclusive representative; or
A.
The City and the non-management employees of the Fire Department
or their exclusive representative.
B.
§ 37-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-2
1:77
§ 37-3. Exclusive representative.
Pursuant to § 802A of the Charter of the City of Hagerstown, nonmanagement
employees of the Police Department and non-management
employees of the Fire Department shall be entitled to designate a union to
act as their exclusive representative and to engage in collective bargaining
with the City, to include the procedures set forth in this section.
§ 37-4. Mediation, fact finding and arbitration.
Should an impasse occur between either the City and the non-management
employees of the Police Department or their exclusive representative; or
the City and the non-management employees of the Fire Department or
their exclusive representative, the parties who have declared the impasse
shall submit the issues on which they have reached impasse to mediation as
provided in § 37-5 and to fact finding as provided in § 37-7. Upon completion
of mediation and fact finding without final agreement on a new collective
bargaining agreement, the parties who have declared the impasse shall
commence arbitration procedures in accordance with § 37-8. The existing
or most recently terminated or most recently expired collective bargaining
agreement between the parties who have declared the impasse shall remain
in effect until a final disposition is rendered, including any motion to vacate
the decision rendered by the arbitrator panel filed in accordance with
§ 37-17 and any appeal thereof.
§ 37-5. Nonbinding mediation.
Mediation shall be nonbinding, conducted by a neutral mediator selected by
the parties who have declared the impasse or, in the event these parties are
unable to agree upon a mediator, by a neutral mediator selected from a list
provided by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, and conducted
in a manner agreed to by the parties at impasse.
§ 37-6. Mediation statements or positions as evidence in other
proceedings.
No statement made or position taken during mediation under this article
may be used as evidence in any other proceeding.
§ 37-7. Fact finding.
If the parties who have declared the impasse do not reach voluntary
agreement in mediation, each party shall submit the issues on which they
have reached impasse and their positions on these issues to fact finding,
upon which a neutral fact finder selected by the parties at impasse or, in the
The Hagerstown Police Department who is in good standing with
AFSCME Local 3373; or
A.
The Hagerstown Fire Department who is a member in good standing
with IAFF Local 1605.
B.
§ 37-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 37-7
1:78
event the parties at impasse are unable to agree upon a fact finder, selected
from a list provided by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service,
will hear evidence presented by both parties and will make a nonbinding
recommendation on which terms and conditions should be contained in the
new collective bargaining agreement between the parties. No statement
made or position taken during fact finding under this section may be used
as evidence in any other proceeding.
§ 37-8. Arbitration.
Upon completion of mediation and fact finding without final agreement on
a new collective bargaining agreement, the parties who have declared the
impasse shall:
§ 37-9. Alternative arbitrator lists.
If the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service is unable to satisfy the
requirements of § 37-8, the parties who have declared the impasse shall:
A. Within 10 days of completion of the fact finding process, reduce to
writing a memorandum of agreed issues, which states all of the wages,
benefits, and terms and conditions of employment upon which they
agree;
B. Within 10 days of completion of the fact finding process, apply to the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service for a list of no fewer than
five neutral labor arbitrators who are members of the National
Academy of Arbitrators, who are familiar with and have rendered
decisions in public employer impasse disputes and interest arbitration,
and are available to conduct a hearing and issue a final written award;
C. Pursuant to an application made under § 37-8B, instruct the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service to provide a list of neutral
arbitrators who are familiar with and have rendered decisions in public
employer impasse disputes and interest arbitration, and are available to
conduct a hearing and issue a final written award; and
D. Within 14 calendar days of receiving the list of neutral arbitrators
described in § 37-8C, select a neutral arbitrator panel in accordance
with § 37-10.
A. Agree to accept fewer than five arbitrators; or
B. Request from the American Arbitration Association a supplementary or
alternative list of neutral labor arbitrators who are members of the
National Academy of Arbitrators, who are familiar with and have
rendered decisions in public employer impasse disputes and interest
arbitration, and are available to conduct a hearing and issue a final
written award.
§ 37-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-10
1:79
§ 37-10. Selection of neutral arbitrator.
The parties who have declared the impasse shall select the neutral
arbitrator in the manner as follows.
§ 37-11. Alternative neutral arbitrator.
If any of the panel of three neutral arbitrators selected under § 37-10 is
unwilling or unable to serve as the arbitrator, then the parties who have
declared the impasse shall select the arbitrator(s) whose name(s) was/were
last stricken under § 37-10.
§ 37-12. Powers and duties of neutral arbitrator panel.
After conferring with the parties who have declared the impasse as to their
selection, the panel of neutral arbitrators selected under this section shall:
A. The non-management employees or their exclusive representative shall
strike the first arbitrator from the list or lists provided under §§ 37-8
and 37-9.
B. After the first strike, the City shall strike the second arbitrator from the
list or lists provided under §§ 37-8 and 37-9.
C. The non-management employees or their exclusive representative and
the City shall continue to alternate strikes until a panel of three neutral
labor arbitrators remains.
D. In the event that the list or lists provided contain more than five neutral
labor arbitrators or fewer than five neutral labor arbitrators, the parties
shall alternate strikes until a panel of three neutral labor arbitrators
remains, in such a manner that the City exercises the final strike of the
fourth remaining neutral labor arbitrator and alternating backwards.
A. Require the parties to submit a final offer, which must consist of either a
complete draft of a proposed collective bargaining agreement or a
complete package proposal, as the panel directs;
B. Require the parties to submit jointly to the arbitrator panel the
memorandum of agreed issues prepared according to § 37-8A;
C. Schedule and hold a prehearing conference in which procedural
consideration for both the hearing and the post-hearing submission of
briefs will be addressed and either agreed to by the parties or, to the
extent the parties cannot agree on procedures, determined by the panel
of arbitrators;
D. Convene and adjourn a hearing, which may be closed in accordance
with law, at which the parties who have declared impasse may present
evidence in accordance with § 37-13;
E. Administer oaths;
§ 37-10 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 37-12
1:80
§ 37-13. Determinations of neutral arbitrator panel.
The neutral arbitrator panel selected under this section shall:
F. Issue subpoenas duces tecum to compel the production of relevant and
nonprivileged documents and other tangible evidence to be produced at
a time prior to a hearing or at a hearing;
G. Issue subpoenas to compel the attendance and testimony or witnesses,
except that no elected official of the City or of the state may be
compelled to appear and testify;
H. Sequester witnesses, if requested; and
I. Decide whether to hear evidence offered through a proffer.
A. Have full authority to hear and decide all stipulated issues in dispute,
including the procedures of the arbitration hearing;
B. Have no authority to consider or amend matters previously agreed upon
and submitted in the parties' memorandum of agreed-upon issues;
C. Have no authority to determine or dictate staffing levels, including but
not limited to determining the number of employees that the City must
hire as well as placing any limits on the City's ability to furlough
employees or reduce staffing through layoffs;
D. Receive and enter into the record the final offers of the City and the
exclusive representative;
E. Evaluate and give the highest priority to the ability of the City to pay for
additional short-term and long-term expenditures by considering the
following factors:
(1) The limits on the City's ability to raise taxes or charge fees under
state law and the City Charter;
(2) The added burden on City taxpayers, if any, resulting from
increases in revenues needed to fund the final offer and/or
decreases/reductions in services;
(3) The City's ability to continue to provide the current standard of all
public services;
(4) The number of bargaining unit employees per capita;
(5) The current assessed valuation of real estate property in the City;
and
(6) A comparison of the assessed valuation of real estate property and
tax rates of other public employers in Washington County,
Maryland; Allegany County, Maryland; Franklin County,
Pennsylvania; and Berkeley County, West Virginia.
§ 37-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-13
1:81
F. After evaluating the ability of the City to pay under § 38-13E, the
arbitrator panel may only consider the following evidence presented by
a party to the impasse at the arbitration hearing:
(1) The interest and welfare of City taxpayers and service recipients;
(2) Past collective bargaining agreements between the parties,
including past bargaining history that led to each agreement;
(3) A comparison of wages, hours, benefits, and conditions of
employment of corresponding fire and law enforcement employees
of other public employers in Washington County, Maryland;
Allegany County, Maryland; Franklin County, Pennsylvania; and
Berkeley County, West Virginia;
(4) A comparison of cost of living in Washington County, Maryland;
Allegany County, Maryland; Franklin County, Pennsylvania; and
Berkeley County, West Virginia;
(5) A comparison of the number of public sector police employees or
public sector fire employees, both gross and on a per capita basis,
to the number of residents of Washington County, Maryland;
Allegany County, Maryland; Franklin County, Pennsylvania; and
Berkeley County, West Virginia;
(6) A comparison of wages and benefits of other City of Hagerstown
employees; and
(7) Such other factors that are normally or traditionally taken into
consideration in the determination of wages, hours, and terms and
conditions of employment, through voluntary collective bargaining,
in public sector employment;
G. Within 30 days of the arbitration hearing or the parties' submission of
post-hearing briefs, the panel will issue a final written award, based
solely on the evidence presented at the arbitration hearing, that either:
(1) Chooses between and sustains in its entirety either the total
package final offer of the parties who have declared impasse; or
(2) Resolves all of the stipulated issues with a final award within the
range contained between the two final offers, that contains the
agreed-upon issues, and that briefly states an explanation as to why
the selected final offer was chosen (if a complete final offer is
chosen) and why the rejected offer was not, or briefly explains why
the final award was made and why the final offers were rejected;
and
H. Have copies of a final written award delivered to the parties who have
declared the impasse.
§ 37-13 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 37-14
1:82
§ 37-14. Revision of final written award by neutral arbitrator panel.
Upon a motion, notice, and after offering the parties who have declared
impasse an appropriate opportunity to be heard, the neutral arbitrator
panel may revise the final written award, if necessary, to correct clerical or
other ministerial errors at any time within 10 days after issuing the award.
§ 37-15. Revision of final written award by agreement of parties.
The parties who have declared impasse may agree to modify the final
written award of the neutral arbitrator panel by a written agreement that
is executed by the parties to the impasse, and the final written award as
amended shall have full force and effect.
§ 37-16. Final written award final and binding.
The final written award issued by the neutral arbitrator panel, or the final
written award as modified in accordance with §§ 37-14, 37-15 and 37-18,
and the memorandum of agreed issues shall be final and binding upon the
parties who have declared the impasse and shall be implemented as part of
the budget process for the appropriate fiscal years.
§ 37-17. Petition to vacate final written award.
The parties who have declared the impasse may move to vacate all or
part of the final written award of the arbitrator panel by filing a petition
to vacate the arbitrator panel's final written award in the Circuit Court
for Washington County in accordance with and subject to the Courts and
Judicial Proceedings Article, § 3-224, of the Maryland Code.
§ 37-18. Severability of provisions.
Should any part of the final written award be vacated pursuant to a final
order of the court of competent jurisdiction, the portions of the final written
award that are not vacated and the written memorandum of agreed issues
shall be severable and given full force and effect.
§ 37-19. Mediator and arbitrator costs shared.
The parties shall share equally all costs and professional fees of mediators
and arbitrators engaged under this article, including the cost of any
recording services, court reports, and/or transcripts.
§ 37-20. Legal costs.
Each party to the impasse shall be separately and independently
responsible for its own legal expenses and fees associated with proceedings
under this article.
§ 37-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-21
1:83
§ 37-21. Location.
All mediation and arbitration proceedings shall be held within the corporate
limits of the City of Hagerstown unless the parties otherwise agree in
writing.
§ 37-22. Strikes prohibited.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit either AFSCME Local
3373 or IAFF Local 1605, or their members, to incite, encourage, or
participate in any strike, sympathy strike, walkout, slowdown or other work
stoppage of any nature.
§ 37-23. Execution.
The parties must execute the award, and any provision which requires
action in the City of Hagerstown budget must be included in the next Mayor
and Council approved fiscal year budget.
§ 37-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 37-23
1:84
Chapter 38
POLICE AND FIRE EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 39.
§ 37-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-23
1:85

ARTICLE I
Establishment of Plan; Terminology
§ 38-1. Adoption of plan; withdrawal from existing systems.
§ 38-2. Short title.
This plan may be referred to as the "City of Hagerstown Police and Fire
Employees' Retirement Plan."
§ 38-3. Qualification under Internal Revenue Code.
A. Plan established. There is hereby established a City of Hagerstown
Police and Fire Employees' Retirement Plan.
B. Legal authority to withdraw from the Maryland Employees Retirement
System of the State of Maryland and/or the Pension System for
Employees of the State of Maryland. Pursuant to the provisions of
§ 31-302 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the City Council has passed a resolution dated April
7, 1998, authorizing:
(1) The withdrawal of certain firefighters and law enforcement
personnel from the Employees Retirement System of the State of
Maryland and/or the Pension System for Employees of the State of
Maryland;
(2) The crediting of each withdrawing member's accumulated
contributions to the individual member; and
(3) The transfer of total reserves resulting from previous contributions
by the City of Hagerstown allocable to the withdrawing members
from the Maryland State Retirement and Pension Systems to the
City of Hagerstown Police and Fire Employees' Plan.
A. Qualification of plan under Internal Revenue Code. The plan is intended
to be a pension plan that will qualify under Section 401(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, and the trust established under the plan is
intended to be exempt from tax under Section 501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
B. Qualification of pickup contributions under Internal Revenue Code. The
City also intends that, effective for the pay period beginning July 5,
1998, the contributions made by plan participants pursuant to
§ 38-26A(1) through payroll deductions be characterized as "pickup"
contributions, as described in Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
§ 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-4
1:87
§ 38-4. Applicability.
The provisions of the plan shall apply only to an individual who meets the
definition of covered employee set forth herein and whose employment with
the City terminates after the effective date.
§ 38-5. Word usage; catchlines.
For all purposes of the plan, where the context admits, the singular shall
include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular, and references
to persons shall include corporations, partnerships, estates and trusts.
Headings of articles, sections, subsections and paragraphs are inserted
only for convenience of reference and are not to be considered in the
construction of the plan.
§ 38-6. Definitions.
The following terms, as used herein, unless a different meaning is clearly
implied by the context, shall have the following meanings:
ACCRUED BENEFIT —
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT —
"Accrued benefit" means the benefit to which a participant is entitled,
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 38-28 through 38-36, expressed as the
normal form of monthly benefit commencing at normal retirement date
or the actuarial equivalent thereof.
A.
The accrued benefit as of any date preceding the participant's normal
retirement date, but expressed as aforesaid, shall be the monthly
benefit computed pursuant to § 38-29, 38-31 or 38-32.
B.
In no event, however, shall the accrued benefit exceed the maximum
limitation determined, as of the date of computation, pursuant to
§ 38-33.
C.
The portion of the participant's accrued benefit attributable to his or
her contributions made pursuant to §§ 38-26 and 38-27 shall be equal
to the actuarial equivalent of the participant's employee contributions
benefit, expressed as the normal form of monthly benefit commencing
at normal retirement date.
D.
The portion of the participant's accrued benefit attributable to City
contributions shall be the remainder, if any, of the accrued benefit.
E.
Accrued benefit computations made for the purpose of reflecting a
benefit commencement date prior to normal retirement date shall be
made without regard to the cost of living adjustment, should the plan,
in the future, provide for such adjustments.
F.
"Actuarial equivalent" means a form of benefit differing in time, period
or manner of payment from a specific benefit provided under the plan
A.
§ 38-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-6
1:88
ACTUARIAL REDUCTION —
ADMINISTRATOR — The Administrator shall be an employee of the City
who has direct responsibility or oversight responsibility for Human
Resources and to whom the City Council has delegated the administrative
responsibilities for the plan, as set forth in § 38-54.[Amended 4-25-2017
by Ord. No. O-17-04]
AVERAGE COMPENSATION — [Amended 5-22-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-12]
but having the same value when computed based upon the following:
[Amended 5-22-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-12]
Pre-Retirement and Post-Retirement:
Unisex Pension (UP) (1984) Table
8% per annum interest rate.
The foregoing factors, to the extent applicable, shall be utilized
(whether or not there is a specific reference to this definition) whenever
in the administration of the plan a calculation of actuarial equivalence
is to be made.
B.
However, in determining the actuarial equivalence of a lump sum or any
other optional form of benefit to the normal form of monthly retirement
income payable pursuant to § 38-28, on or after July 1, 2003, the value
of the normal form of benefit shall include the value of the cost of living
adjustments, if any, that would have been made pursuant to any valid
amendment to § 38-35 had the participant retired thereunder and lived
his or her anticipated life span.
C.
"Actuarial reduction" means a reduction which will cause a benefit with
a starting date which precedes a participant's normal retirement date
to be the actuarial equivalent of the benefit which would otherwise have
been payable at normal retirement date.
A.
However, notwithstanding any factors set forth in the definition of
actuarial equivalent, the reduction shall be equal to 0.50% of the
benefit for each month preceding the participant's 62nd birthday until
the participant's 55th birthday and 0.33% of the benefit for each month
preceding the participant's 55th birthday. [Amended 5-22-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-12]
B.
No reduction pursuant to this definition shall apply to a participant who
retires after completing at least 25 years of eligibility service.
C.
"Average compensation" means —
For plan years beginning before July 1, 2019, the average monthly
rate of a participant's compensation, equal to 1/36 of the total
amount of a participant's compensation for the three plan years of
the participant's employment which produce the highest average;
(1)
A.
§ 38-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-6
1:89
BENEFICIARY — Any person entitled to death benefits in accordance with
the provisions of §§ 38-48 and 38-49.
BENEFIT COMMENCEMENT DATE — The first day of the first period for
which the sole payment or the first in a series of payments constituting the
distribution of an accrued benefit is made.
CASH-OUT — A distribution in settlement of a benefit otherwise payable
under the plan, and which is equal to the employee contributions benefit.
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, a municipal corporation existing under the
laws of the State of Maryland.
C/L INCREASE — An automatic increase (without necessity of plan
amendment) in a dollar value set forth or described in the plan, for the
purpose of reflecting increases in the cost of living to the extent prescribed
in or pursuant to regulations under Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue
Code, but only to the extent permitted by the operative Internal Revenue
Code or regulatory provision specifically governing the dollar value in
question.
COMPENSATION — The monthly equivalent of the participant's base
annual salary, determined without regard to:
For the plan year beginning on July 1, 2019, the average monthly
rate of a participant's compensation, equal to 1/48 of the total
amount of a participant's compensation for the four plan years of
the participant's employment which produce the highest average;
or
(2)
For plan years beginning after July 1, 2019, the average monthly
rate of a participant's compensation, equal to 1/60 of the total
amount of a participant's compensation for the five plan years of
the participant's employment which produce the highest average.
(3)
If the participant's employment does not provide the full number of plan
years as aforesaid, compensation for the participant's actual number
of consecutive full calendar months of employment will be totaled and
divided by the number thereof.
B.
A. Overtime, bonuses and other extra Remuneration;
Amounts in excess of 1/12 of the applicable dollar limit under Section
401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code and regulations promulgated
thereunder, as adjusted by the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue
Service for increases in the cost of living in accordance with Section
401(a)(17)(b) of the Internal Revenue Code;
B.
Contributions, credits or benefits under this Plan or under any other
retirement, deferred compensation, fringe benefit or employee welfare
benefit plan; or
C.
Direct reimbursement for expenses; provided, however, that
compensation shall include any amount that would have qualified as
D.
§ 38-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-6
1:90
COVERED EMPLOYEE — Except as otherwise provided in § 38-4, "covered
employee" means any employee who is classified by the City as full-time
and who is employed by the City in one of the following job
classifications:[Amended 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. O-08-29; 11-24-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-16; 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-01]
Police officer Fire fighter Fire Apparatus Operator
Police officer trainee Fire Captain Fire Public Safety
Educator
Police cadet Battalion Chief Fire Marshal
Police Sergeant Deputy Chief Deputy Fire Marshal
Police Lieutenant Fire Chief Fire Training Officer
Police Captain
Police Chief
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — Any date occurring on or after the first date
on which a participant both reaches age 50 and has completed years of
eligibility service totaling at least 20.[Amended 5-22-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-12]
EFFECTIVE DATE — The effective date of the plan, which shall be July 1,
1998.
EMPLOYEE — Any person employed by the City.
EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS BENEFIT — The sum of the following
amounts (net of any previous distributions):
compensation but for the fact that it constitutes a pickup contribution
under § 38-26 or a salary reduction under any plan described in Section
132(f), 414(h)(2), 457(b) or 125 of the Internal Revenue Code.
[Amended 8-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-22]
The contributions made by the participant through salary reduction
and "picked up" by the City, as described in § 38-26 [other than in
§ 38-26A(3)]; plus
A.
The contributions made by the participant pursuant to § 38-27 which
are not picked up by the City; plus
B.
The contributions, plus earnings previously credited on such
contributions, made by the participant, pursuant to § 38-27, through
transfer from another government employer retirement plan, which
were not picked up by such government employer; plus
C.
Contributions, plus earnings previously credited on such contributions,
made by the participant and picked up by another government
employer, all of which are thereafter transferred to the plan; plus
D.
Interest on the amounts described in Subsections A through D credited
through June 30, 2017, under the terms of the plan as in effect before
E.
§ 38-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-6
1:91
EMPLOYMENT COMMENCEMENT DATE — The date on which the
employee first performs an hour of service.
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYER — The United States of America, the State of
Maryland, any political subdivision within the State of Maryland as well as
any state, commonwealth, municipality or political subdivision within the
United States of America.
HOUR OF SERVICE — Each hour, other than overtime hours, for which an
individual, in his or her capacity as an employee, is directly or indirectly
paid, or entitled to payment, for the performance of duties for the City.
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or any
provision or section thereof herein specifically referred to, as such Internal
Revenue Code, provision or section may from time to time be amended or
replaced.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE — An authorized absence from active service, under
conditions described in § 38-14, which does not constitute a termination of
employment, and during which the employee completes no hours of service.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The earlier of:
PARTICIPANT — Any employee who is currently benefiting under the plan,
and, where appropriate according to the context of the plan, any former
employee who is or may become (or whose beneficiaries may become)
eligible to receive a benefit under the plan.
PERIOD OF SEVERANCE — The continuous period beginning with an
employee's termination date and ending with the employee's reemployment
commencement date, if any.
PLAN — The retirement plan set forth herein, as amended from time to
time.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period ending on the last day of the month
of June.
REEMPLOYMENT COMMENCEMENT DATE — The date on which an
employee first performs an hour of service after a period of severance.
REFUNDABLE CONTRIBUTIONS BENEFIT —
that date; no interest shall be credited for periods after June 30, 2017.
[Amended 5-16-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-06]
The first day of the month on or following the date on which the
participant completes 25 years of eligibility service, of which at least
three years are completed as a covered employee; or
A.
The first day of the month on or following the date on which the
participant attains age 62 and completes three years of eligibility
service.
B.
"Refundable contributions benefit" means the sum of the following
amounts (net of any previous distributions) and is applicable only to
A.
§ 38-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-6
1:92
REMUNERATION — The participant's wages, salaries, professional service
fees and other amounts received for personal services actually rendered in
the course of employment with the City, but not including:
TERMINATION DATE — The date of the first to occur of:
those participants who irrevocably elected to transfer to the plan from
the Maryland State Retirement System effective as of July 1, 1998:
The contributions made prior to July 1, 1998, by the participant and
contributed to the Maryland State Retirement System, which were
classified by the Maryland State Retirement System as "refundable
contributions" and which would have provided an additional benefit
to the participant pursuant to the State Personnel and Pensions
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland (1997), or a statutory
provision of comparable effect, if the participant had not
transferred from the Maryland State Retirement System, plus
earnings previously credited on such contributions, all of which are
transferred to the plan; plus
(1)
Interest of 5% per annum, compounded annually, on the amount
of contributions described in Subsection A(1) hereof transferred to
the plan, computed on the participant's termination date.
(2)
To the extent a participant is entitled to receive a refundable
contributions benefit, the participant shall at all times be 100% vested
in the refundable contributions benefit.
B.
A participant's refundable contributions benefit is payable following a
participant's termination date in addition to any employee contributions
benefit the participant might otherwise be entitled to receive under the
terms of the plan.
C.
A refundable contributions benefit is payable only in the form of cash
and in one lump sum distribution.
D.
The trust shall accept a transfer of funds comprising participants'
refundable contributions benefits from the Maryland State Retirement
Systems.
E.
Nontaxable employer contributions under, or distributions (whether or
not taxable) from, a deferred compensation plan, other than taxable
payments received under an unfunded, nonqualified plan; and
A.
B. Other amounts which receive special tax benefits.
A termination of employment by reason of resignation, discharge,
mutual agreement, total and permanent disability, retirement or death;
A.
The date on which a leave of absence expires without a return to active
employment; or
B.
C. The date on which the individual ceases to be a covered employee.
§ 38-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-6
1:93
TRUST — The trust fund established pursuant to the plan, maintained
in accordance with the terms of the trust agreement, as from time to
time amended, between the City and the Trustees, which trust agreement
constitutes a part of the plan; where appropriate according to the context,
the term "trust" shall also refer to the trust agreement.
TRUSTEES — Collectively, the Trustee or Trustees named in the trust and
such successor and/or additional Trustees as may be named pursuant to the
terms of the trust.
YEAR OF CREDITED SERVICE — A year of service for purposes of
calculating a participant's accrued benefit, his or her retirement allowance
pursuant to § 38-28, and other specified benefits under §§ 38-29 through
38-39. The rules for calculating a participant's years of credited service are
set forth in §§ 38-13 through 38-20.
YEAR OF ELIGIBILITY SERVICE — A year of service for purposes of
calculating a participant's eligibility for specified benefits under the plan.
The rules for calculating a participant's years of eligibility service are set
forth in §§ 38-13 through 38-20.
§ 38-7. Participation requirements.
Except as otherwise provided below, a covered employee's participation in
this plan, and the agreement to make contributions hereunder, as described
in § 38-26, is mandatory as a condition of employment with the City:
§ 38-8. Reemployment.
If an employee or participant who reaches a termination date is
subsequently reemployed as a covered employee, his or her status with
respect to the plan shall be governed by the following:
A. Irrevocable participation. Every individual who is a covered employee
as of June 30, 1998, may elect to participate in the plan effective July 1,
1998, and continuing until his or her termination date. Such election
shall be irrevocable, shall be made on a written application supplied by
the City and shall contain agreement to make, as a condition of his or
her employment with the City, participant contributions as provided in
§ 38-26. If an employee who is otherwise eligible to participate fails to
return the completed application to the City on or before June 5, 1998,
he or she shall cease to be a covered employee as of July 1, 1998.
B. Mandatory participation. Every other individual who becomes a
covered employee on or after July 1, 1998, shall become a participant
on the date he or she first performs an hour of service as a covered
employee.
A. Eligibility for participation. If the reemployed employee was not a
participant prior to his or her termination date, or the employee's
reemployment commencement date occurs prior to July 1, 1998, the
employee shall become a participant in accordance with the provisions
§ 38-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-8
1:94
of § 38-7A. If the reemployed employee was a participant prior to
such termination, or the individual's reemployment commencement
date occurs after June 30, 1998, his or her participation shall
commence immediately upon the resumption of status as a covered
employee.
B. Vesting and benefit accrual. Subject to Subsection D below, if the
reemployed employee was a participant prior to his or her termination,
that employee's prior years of credited service and years of eligibility
service shall be aggregated with years of credited service and years of
eligibility service performed after his or her reemployment
commencement date for purposes of determining eligibility to receive,
the vested percentage of, and amount of, his or her accrued benefit
(with respect to the periods before and after the period of severance).
C. Benefit payments. If, at the time of reemployment, the participant is
receiving benefits under the plan, such benefits (other than those
previously funded through individual or non-pooled group insurance
annuity arrangements) shall cease until such time as they may be paid
in conjunction with the benefits accrued with respect to the
participant's subsequent employment. In any event, any benefits
payable with respect to the participant's subsequent employment shall
be reduced or offset if and as necessary to avoid duplication of any
benefits payable or paid with respect to his or her prior employment.
D. Cash-out.
(1) If, after his or her termination date the participant receives a cashout
of his or her employee contributions benefit; and the
participant resumes status as a covered employee, then,
notwithstanding the covered employee's reemployment, the years
of credited service and years of eligibility service with respect to
which the distribution was received shall be disregarded in
subsequent determinations of the amount of, and vested
percentage of, the participant's accrued benefit.
(2) However, if the participant resumes status as a covered employee
and, at any time after the resumption of such status and prior to
reaching a termination date, repays to the trust the full amount of
the cash-out, plus interest from date of distribution to date of
repayment at the rate of 5% per annum compounded annually, his
or her accrued benefit will be determined taking into account the
participant's years of credited service and his or her vested
percentage will be determined taking into account years of
eligibility service before as well as after the termination date
(subject to the other provisions of this chapter). [Amended
5-16-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-06]
§ 38-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-9
1:95
§ 38-9. Enrollment.
Participation hereunder shall be automatic when the requirements of § 38-7
have been met; provided, however, that the City may, in its discretion,
require each covered employee to execute a written application containing
such items as may be desired by the City including, but not limited to, the
employee's consent to be bound by all the terms and conditions of the plan
and all amendments thereto.
§ 38-10. (Reserved)
§ 38-11. (Reserved)
§ 38-12. (Reserved)
§ 38-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-12
1:96
ARTICLE II
Credited Service
§ 38-13. Credit for service with City.
Except as otherwise provided in §§ 38-7 through 38-9, a participant will
receive credit only for years of credited service and years of eligibility
service for his or her actual service with the City as a covered employee on
or after July 1, 1998.
§ 38-14. Leaves of absence.
A. Temporary absence is not a termination of employment. A covered
employee's employment will not be deemed to have terminated though
it is interrupted by a temporary absence from active service, extending
for not more than 24 months, under conditions which are not treated by
the City as a termination of employment. The performance of an hour of
service after a leave of absence has commenced will constitute an
expiration of the leave of absence.
B. Basis for computing compensation and/or average compensation. If,
during a leave of absence, a participant is unpaid or the participant's
rate of basic pay is reduced, then, for purposes of computing plan
benefits, the participant's compensation and/or average compensation
will be computed as if he or she were being paid at a rate equivalent to
that in effect as of the July 1 immediately preceding the beginning of the
leave of absence.
C. Expiration of leave of absence. If any participant on leave of absence
fails to answer an inquiry by the City as to the status of the leave of
absence, or if the City is not notified of the death or disability of such
participant, and the City has no actual knowledge thereof, the City may
determine that the leave of absence had or has expired.
D. Crediting of service during paid leaves of absence. Service with respect
to a leave of absence will be credited pursuant to the following:
(1) Paid leaves of absence will constitute continuation of employment.
(2) Service will be credited for the customary period of work during a
paid leave of absence, and § 38-26 contributions will continue to be
made.
(3) An individual on a leave of absence for reasons of illness will be
deemed to be on a paid leave of absence so long as the individual's
rate of pay is not reduced and so long as he or she is paid directly
by the City or through City-financed wage continuation insurance;
but the individual will not be considered to be on a paid leave of
absence under circumstances where payments are made solely for
the purpose of complying with workers' compensation,
unemployment insurance or disability insurance laws.
§ 38-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-14
1:97
§ 38-15. Fractional credit for service.
An individual shall receive partial or full credit for years of credited service
and years of eligibility service, as follows:
§ 38-16. Transfer of credited service under Maryland State
Retirement System.
Any covered employee as of June 1, 1998, has the right to elect to receive
credit for years of credited service and years of eligibility service for service
recognized and performed under the Maryland State Retirement System.
Such election is irrevocable and must be made prior to June 5, 1998. If such
service is transferred and recognized under the plan, the participant shall
receive full credit under the plan for all such service.
§ 38-17. Transfers of service with other government employers.
A participant may receive credit for periods of employment with another
government employer under the circumstances described in this § 38-17,
provided that such service has not been transferred and recognized under
E. Crediting of service during unpaid leave of absence. A leave of absence
where the participant's rate of pay is reduced shall constitute an unpaid
leave of absence. Service credit shall not be granted for an unpaid leave
of absence (other than for military service, as described below).
F. If a participant takes an unpaid leave of absence on account of military
service, the participant shall receive credit for years of eligibility
service and years of creditable service for the period of such unpaid
leave of absence to the extent required by the Uniformed Services
Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 or any other law
(but without any requirement for such a participant to make participant
contributions upon his or her reemployment for the period of his or her
military service and only with respect to reemployment initiated on or
after December 12, 1994). [Amended 8-27-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-22]
A. Vesting. For purposes of determining the extent to which a participant
is vested in his or her accrued benefit, and eligibility for early or normal
retirement benefits, or for any other purpose under the plan except
benefit accrual, the participant shall receive credit on the basis of the
number of whole years of eligibility service.
B. Benefit accrual. Except as otherwise provided in §§ 38-14 and 38-28, for
purposes of determining the extent to which a participant shall accrue
benefits, the participant shall receive fractional credit equal to 1/12 of a
year of credited service for each calendar month during which he or she
was a covered employee for the entire month, but shall receive no
fractional credit with respect to any calendar month during which he or
she was not a covered employee for the entire month.
§ 38-14 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-17
1:98
§ 38-16 above. If such service is transferred and recognized under the plan,
either:
A. Adjustment of retirement date. The participant's early retirement date
and normal retirement date shall be adjusted in accordance with
Subsection C below; and/or
B. Amount of benefit payable to participant. The amount of the benefit
payable to the participant pursuant to § 38-28 and the participant's
accrued benefit shall be adjusted in accordance with Subsection D
below.
C. Adjustment of early retirement date and normal retirement date. For
the sole purpose of calculating whether a participant has reached his or
her early retirement date or normal retirement date under the plan, a
participant's years of eligibility service include the following:
(1) Years of eligibility service of up to five years will be provided for
periods of full-time employment with another government
employer provided that such periods of full-time employment are in
a position classification which is comparable to one or more of the
position classifications of covered employees.
(2) The total years of eligibility service provided under this subsection
shall not exceed five years.
D. Adjustment of the amount of benefit payable. For the sole purpose of
calculating a participant's accrued benefit and his or her retirement
benefits payable under § 38-28, any participant may irrevocably elect,
at any time after performing his or her first hour of service as a covered
employee and prior to reaching a termination date, to transfer to the
plan the amount of any participant contributions made to another
government employer retirement plan under which the participant was
covered, together with interest previously credited by such plan,
provided that such plan permits transfer of contributions to this plan. If
a participant so elects, the amount of his or her accrued benefit and the
amount of retirement benefit as calculated under § 38-28 shall include
an actuarial adjustment for the participant contributions which are
transferred, subject to the limit under § 38-17E. [Amended 5-16-2017
by Ord. No. O-17-06]
E. Adjustment limit. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in § 38-17D,
if a participant retires within five years after transferring into the plan,
the benefits payable with respect to the transferred service credit may
not be greater than the benefits that would have been payable by the
previous government employer with respect to that service if the
participant had remained with the previous government employer, or
any other amount permitted under § 37-203(f)(3) of the State Personnel
and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. [Added
5-16-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-06]
§ 38-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-18
1:99
§ 38-18. Purchase of credited service.
A. General. Any participant may elect, at any time after becoming a
participant and prior to reaching a termination date, to receive credit
for service performed with another government employer, provided
that such service has not been previously recognized under § 38-16 or
38-17. The maximum number of years of eligibility service and years of
credited service which may be purchased pursuant to this section shall
be five.
B. Cost of purchase.
(1) It is the intent of the City that a participant who elects to purchase
credit for service hereunder pay the full actuarial cost of the credit
for service.
(2) The participant's election to purchase service shall include an
election by the participant of an assumed retirement date (the
"assumed retirement date") upon which the cost to purchase
service will be based.
(3) The cost of the purchase equals the present value of the
participant's projected accrued benefit including the credit for the
service purchased hereunder and calculated on the basis of the
participant's assumed retirement date, less the present value of the
participant's projected accrued benefit without the service credit
purchased hereunder.
(4) Present value will be determined using the interest, postretirement
mortality, post-retirement benefit increase and pay
increase assumptions used by the enrolled actuary to perform the
most recent actuarial examination of the plan.
C. Methods of payment for purchased service. The participant's election to
purchase credit for service shall also include an election of the method
by which the participant will purchase the credit for service.
[Amended 8-27-2002 by Ord. 2002-22]
(1) The participant may pay over to the plan the amounts calculated
pursuant to Subsection B(2) hereof by either:
(a) A lump sum cash payment to the plan;
(b) A rollover from another employer's qualified retirement plan;
(c) A rollover from an eligible deferred compensation plan
established pursuant to Section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue
Code;
(d) A rollover from a tax-deferred annuity established pursuant to
Section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code;
(e) Periodic installment payments by payroll deduction; or
§ 38-18 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-18
1:100
§ 38-19. Credit for preemployment military service. [Amended
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-30; 9-25-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-13]
(f) A combination of any of the methods designated in Subsection
C(1)(a) through (e).
(2) If the participant chooses to purchase the credit in whole or in part
by periodic installment payments, such a purchase shall be
pursuant to a binding, irrevocable payroll deduction authorization
between the City and the participant which provides for the
number of deductions and the dollar amount of each deduction.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the participant's election of the
method of payment for purchased service may be modified by the
City to the extent necessary to conform to Section 415 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
D. Retirement before or after assumed retirement date.
(1) If a participant reaches a termination date on a date other than the
participant's assumed retirement date, but after the participant's
early retirement date, the credit for service purchased by the
participant will be adjusted so that the amount of credit purchased
equals the amount that would have been purchased (based on the
participant's actual contributions) if the actual termination date
had been used (rather than the assumed retirement date) for
purposes of calculating the cost of the service.
(2) If the adjustment reduces the amount of credit purchased, the
participant may pay over to the plan, in one lump sum, an amount
necessary to purchase the credit for the service which would have
been awarded if the participant terminated employment on the
assumed retirement date.
(3) If the adjustment increases the amount of credit purchased over
the credit which would have been awarded if the participant
terminated employment on the assumed retirement date, the
excess will be used to provide an additional monthly benefit to the
participant.
E. Participant elects return of payments. If a participant reaches a
termination date prior to his early retirement date or normal retirement
date, the participant, or the participant's beneficiary, may elect to
receive a return of the payments made pursuant to this § 38-18 plus
interest at the rate specified in Subsection B hereof, in the form of
either:
(1) A lump sum payment; or
(2) A monthly benefit equivalent to a lump sum payment, with the
equivalence to be determined pursuant to the factors set forth in
Subsection B hereof.
§ 38-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-19
1:101
§ 38-20. Transfers of credited service to other plans.
If a participant terminates employment for the City as a covered employee,
but either remains an employee of the City, or ceases to be an employee,
but becomes an employee of a government employer, and becomes eligible
to participate in a retirement plan sponsored by the government employer,
the participant may elect to transfer service earned under this plan to
the retirement plan sponsored by such other government employer to the
extent allowed by such other retirement plan.
§ 38-21. (Reserved)
§ 38-22. (Reserved)
A. A participant may apply for and receive credit for years of credited
service for service in the armed forces of the United States which
precedes the participant’s employment commencement date if the
participant:
(1) Is not entitled to a military pension from the United States
government or any other foreign government, other than a
disability pension;
(2) Has years of credited service totaling at least 10 years (determined
without regard to his or her military service);
(3) Was actively employed by the City on or before June 30, 1998, or on
or after October 26, 2012; and
(4) Did not receive credit for such service pursuant to § 38-16.
B. In the case of a participant who was actively employed by the City on or
before June 30, 1998, the total pre-employment military service
credited under this § 38-19 shall not exceed five years and shall also be
credited as years of eligibility service. In the case of a participant who
was not actively employed by the City on or before June 30, 1998, but
was actively employed by the City on or after October 26, 2012, the
total pre-employment military service credited under this § 38-19 shall
not exceed three years and shall not be credited as years of eligibility
service. If a participant receives credit for years of eligibility service
and/or years of credited service under both this § 38-19 and § 38-14F,
the total service credited shall not exceed the greater of five years or
the amount of such service credited pursuant to § 38-14F.
§ 38-19 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-22
1:102
ARTICLE III
Funding of Benefits
§ 38-23. Payment of contributions.
The funding of the plan and payment of benefits hereunder shall be
provided for through the medium of the trust. The trust shall accept transfer
of funds from the Maryland State Retirement Systems, consistent with the
elections made by participants pursuant to § 38-17. The City, from time
to time, shall make contributions to the trust in amounts determined, in
accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles, to be sufficient to
support the contributions required under § 38-26, and the contributions and
transfers made pursuant to § 38-27 and to fund the benefits provided by the
plan.
§ 38-24. Disposition of forfeitures.
Any forfeiture arising under the provisions of the plan shall be used to
reduce the then current or future costs of funding the benefits provided in
the plan.
§ 38-25. Actuarial examination.
The City shall, at least once every other plan year, cause the liabilities of the
plan to be evaluated by an enrolled actuary who shall report to the City as to
the soundness and solvency of the trust in relation to the said liabilities and
the amount of the City's contributions sufficient to meet the requirements
of § 38-23.
§ 38-26. Pickup contributions.
Under limited circumstances described below, participant contributions and
moneys from other government employers may be accepted by the plan.
A. Types of contributions/transfers.
(1) City pickup contributions. Effective for the pay periods beginning
on or after July 1, 2018, and in accordance with rules established
by the City, each participant shall make contributions to the plan
equal to 8.0% of his or her compensation. The participant
contributions referred to in this § 38-26 shall be picked up by the
City, as described in Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code, deducted from the pay of the contributing participants as
salary reduction contributions, and paid by the City to the Trustees
with reasonable promptness after the total of such contributions
during any month has been determined, and in any event by the
end of the succeeding month. The contributions made pursuant to
this § 38-26 shall be made a part of the participant's employee
contributions benefit, that is, a part of his or her accrued benefit.
[Amended 5-22-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-12]
§ 38-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-26
1:103
(2) Transfer of pickup contributions from other government
employers. Pursuant to the provisions of § 38-17, the trust may
accept a transfer of moneys directly from another government
employer retirement plan. Such transfer shall consist of
contributions made by the participant, but characterized by such
other government employer as employer pickup contributions, plus
earnings previously credited upon such contributions. Such
amounts shall be made a part of the participant's employee
contributions benefit, that is, a part of the participant's accrued
benefit.
(3) Purchase of service pickup contributions. Pursuant to the
provisions of § 38-18, a participant may enter into a payroll
deduction authorization with the City pursuant to which the
participant may purchase credit for service. The participant
contributions referred to in this § 38-26A(3) shall be:
(a) Picked up by the City, as described in Section 414(h)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code;
(b) Deducted from the pay of the contributing participant as salary
reduction contributions; and
(c) Paid by the City to the Trustees with reasonable promptness
after the total of such contributions during any month has been
determined, and in any event by the end of the succeeding
month.
B. Suspension of contributions. A participant's salary reduction
contributions shall be automatically suspended for any payroll period
during which the participant is not a covered employee or during which
he or she is on an unpaid leave of absence. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-24]
C. Withdrawals of pickup contributions. A participant who has reached his
or her termination date may elect, at any time, to receive a cash-out of
the employee contributions benefit, by filing a written notice of such
election with the City. Such cash-out shall constitute full payment of all
benefits due to such participant under the plan.
D. Forfeiture of remaining accrued benefit. In the event of a cash-out to a
participant pursuant to this section, then, subject to restoration
provided in § 38-8, the participant shall forfeit the entire remaining
portion of his or her accrued benefit.
E. Vesting of pickup contributions. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
plan to the contrary, participant contributions, picked up either by the
City or by other government employers and made or transferred to the
plan, shall be fully vested at all times.
F. Payment of benefits. Subject to the right of withdrawal described
above, the benefits purchased from the participant's contributions shall
§ 38-26 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-26
1:104
§ 38-27. Participant contributions.
Under limited circumstances, as described below, other participant
contributions may be accepted by the plan.
be payable at the same time, in the same manner, and, in the event of
the participant's death, to the same beneficiary or beneficiaries, as is
the remainder of his or her accrued benefit.
G. Plan termination. In the event of a termination of the plan, distribution
to each participant of the portion of the participant's accrued benefit
attributable to his or her contributions picked up by the City shall,
notwithstanding any other provisions of § 38-69, be treated as a priority
distribution ahead of any other distribution to participants based upon
the remainder of the trust, other than those attributable to
contributions made pursuant to § 38-27.
A. Characterization. The contributions made pursuant to this section shall
be distinct from those made pursuant to § 38-26 as to the character of
such contributions. Whereas § 38-26 contributions shall be classified as
City, or other government employer, contributions picked up from the
pay of participants, contributions made pursuant to this section shall be
after-tax contributions either made directly by the participant or, in
some cases, transferred from another government employer retirement
plan.
B. Limitations. A participant may elect to make contributions pursuant to
this section, or to have contributions previously made to another
government employer retirement plan transferred to this plan, within
the following limitations:
(1) A participant who elects to restore credit for service and benefits,
as described in § 38-8D, shall pay over to the plan the amount of
any cash-out previously made to the participant, with interest
thereon.
(2) The Trustees shall accept a direct transfer of after-tax participant
contributions, together with interest thereon, from another
government employer, provided such contributions were made by a
covered employee who elects to transfer service from another
government employer retirement plan, as described in § 38-17.
(3) A covered employee who elects to purchase credit for service
performed with another government employer shall pay over to the
plan the actuarial equivalent of his or her accrued benefit, as
described in § 38-18.
C. Procedures. All participant contributions or transfers made pursuant to
this section shall be paid to the trust or, in the case of payroll
deductions required under this section, withheld by the City and
remitted to the Trustees.
§ 38-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-27
1:105
D. Separate accounting. participant contributions, whether made directly
or transferred from another retirement plan, as aforesaid, shall be
made a part of the participant's employee contributions benefit, which
shall be a part of the accrued benefits of each participant.
E. Withdrawals of participant contributions. A participant who has
reached his or her termination date may elect, at any time, to receive a
cash-out of the participant's employee contributions benefit, by filing a
written notice of such election with the City. Such cash-out shall
constitute full payment of all benefits due to such participant under the
plan.
F. Forfeiture of remaining accrued benefit. In the event of a cash-out to a
participant pursuant to this section, then, subject to restoration
provided in § 38-8D, the participant shall forfeit the entire remaining
portion of his or her accrued benefit.
G. Vesting of participant contributions. Notwithstanding any provisions of
this plan to the contrary, participant contributions made to the plan
shall be fully vested at all times.
H. Payment of benefits. Subject to the right of withdrawal described
above, the benefits purchased from the participant's contributions shall
be payable at the same time, in the same manner, and, in the event of
his or her death, to the same beneficiary or beneficiaries, as is the
remainder of his or her accrued benefit.
I. Plan termination. In the event of a termination of the plan, distribution
to each participant of the portion of the accrued benefit attributable to
his or her participant contributions shall, notwithstanding any other
provision of § 38-69, be treated as a priority distribution ahead of any
other distribution to participants based upon the remainder of the trust.
§ 38-27 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-27
1:106
ARTICLE IV
Lifetime Benefits
§ 38-28. Normal retirement.
Except as otherwise provided in §§ 38-28 through 38-36, a participant shall
retire on his or her normal retirement date. A participant who retires on
his or her normal retirement date shall be entitled to receive a monthly
retirement income, beginning with the first day of the month coincident
with or otherwise next following the participant's normal retirement date
and continuing for the remainder of his or her life. Subject to § 38-8D, and
subject to the adjustment set forth in § 38-17 and the limitations set forth in
§ 38-33, the amount of the monthly retirement income shall be determined
as follows:
A. With respect to a participant who retires between July 1, 1998, and June
30, 1999, his or her accrued benefit under the Maryland State
Retirement System as of June 30, 1998.
B. With respect to a participant who retires between July 1, 1999, and June
30, 2000, 1.4% multiplied by the participant's average compensation
and multiplied by the number of years (and fractional years) in his or
her years of credited service, not to exceed 60% of average
compensation.
C. With respect to a participant who retires between July 1, 2000, and June
30, 2001, 1.7% multiplied by the participant's average compensation
and multiplied by the number of years (and fractional years) in his or
her years of credited service, not to exceed 60% of average
compensation.
D. With respect to a participant who is hired before July 1, 2018, and is
continuously employed before his or her termination date after June 30,
2001, 2.0% multiplied by the participant's average compensation and
multiplied by the number of years (and fractional years) in his or her
years of credited service, not to exceed 60% of average compensation.
With respect to a participant who is first hired on or after July 1, 2018,
1.8% multiplied by the participant's average compensation and
multiplied by the number of years (and fractional years) in his or her
years of credited service, not to exceed 60% of average compensation.
With respect to a participant who is first hired before July 1, 2018, is
initially terminated from employment on or after July 1, 2018 (the
"initial termination date"), and is rehired after the initial termination
date, (i) 2.0% multiplied by the participant's average compensation and
multiplied by the number of years (and fractional years) in his or her
years of credited service on and before the initial termination date, plus
(ii) 1.8% multiplied by the participant's average compensation and
multiplied by the number of years (and fractional years) in his or her
years of credited service after the initial termination date. [Amended
5-22-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-12]
§ 38-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-29
1:107
§ 38-29. Early retirement.
§ 38-30. Deferred retirement.
In the event a participant remains a covered employee after his or her
normal retirement date, then, subject to the limitations set forth in § 38-33,
and except as otherwise provided in § 38-43, the participant shall be
entitled to receive, commencing on the first day of the month coincident
with or otherwise next following his or her termination date, the benefit
to which the participant would have been entitled pursuant to § 38-28 if
he or she had retired at his or her normal retirement date, but adjusted
by including any additional years of credited service which have accrued
since his or her normal retirement date (up to the maximum percentage
of average compensation described in § 38-28), and (notwithstanding any
provision in the definition of average compensation to the contrary) by
taking into account any increases in average compensation which may be
generated by increases in compensation earned since his or her normal
retirement date.
§ 38-31. Disability benefits.
The plan shall pay disability benefits determined in accordance with the
following provisions:
A. Early retirement date. A participant may elect to retire on any date on
or after the first date which qualifies as an early retirement date, in
which case the date of retirement shall be deemed to be his or her early
retirement date and the participant shall be entitled to a monthly early
retirement benefit equal to the benefit computed pursuant to § 38-28
(based upon the participant's actual years of credited service and
average compensation at his or her early retirement date), but subject
to the appropriate actuarial reduction, if any.
B. Commencement of early retirement benefits. Early retirement benefits
shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or
otherwise next following the participant's normal retirement date,
unless the participant elects to have the benefits commence on the first
day of any prior month coincident with or following his or her early
retirement date.
C. Form of payment. Except as otherwise provided in § 38-43D, the
benefits payable pursuant to this section shall be payable in the normal
form provided by § 38-28, unless an optional form of payment has been
elected pursuant to § 38-42.
A. Ordinary disability. If a participant reaches a termination date by
reason of total and permanent disability, the participant shall be
entitled to receive a monthly disability benefit equal to the greater of
the amounts determined in accordance with Subsection A(1) or (2), as
follows:
§ 38-29 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-31
1:108
(1) If the participant is credited with at least five years of eligibility
service, the monthly benefit payable pursuant to this Subsection
A(1) shall be 20% of the participant's average compensation.
(2) If the participant is credited with at least five years of eligibility
service, the monthly benefit payable pursuant to this Subsection
A(2) shall be the participant's accrued benefit (based upon the
participant's actual years of credited service and average
compensation at his or her termination date), without actuarial
reduction and, notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C
below hereof, without reduction for any benefits payable under the
Workers' Compensation Law of Maryland.
B. Line of duty disability.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection A(2) of this section, a participant
(regardless of his or her length of service) who terminates
employment by reason of total and permanent disability, which, as
determined in accordance with rules established by the
Administrator, is incurred as a result of an accident or injury which
has been sustained as an active covered employee (excluding police
officer trainees and police cadets) and which has been ruled
compensable under the Workers' Compensation Law of Maryland,
shall be entitled to receive a monthly benefit equal to the greater
of: [Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-01]
(a) The benefit determined pursuant to Subsection A above; or
(b) If the line of duty disability is a catastrophic disability, as
defined in Subsection B(2) below, the greater of:
[1] A monthly benefit equal to the greater 66 2/3% of the
participant's compensation; or
[2] The participant's employee contributions benefit; or
(c) If the line of duty disability is a noncatastrophic disability, as
defined in Subsection B(2) below, the greater of:
[1] A monthly benefit equal to the greater 33 1/3% of the
participant's compensation; or
[2] The participant's employee contributions benefit.
(2) In Subsection B(1) of this subsection the following terms have the
meanings indicated:
CATASTROPHIC DISABILITY — A line of duty disability by reason
of which the participant will be permanently prevented from
engaging in any substantial gainful employment; or which severely
limits one or more major life activities. "Substantial gainful
employment" means the ability to perform a moderate amount of
work with reasonable regularity, without reference to the type of
§ 38-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-31
1:109
work performed by the participant before his or her termination
date. "Major life activities" include caring for one's self, walking,
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing or learning.
LINE OF DUTY DISABILITY — A total and permanent disability
incurred as a result of an accident or injury which has been
sustained as a result of service as an active covered employee
and which has been ruled compensable under the Workers'
Compensation Law of Maryland.
NON-CATASTROPHIC DISABILITY — A line of duty disability which
is not a catastrophic disability.
C. Payments considered in the nature of Workers' Compensation
payments. Any payments made to police and fire employees for injuries
received in the line of duty pursuant to any retirement disability
provisions of this plan shall be considered to be in the nature of
Worker's Compensation payments made pursuant to Title 9 of the Labor
and Employment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
D. Adjustments to compensation. For purposes of Subsection B above,
"compensation" includes adjustments to the base annual salary for
employees in the same position classification as the participant at the
time of the onset of the participant's disability through the date the
participant's disability benefits commence.
E. General provisions relating to disability.
(1) Commencement of disability benefits. Disability benefits shall
commence on the first day of the month coincident with or
otherwise next following the determination of disability by the City;
provided, however, that benefits payable pursuant to this section
shall be reduced by any benefits payable from workers'
compensation.
(2) Forms of benefit. The benefits payable pursuant to this section shall
be payable in the normal form provided by § 38-28, unless an
optional form of payment has been elected pursuant to § 38-42.
(3) Definition.
(a) "Total and permanent disability" shall mean a medically
determinable physical or mental impairment which can be
expected to be permanent or result in death, and by reason of
which the participant will be prevented from performing the
usual duties of his or her position with the City as required by
the City Code.
(b) Such total and permanent disability must be evidenced by a
certificate of a physician selected or approved by the City.
(c) However, total and permanent disability shall not include any
injury or disease which:
§ 38-31 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-31
1:110
§ 38-32. Other terminations of employment.
[1] Resulted from or consists of chronic alcoholism or
addiction to narcotics;
[2] Was contracted, suffered or incurred while the participant
was engaged in, or resulted from his or her having
engaged in, a criminal enterprise;
[3] Was intentionally self-inflicted; or
[4] Arose as a result of willful misconduct on the part of the
participant.
(4) Continuing disability.
(a) Until a participant who has reached a termination date by
reason of disability attains his or her normal retirement date,
the continuation of the participant's right to receive disability
benefits shall depend on the participant's continued disability,
and the case shall be subject to periodic review in accordance
with rules established by the City to determine the
participant's health and employment status, including the
requirement that the participant furnish to the City a copy of
his or her federal income tax return each year.
(b) In the event a disabled participant ceases to submit to such
review, prior to his or her normal retirement date, the disability
benefits payable pursuant to this section shall cease.
(5) Death of disabled participant. In the event of the death of a
disabled participant, no benefits with respect to the participant
shall be payable except as otherwise provided in §§ 38-39 and
38-40.
A. Amount of termination benefit. If a participant reaches a termination
date for any reason other than death, retirement or disability, the
participant shall be entitled to a monthly termination benefit equal to a
vested percentage (determined as set forth below) of the benefit
computed pursuant to § 38-28 (based upon the participant's actual
years of credited service and average compensation at his or her
termination date).
B. Commencement of termination benefits. Benefits payable pursuant to
this § 38-32 shall commence on the first day of the month coincident
with or otherwise next following the earliest of the participant's early
retirement date or attainment of age 62, unless the participant elects to
receive a cash-out of his or her employee contributions benefit, as
provided in § 38-42, in which case, such cash-out may be made at any
time following the termination date, at the election of the participant.
§ 38-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-32
1:111
§ 38-33. Maximum limitation on benefits. [Amended 8-26-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-27; 8-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-22; 11-24-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-16; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-24]
Notwithstanding any plan provisions to the contrary:
C. Form of benefits. Except as otherwise provided in § 38-43, the benefits
payable pursuant to this section shall be payable in the normal form
provided by § 38-28, unless an optional form of payment has been
elected pursuant to § 38-42.
D. Vested percent of the accrued benefit. Subject to § 38-8, the vested
percentage of the accrued benefit to which the participant is entitled
shall be equal to the greater of:
(1) 100% of the participant's employee contributions benefit; or
(2) A percentage of the participant's accrued benefit, determined on
the basis of the number of whole years in the participant's years of
eligibility service and in accordance with the following schedule:
Whole Years in Total
Years of Eligibility Service Percentage Vested
Less than 5 0%
5 or more 100%
A. Maximum benefit. To the extent necessary to prevent disqualification
under Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, and subject to the
remainder of this section, the maximum monthly benefit to which any
participant may be entitled at any time (the "maximum benefit") shall
be equal to 1/12th of the amount set forth in Section 415(b)(1)(A) of the
Internal Revenue Code, as adjusted by C/L increases, (the "monthly
dollar limit"). The rate of benefit accrual shall be frozen or reduced
accordingly to comply with the limitations.
B. Actuarial adjustment of monthly dollar limit. The monthly dollar limit
shall be subject to actuarial adjustment as follows:
(1) Benefit payment.
(a) If the benefit is payable in any form other than a single life
annuity or a qualified joint and survivor annuity (as defined for
purposes of Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code), the
maximum benefit shall be reduced so that it is the actuarial
equivalent of the single life annuity.
(b) For purpose adjusting the form of benefit payment under this
plan to a single life annuity under this Subsection B(1), if the
benefit is paid in any optional form of benefit other than an
optional form of benefit that is subject to Internal Revenue
§ 38-32 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-33
1:112
Code Section 417(e)(3), then the equivalent annual benefit
shall be the greater of:
[1] The equivalent annual benefit computed using the plan
interest rate and plan mortality table set forth in § 38-6;
and
[2] The equivalent annual benefit computed using five percent
and the applicable mortality table designated by the
Secretary of the Treasury from time to time pursuant to
Internal Revenue Code Section 417(e)(3).
(c) For purpose adjusting the form of benefit payment under this
plan to a single life annuity under this Subsection B(1), if the
benefit is paid in any optional form of benefit that is subject to
Internal Revenue Code Section 417(e)(3), then the equivalent
annual benefit shall be the greater of:
[1] The equivalent annual benefit computed using the plan
interest rate and plan mortality table set forth in § 38-6;
and
[2] The equivalent annual benefit computed using the
applicable mortality table designated by the Secretary of
the Treasury from time to time pursuant to Internal
Revenue Code Section 417(e)(3) and the GATT interest
rate for plan years beginning before 2004, 5.5% for plan
years beginning in 2004 and 2005, and the greatest of the
following for plan years beginning in and after 2006: 5.5%;
the plan interest rate; and the rate that provides a benefit
of not more than 105% of the benefit that would be
provided if the GATT interest rate were used.
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(1)(a), effective
as of January 1, 2008, no actuarial adjustment shall be made to
the monthly dollar limit to the extent provided under IRS
Regulations 1.415(b)-1(c)(4) and 1.415(b)-1(c)(5).
(2) Benefits beginning before age 62.
(a) With respect to a benefit beginning before age 62, the monthly
dollar limit shall be reduced to the actuarial equivalent of a
monthly benefit in the amount of the monthly dollar limit
beginning at age 62. The actuarial equivalent for this purpose
shall be calculated using the applicable mortality table
designated by the Secretary of the Treasury from time to time
pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 417(e)(3) and an
interest rate that is no less than the greater of the plan interest
rate set forth in § 38-6 and 5%.
§ 38-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-33
1:113
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, in no event shall the
monthly dollar limit applicable to benefits beginning before
age 62 be reduced, but only with respect to:
[1] Participants who have been credited with at least 15 years
of credited service as a covered employee, including
military service; and
[2] Death or disability benefits to the extent provided in IRS
Regulations 1.415(b)-1(d)(4).
(3) With respect to a benefit beginning after age 65, the dollar limit
shall be increased so that it is the actuarial equivalent of a dollar
limit applicable to a benefit beginning at age 65. The actuarial
equivalent for this purpose shall be calculated using the applicable
mortality table designated by the Secretary of the Treasury from
time to time pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 417(e)(3)
and an interest rate that is no greater than the lesser of the plan
interest rate set forth in § 38-6 and 5%.
(4) Applicable mortality tables. Notwithstanding any other plan
provisions to the contrary, the applicable mortality table
designated by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to Internal
Revenue Code Section 417(e)(3) for distributions with annuity
starting dates on or after December 31, 2002 is the table
prescribed in Revenue Ruling 2001-62.
(5) For any distribution with an annuity starting date on or after the
effective date of this section and before the adoption date of this
section, if application of the amendment as of the annuity starting
date would have caused a reduction in the amount of any
distribution, such reduction is not reflected in any payment made
before the adoption date of this section. However, the amount of
any such reduction that is required under Section 415(b)(2)(B) of
the Internal Revenue Code must be reflected actuarially over any
remaining payments to the participant.
C. Reducing dollar limit.
(1) The dollar limit shall be reduced (but not by more than 90%) by 1/
10th for each year of credited service less than 10, considering only
those years of credited service during any part of which the
participant was participating in the plan (including those periods
for which he or she elected to purchase or transfer service
pursuant to §§ 38-16 through 18 of this plan).
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection C(1), however, in no event shall the
monthly dollar limit be reduced in the case of death or disability
benefits to the extent provided in IRS Regulations 1.415(b)-1(g)(3).
D. The City-provided annual retirement benefit payable to any participant
shall not exceed the maximum benefit allowed under Section 415 of the
§ 38-33 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-33
1:114
§ 38-34. Post-termination changes.
Any change in benefits provided for by amendment to the plan shall not
apply to any participant whose termination date with the City occurred prior
to the effective date of such amendment, except as otherwise specifically
provided for in the plan or in such amendment.
§ 38-35. Cost of living adjustments.
Subject to the limitations set forth in § 38-34, the monthly retirement
income of a participant who has reached his benefit commencement date,
as otherwise computed pursuant to § 38-28, may be eligible for a cost of
living adjustment. Such a cost of living adjustment shall be accomplished by
Internal Revenue Code, as amended from time to time and which
is specifically incorporated herein by reference. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, if the participant is a participant in any other qualified
defined benefit pension plan sponsored by the City, the participant's
pension benefit under such other plan shall be aggregated with the
projected benefit under this plan, and the benefit under this plan shall
be reduced, to the extent necessary, so that the aggregate of such
benefits does not exceed the limitations set forth in Section 415 of the
Internal Revenue Code. Effective only for plan years ending prior to
July 1, 2000, if the participant is a participant in one or more qualified
defined contribution plans sponsored by the City, the participant's
benefit under the plan shall be reduced, to the extent necessary, so that
the sum of the defined benefit fraction and the defined contribution
fraction does not exceed one. For this purpose, "defined benefit
fraction" and "defined contribution fraction" shall be the fractions
described in Section 415(e) of the Internal Revenue Code as in effect
prior to July 1, 2000.
E. Other reductions in maximum benefit. In addition to the foregoing, the
maximum benefit shall be reduced, and the rate of benefit accrual shall
be frozen or reduced accordingly, to the extent necessary to prevent
disqualification of the plan under Section 415 of the Internal Revenue
Code, with respect to any participant who is also a participant in:
(1) Any other tax-qualified pension plan maintained by the City,
including a defined benefit plan in which an individual medical
benefit account (as described in Section 415(1) of the Internal
Revenue Code) has been established for the participant;
(2) Any welfare plan maintained by the City in which a separate
account [as described in Section 419A(d) of the Internal Revenue
Code] has been established to provide post-retirement medical
benefits for the participant; and/or
(3) Any retirement or welfare plan, as aforesaid, maintained by a
related employer, as described in Section 414(b),(c), (m) or (o) of
the Internal Revenue Code.
§ 38-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-35
1:115
amendment to this plan pursuant to § 38-65. The earliest effective date of
any such amendment shall be July 1, 2003.
§ 38-36. Refundable contributions benefit.
In addition to any other benefits payable under this plan, a participant who
retires or otherwise reaches a termination date shall be entitled to receive
a lump sum distribution of his or her refundable contributions benefit, if the
participant is entitled to the benefit.
§ 38-37. (Reserved)
§ 38-38. (Reserved)
§ 38-35 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-38
1:116
ARTICLE V
Death Benefits
§ 38-39. Death benefits.
Upon a participant's death, those persons designated pursuant to § 38-48
shall receive a lump sum distribution of the participant's refundable
contributions benefit, if the participant was entitled to the benefit. The only
additional benefits payable under the plan in the event of the death of a
participant shall be paid to those persons designated in accordance with
this § 38-48 as follows:
A. Ordinary death benefit. In the event of the death of a participant prior
to his or her benefit commencement date, while not in the line of duty,
the participant's beneficiary shall be entitled to receive either the
benefits described in Subsection A(1) or those described in Subsection
A(2), as applicable:
(1) General benefit. The beneficiary shall be entitled to receive:
(a) The participant's employee contributions benefit, payable in
one or more installments over a period which meets the
requirements of § 38-40 and which is designated by the
participant, or, if the participant has made no designation, by
his or her beneficiary; plus
(b) An amount, payable as a single lump sum, equal to the
participant's annualized compensation determined as of the
date of death; provided, however, that the benefit provided by
this Subsection A(1)(b) shall be payable only if the participant
had died while a covered employee and after completing at
least one year of eligibility service.
(2) Surviving spouse annuity benefit.
(a) If all of the following conditions are met, then the surviving
spouse of a deceased participant shall be entitled to receive a
survivor annuity, in lieu of any other plan benefit:
[1] The participant is married on the date of death;
[2] The participant's death occurs before the participant's
benefit commencement date;
[3] The participant has designated the participant's surviving
spouse as his or her only primary beneficiary;
[4] Either the participant would have been eligible to receive
early retirement benefits pursuant to § 38-29 had the
participant retired the day before his or her death, or the
participant has attained age 50 and received credit for at
least 20 years of eligibility service; [Amended 5-22-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-12]
§ 38-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-39
1:117
[5] The participant has not died in the line of duty as
described in § 38-39B; and
[6] The spouse does not elect to receive the benefit provided
in Subsection A(1) above.
(b) For purposes of this subsection, a "survivor annuity" is a
monthly income commencing in the month next following the
participant's death, and continuing for the remainder of the
spouse's life, in an amount equal to the actuarial equivalent of
the benefit the spouse would have received under an
immediate joint and survivor annuity pursuant to § 38-42 (with
a 100% survivor benefit) had the participant retired on the day
before his or her death.
B. Line of duty death benefit. In the event of the death of a participant,
prior to the participant's benefit commencement date, while in the line
of duty (as defined below), the participant's beneficiary shall be entitled
to receive the benefits described in Subsection B(1), (2) or (3), as
applicable.
(1) General benefit. The beneficiary shall be entitled to receive:
(a) The participant's employee contributions benefit, payable in
one or more installments over a period which meets the
requirements of § 38-40 and which is designated by the
participant, or, if the participant has made no designation, by
his or her beneficiary; plus
(b) An amount, payable as a single lump sum, equal to the
participant's annualized compensation determined as of the
date of death; provided, however, that the benefit provided by
this Subsection B(1)(b) shall be payable only if the participant
has died while a covered employee.
(2) Surviving spouse benefit.
(a) If all of the following conditions are met, then the surviving
spouse of a deceased participant shall be entitled to receive a
survivor benefit, in lieu of any other plan benefit:
[1] The participant is married on the date of death;
[2] The participant's death occurs before the benefit
commencement date;
[3] The participant has designated the participant's surviving
spouse as his or her beneficiary;
[4] The participant has died in the line of duty as described in
this § 38-39B; and
§ 38-39 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-39
1:118
[5] Upon the death of the participant, the spouse does not
elect to receive the benefits provided in § 38-39B(1).
(b) Monthly benefit.
[1] For purposes of this subsection, the line of duty survivor
benefit is a monthly income commencing in the month next
following the participant's death and continuing for the
remainder of the spouse's life or earlier remarriage in an
amount equal to 662/3% of the participant's compensation
determined as of the day before the participant's death.
[2] In the event of the death or remarriage of the spouse
following the death of the participant, a monthly benefit
equal to 50% of such compensation shall be paid, in the
aggregate, to the participant's surviving children who are
named as contingent beneficiaries.
[3] The monthly benefits payable to any child of the
participant pursuant to this subsection shall continue until
the first day of the month preceding the earlier of:
[a] The death of the child; or
[b] The later of the child's:
[i] Attainment of age 18; or
[ii] Attainment of age 23, but only so long as the child
remains a full-time student.
(3) Surviving children's benefit.
(a) If all of the following conditions are met, then the surviving
children of a deceased participant shall receive a survivor
benefit, in lieu of any other plan benefit:
[1] The participant's death occurs before the benefit
commencement date;
[2] The participant has designated one or more of the
participant's children as his or her only primary
beneficiaries; and
[3] The participant has died in the line of duty as described in
this § 38-39B.
(b) Monthly benefit.
[1] For purposes of this subsection, the line of duty survivor
children's benefit is a monthly income commencing in the
month next following the participant's death in an amount
equal to 50% of the participant's compensation
determined as of the day before the participant's death
§ 38-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-39
1:119
§ 38-40. Limitations. [Amended 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-0912]
All death benefits payable pursuant to § 38-39 shall be distributed only in
accordance with regulations prescribed by the Internal Revenue Service
under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. To the extent
required thereby, such benefits shall be distributed in full not later than the
and paid, in the aggregate, to the participant's surviving
children who are named as primary beneficiaries.
[2] The monthly benefits payable to any child of the
participant pursuant to this subsection shall continue until
the first day of the month preceding the earlier of:
[a] The death of the child; or
[b] The later of the child's:
[i] Attainment of age 18; or
[ii] Attainment of age 23, but only so long as the child
remains a full-time student.
(4) Line of duty definition. For purposes of this section, the term "line
of duty" means death from an injury or illness which has been
sustained as an active covered employee and which has been ruled
compensable under the Workers' Compensation Law of Maryland.
C. Benefits payable after benefit commencement date. If a participant dies
after the participant's benefit commencement date, the benefits, if any,
to which his or her beneficiary shall be entitled shall depend upon the
form in which the participant's benefits were payable at the time of
death, under the applicable form of benefit described in §§ 38-41
through 38-44.
D. Military service death benefit. In the event of the death of a participant
while performing qualified military service on or after January 1, 2007,
that participant's beneficiary shall be entitled to any death benefits and
other benefits that would have been provided under the plan had the
participant resumed employment on the day preceding death and been
deemed to have terminated employment on account of death on the
actual date of death. The term "qualified reservist" means an individual
who is a member of a reserve component, as defined in Section 101 of
Title 37 of the United States Code, and who is ordered or called to
active duty after September 11, 2001, either for a period in excess of
179 days or for an indefinite period; and the term "qualified military
service" means military service as used in Section 414(u)(1) of the
Internal Revenue Code. [Added 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-2611]
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that the new provisions set forth in Subsection D
have an effective date of 1-1-2007.
12.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it become effective on 1-1-2013.
§ 38-39 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-40
1:120
last day of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the death of
the participant, except as follows:
§ 38-41. Method of payment.
A. Distributed over lifetime of beneficiary. Unless the participant or the
participant's beneficiary irrevocably elects pursuant to any elective
provision which may be then present in the plan (which election must
be prior to the earliest date on which distribution would be otherwise
required pursuant to this section) to have the aforesaid five-year limit
apply, benefits payable to or for the benefit of the participant's
beneficiary, and which begin not later than the last day of the calendar
year containing the first anniversary of the participant's death, may be
distributed over the life of the beneficiary or a period certain not
extending beyond the life expectancy of the beneficiary, under a method
of distribution which meets the requirements of § 38-43 (but with life
expectancy based upon the beneficiary's attained age as of the
beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year in which falls the date on
which non-annuity benefits are required to commence pursuant to this
subsection, or if earlier, the date on which annuity benefits actually
commence).
B. When annuity benefits commence before participant's death. If annuity
benefits meeting the requirements of § 38-43 had commenced prior to
the participant's death, then, in either case, the death benefits payable
pursuant to §§ 38-39 through 38-40 may be distributed without regard
to the aforesaid five-year limit, but must be distributed at least as
rapidly as they would have been under the predeath method of
distribution.
A. All benefit distributions shall be in cash (or in annuity contracts as
provided herein).
B. The City shall determine, in its discretion, whether the distribution shall
be funded through periodic payments made directly from the trust, or
through the purchase of annuity contracts, or whether a combination of
such methods of distribution shall be used, and the City shall give to the
Trustees such directions and information as may be necessary for the
Trustees to carry out the decision of the City.
C. If the City shall determine that the whole or any part of the distribution
is to be funded through the purchase of an annuity contract for a
participant, the City shall select such form of contract (including a
variable annuity) to be so purchased and shall direct the Trustees to pay
the premium of such contract to the issuing company.
D. The City shall direct that all right, title and interest in such contract
shall remain in the Trustees under the terms of the plan and the
participant shall have no right, title or interest therein except to receive
the payments therefrom as provided therein, and to change the
beneficiary from time to time.
§ 38-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-41
1:121
§ 38-42. Optional forms of benefit.
A participant, subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth, may elect to
receive, in lieu of the normal monthly form of retirement income described
in § 38-28, a benefit, which is its actuarial equivalent, payable in any of the
following forms and in the form described in § 38-44:
E. Alternatively, the City may direct that the contract shall be purchased in
the name of the participant and distributed to the participant free and
clear of the trust, in which case:
(1) The contract shall be issued so as to be nontransferable;
(2) It shall not contain a death benefit in excess of the greater of the
reserve or the total premiums paid for annuity benefits; and
(3) It shall not contain provisions that expand upon, change or
eliminate any plan provisions applicable to distributions in annuity
form.
A. Joint and survivor option.
(1) The joint and survivor option is a monthly income payable during
the participant's lifetime and continuing after the participant's
death at the rate of either 50% or 100% (as elected by the
participant) to his or her beneficiary for the remainder of such
beneficiary's life.
(2) If the participant's beneficiary dies before the date on which the
participant's benefits commenced (whether before or after his or
her termination date), the election shall thereupon become void.
(3) If the participant's beneficiary dies after the date on which the
participant's benefits have commenced, or the participant becomes
divorced from the beneficiary, but before the death of the
participant, the election shall remain effective and the participant
shall continue to receive the reduced retirement income payable to
him or her in accordance with the option.
B. Pop-up option.
(1) The pop-up option is a monthly income payable during the
participant's lifetime and continuing after the participant's death at
the rate of either 50% or 100% (as elected by the participant) to his
or her beneficiary for the remainder of the beneficiary's life.
(2) If the participant's beneficiary dies before the date on which the
participant's benefits commenced (whether before or after his or
her termination date), the election shall thereupon become void.
(3) If the participant's beneficiary dies, or if the participant becomes
divorced from the beneficiary, after the date on which the
participant's benefits have commenced, but before the death of the
§ 38-41 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-42
1:122
§ 38-43. General provisions applicable to options.
participant, the election shall likewise become void, and the
participant shall receive, commencing on the first day of the month
following the beneficiary's death (or divorce), the monthly benefit
which the participant would have received had his or her benefits
originally been payable as a life only option, as described in
§ 38-42C; and such benefit shall thereafter be payable as a life only
option.
C. Life only option. The life only option, which is the normal form of benefit
under the plan, is a monthly income payable during the participant's
lifetime, with no payments to be made after the last payment prior to
the participant's death.
D. Lump sum option. The lump sum option is a cash-out of the participant's
employee contributions benefit in lieu of all other benefits under the
plan, as described in §§ 38-26 and 38-27.
E. Single life annuity with refund. The single life annuity with refund
option is a monthly income payable during the participant's lifetime,
and, upon the participant's death, the participant's beneficiary will
receive a lump sum payment of an amount which is the unpaid balance
of the present value of the participant's employee contributions benefit
or accrued benefit (as elected by the participant).
F. Social security leveling option. The social security leveling option is a
monthly income payable for the participant's lifetime which is greater
prior to the commencement of payment to the participant of social
security retirement benefits and is less after the commencement of
such benefits so that the participant receives substantially equal
monthly payments.
A. Minimum distribution requirements. Notwithstanding any other
provision in the plan to the contrary, distribution shall be made only in
accordance with regulations published by the Internal Revenue Service
under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. To the extent
required thereby, distribution of benefits shall comply with the
following limitations: [Amended 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. O-08-29]
(1) Start; duration.
(a) Except as otherwise provided below, distribution shall begin
not later than the calendar year (hereinafter referred to as the
"commencement year") in which the participant reaches age
70 1/2 or in which he or she subsequently retires.
(b) Distribution shall be made:
[1] Over the life of the participant or the lives of the
participant and the participant's beneficiary; and/or
§ 38-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-43
1:123
[2] Over a period certain not extending beyond the life
expectancy of the participant or the joint life and last
survivor expectancy of the participant and his or her
beneficiary, or, if shorter, the alternate period all as
described in Treasury Regulation Section 401(a)(9)-6.
(2) A required distribution shall be deemed to have been made during
the commencement year if actually made by the following April 1,
but such delayed distribution shall not change the amount of such
distribution, and the distribution otherwise required during the
subsequent calendar year shall be calculated as if the first
distribution had been made on the last day of the commencement
year.
(3) Benefits paid prior to the commencement year shall reduce the
aggregate amount subject to (but shall not otherwise negate) the
minimum distribution requirements described herein.
(4) Nothing contained in this subsection shall prevent distribution of
annuity benefits providing for non-increasing [except as otherwise
permitted in Treasury Regulation 401(a)(9)-6] payments beginning
not later than the commencement year [except as provided in
Subsection A(3) above] and payable at least annually over a period
permitted by this subsection (for which purpose, if benefit
commencement under the annuity precedes the commencement
year, each relevant life expectancy shall be based on the
individual's attained age as of his or her birthday occurring in the
calendar year in which benefit commencement occurs). Any
benefits accruing after the commencement year shall be treated as
a separate identifiable component distributable in accordance with
this subsection beginning in the payment year following the year of
accrual.
(5) If the provisions of this subsection require the commencement of
benefits to a participant who has not yet terminated employment,
distribution shall be made or commenced in accordance with
§§ 38-41 through 38-44 as if the participant had retired on the last
day of the commencement year. However, notwithstanding the
commencement of benefits pursuant to this subsection, all other
aspects of the participant's plan participation shall continue in
accordance with the remaining provisions of the plan. The actuarial
equivalent of any additional benefits which may accrue to the
participant pursuant to § 38-30 after the participant's benefits have
been paid or commenced by reason of this subsection shall increase
the amount of periodic benefit payments being received by the
participant under the plan.
B. Election procedures. An election of any optional form of benefit
described in § 38-42, or any revocation or change of such election, must
be made by a participant in writing, on a form supplied by or acceptable
to the City. [Amended 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. O-08-29]
§ 38-43 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-43
1:124
C. Effect of death. In the event of the death of a participant prior to the
date on which the participant's benefits are due to commence under the
terms of the plan, no benefits shall be payable to the participant's
spouse or other beneficiary except as provided in §§ 38-39 and 40,
regardless of whether or not the participant has elected an optional
form of benefit pursuant to §§ 38-41 through 38-44. [Amended
1-27-2009 by Ord. No. O-08-29]
D. Timing of benefit commencement. Notwithstanding any other plan
provision to the contrary, in no event (unless the participant otherwise
elects pursuant to any elective provision which may be then present in
the plan) shall benefits begin later than the 60th day after the close of
the plan year in which occurs the latest of: [Amended 1-27-2009 by
Ord. No. O-08-29]
(1) The date on which the participant attains age 62 (or any earlier
normal retirement age which may be then specified in the plan); or
(2) The termination of the participant's employment with the City.
E. Minimum distributions. With respect to distributions under the plan on
or after January 1, 2001, for calendar years being on or after January 1,
2001, the plan will apply the minimum distribution requirements of
Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code in accordance with the
regulations under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code that
were proposed on January 17, 2001 (the “2001 Proposed Regulations”),
notwithstanding any provisions of the plan to the contrary. If the total
amount of required minimum distributions made to a participant for
2001 prior to January 1, 2001, are equal to or greater than the amount
of required minimum distributions determined under the 2001
Proposed Regulations, then no additional distributions are required for
such participant for 2001 on or after such date. If the total amount of
required minimum distributions made to a participant for 2001 prior to
January 1, 2001, are less than the amount determined under the 2001
Proposed Regulations, then the amount of required minimum
distributions for 2001 on or after such date will be determined so that
the total amount of required minimum distributions for 2001 is the
amount determined under the 2001 Proposed Regulations. This
amendment shall continue in effect until the last calendar year
beginning before the effective date of the final regulations under
Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code or such other date as
may be published by the Internal Revenue section. [Added 8-27-2002
by 2002-22]
F. Minimum distribution requirements: final regulations. [Added
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-30]
(1) General.
(a) Precedence. The requirements of this Subsection F will take
precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan.
§ 38-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-43
1:125
(b) Requirements of treasury regulations incorporated. All
distributions under this § 38-43 will be determined and made
in accordance with the Treasury regulations under Section
401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(2) Time and manner of distribution.
(a) Required beginning date. The participant's entire interest will
be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the participant no
later than the participant's required beginning date.
(b) Death of participant before distributions begin.
[1] If the participant dies before distributions begin, the
participant's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to
be distributed, no later than as follows:
[a] If the participant's surviving spouse is the
participant's sole designated beneficiary, then
distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by
December 31 of the calendar year immediately
following the calendar year in which the participant
died, or by December 31 of the calendar year in which
the participant would have attained age 70 1/2, if
later.
[b] If the participant's surviving spouse is not the
participant's sole designated beneficiary, then, except
as provided in the adoption agreement, distributions
to the designated beneficiary will begin by December
31 of the calendar year immediately following the
calendar year in which the participant died.
[c] If there is no designated beneficiary as of September
30 of the year following the year of the participant's
death, the participant's entire interest will be
distributed by December 31 of the calendar year
containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's
death.
[d] If the participant's surviving spouse is the
participant's sole designated beneficiary and the
surviving spouse dies after the participant but before
distributions to the surviving spouse begin this
Subsection F(2)(b), other than Subsection F(2)(b)[1],
will apply as if the surviving spouse were the
participant.
[2] For purposes of this Subsection F(2)(b) and Subsection
F(4), unless Subsection F(2)(b)[1][d] applies, distributions
are considered to begin on the participant's required
beginning date. If Subsection F(2)(b)[1][d] applies,
§ 38-43 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-43
1:126
distributions are considered to begin on the date
distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse
under Subsection F(2)(b)[1]. If distributions under an
annuity purchased from an insurance company irrevocably
commence to the participant before the participant's
required beginning date (or to the participant's surviving
spouse before the date distributions are required to begin
to the surviving spouse under Subsection F(2)(b)[1], the
date distributions are considered to begin is the date
distributions actually commence.
(c) Forms of distributions. Unless the participant's interest is
distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an
insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required
beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year
distributions will be made in accordance with Subsection F(3)
and (4). If the participant's interest is distributed in the form of
an annuity purchased from an insurance company,
distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the
requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue
Code and the Treasury regulations.
(3) Required minimum distributions during participant's lifetime.
(a) Amount of required minimum distribution for each distribution
calendar year. During the participant's lifetime, the minimum
amount that will be distributed for each distribution calendar
year is the lesser of:
[1] The quotient obtained by dividing the participant's
account balance by the distribution period in the Uniform
Lifetime Table set forth in Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the
Treasury regulations, using the participant's age as of the
participant's birthday in the distribution calendar year; or
[2] If the participant's sole designated beneficiary for the
distribution calendar year is the participant's spouse, the
quotient obtained by dividing the participant's account
balance by the number in the Joint and Last Survivor Table
set forth in Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury
regulations, using the participant's and spouse's attained
ages as of the participant's and spouse's birthdays in the
distribution calendar year.
(b) Lifetime required minimum distributions continue through
year of participant's death. Required minimum distributions
will be determined under this Subsection F(3) beginning with
the first distribution calendar year and up to and including the
distribution calendar year that includes the participant's date
of death.
(4) Required minimum distributions after participant's death.
§ 38-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-43
1:127
(a) Death on or after date distributions begin.
[1] Participant's survived by designated beneficiary. If the
participant dies on or after the date distributions begin
and there is a designated beneficiary, the minimum
amount that will be distributed for each distribution
calendar year after the year of the participant's death is
the quotient obtained by dividing the participant's account
balance by the longer of the remaining life expectancy of
the participant or the remaining life expectancy of the
participant's designated beneficiary, determined as
follows:
[a] The participant's remaining life expectancy is
calculated using the age of the participant in the year
of death, reduced by one for each subsequent year.
[b] If the participant's surviving spouse is the
participant's sole designated beneficiary, the
remaining life expectancy of the surviving spouse is
calculated for each distribution calendar year after
the year of the participant's death using the surviving
spouse's age as of the spouse's birthday in that year.
For distribution calendar years after the year of the
surviving spouse's death, the remaining life
expectancy of the surviving spouse is calculated using
the age of the surviving spouse as of the spouse's
birthday in the calendar year of the spouse's death,
reduced by one for each subsequent calendar year.
[c] If the participant's surviving spouse is not the
participant's sole designated beneficiary, the
designated beneficiary's remaining life expectancy is
calculated using the age of the beneficiary in the year
following the year of the participant's death, reduced
by one for each subsequent year.
[2] No designated beneficiary. If the participant dies on or
after the date distributions begin and there is no
designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year
after the year of the participant's death, the minimum
amount that will be distributed for each distribution
calendar year after the year of the participant's death is
the quotient obtained by dividing the participant's account
balance by the participant's remaining life expectancy
calculated using the age of the participant in the year of
the death, reduced by one for each subsequent year.
(b) Death before date distributions begin.
[1] Participant survived by designated beneficiary. If the
participant dies before the date distributions begin and
§ 38-43 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-43
1:128
there is a designated beneficiary, the minimum amount
that will be distributed for each distribution calendar year
after the year of the participant's death is the quotient
obtained by dividing the participant's account balance by
the remaining life expectancy of the participant's
designated beneficiary, determined as provided in
Subsection F(4)(a).
[2] No designated beneficiary. If the participant dies before
the date distributions begin and there is no designated
beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the
year of the participant's death, distribution of the
participant's entire interest will be completed by
December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth
anniversary of the participant's death.
[3] Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving
spouse are required to begin. If the participant dies before
the date distributions begin, the participant's surviving
spouse is the participant's sole designated beneficiary, and
the surviving spouse dies before distributions are required
to begin to the surviving spouse under Subsection
F(2)(b)[1], this Subsection F(4)(b) will apply as if the
surviving spouse were the participant.
(5) Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
DESIGNATED BENEFICIARY — The individual who is designated
as the beneficiary under § 38-48 of the plan and is the designated
beneficiary under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code
and Section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury regulations.
DISTRIBUTION CALENDAR YEAR — A calendar year for which
a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning
before the participant's death, the first distribution calendar year is
the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which
contains the participant's required beginning date. For
distributions beginning after the participant's death, the first
distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which
distributions are required to begin under Subsection F(2)(b). The
required minimum distribution for the participant's first
distribution calendar year will be made on or before the
participant's required beginning date. The required minimum
distribution for other distribution calendar years, including the
required minimum distribution for the distribution calendar year
in which the participant's required beginning date occurs, will be
made on or before December 31 of that distribution calendar year.
LIFE EXPECTANCY — Life expectancy as computed by the use
of the Single Life Table in Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury
regulations.
§ 38-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-43
1:129
§ 38-44. Eligible rollover distributions.
Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee
may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Administrator,
to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
PARTICIPANT'S ACCOUNT BALANCE — The account balance as of
the last valuation date in the calendar year immediately preceding
the distribution calendar year (valuation calendar year) increased
by the amount of any contributions made and allocated or
forfeitures allocated to the account balance as of the dates in the
valuation calendar year after the valuation date and decreased
by distributions made in the valuation calendar year after the
valuation date. The account balance for valuation calendar year
includes any amounts rolled over or transferred to the plan either
in the valuation calendar year or in the distribution calendar year
if distributed or transferred in the valuation calendar year.
REQUIRED BEGINNING DATE — The date specified in § 38-43A(1)
of the plan.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DIRECT ROLLOVER — A payment by the plan to the eligible retirement
plan specified by the distributee.
DISTRIBUTEE — Includes a participant or former participant. In
addition, the participant's or former participant's surviving spouse and
the participant's or former participant's spouse or former spouse who
is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as
defined in Section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code, are distributees
with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the plan, in any case where
the participant or former participant is married to a person of the
same sex, that participant's spouse shall not be treated as a distributee
under this definition but shall be treated as a nonspouse beneficiary
under § 38-45. However, the preceding sentence shall not apply and a
same-sex spouse shall be treated as a distributee under this section to
the extent permitted under Section 402(c)(11) of the Internal Revenue
Code and administrative guidance thereunder.[Amended 6-18-2013
by Ord. No. O-13-0913]
ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — [Amended 8-27-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-22; 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. O-08-29]
(1) An "eligible retirement plan" is:
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it become effective on 1-1-2013.
§ 38-43 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-44
1:130
§ 38-45. Distribution to nonspouse beneficiaries. [Added 1-27-2009
by Ord. No. O-08-29; 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-09]
This section applies to distributions made on or after February 26, 2009.
Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would
ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTIONS — Any distribution of all or any
portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an
eligible rollover distribution does not include:
An individual retirement account described in Section 408(a)
of the Internal Revenue Code;
(a)
An individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of
the Internal Revenue Code; or
(b)
A qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code or an annuity plan described in Section 403(a)
of the Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee's
eligible rollover distribution.
(c)
With respect to distributions made after December 31, 2001, an
"eligible retirement plan" shall also mean an annuity contract
described in Section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and an
eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained
by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into
such plan from this plan.
(2)
With respect to distributions made after December 31, 2007, an
"eligible retirement plan" shall also mean a Roth IRA described in
Section 408A of the Internal Revenue Code.
(3)
With respect to distributions made after December 31, 2001, the
definition of "eligible retirement plan" shall also apply in the case of
a distribution to a surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse
who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations
order, as defined in Section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(4)
Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal
periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for
the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives
(or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's
designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of 10 years or
more;
(1)
Any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under
Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of
any distribution that is not includable in gross income (determined
without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation
with respect to employer securities).
(2)
§ 38-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-45
1:131
otherwise limit the options of the beneficiary of a deceased participant who
is not a distributee [within the meaning of § 38-44A(3)], the Administrator
shall, upon the request of such a beneficiary, transfer a lump sum
distribution to the trustee of an individual retirement account established
under Section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code in accordance with the
provisions of Section 402(c)(11). Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in the plan, in any case where the participant or former participant is
married to a person of the same sex, that participant's spouse shall be
treated as a nonspouse beneficiary under this section. However, the
preceding sentence shall not apply and a same-sex spouse shall be treated
as a distributee under this section to the extent permitted under Section
402(c)(11) of the Internal Revenue Code and administrative guidance
thereunder.
§ 38-46. (Reserved)
§ 38-47. (Reserved)
§ 38-45 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-47
1:132
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 38-48. Designation of beneficiaries.
A. Participant designates beneficiary. Each participant may designate a
beneficiary or beneficiaries (who may be named contingently or
successively) to receive such benefits as may be payable under the plan
upon or after his or her death, and, subject to the provisions of §§ 38-41
through 38-44, such designation may be changed from time to time by
the participant by filing a new designation. Each designation will
revoke all prior designations by the same participant, shall be in form
prescribed by the City, and will be effective only when filed in writing
with the City during the participant's lifetime.
B. Absence of valid beneficiary designation. In the absence of a valid
beneficiary designation (except in conjunction with the election of a
form of benefit payment which does not require the designation of a
specific beneficiary), or if, at the time any benefit payment is due to a
beneficiary, there is no living beneficiary eligible to receive the
payment, validly named by the participant, the City shall direct the
Trustees to distribute any such benefit payment to:
(1) The participant's spouse, if then living; otherwise to
(2) The participant's then living descendants, if any, per stirpes;
otherwise to
(3) The participant's then living parent or parents, equally; otherwise
to
(4) The participant's estate.
C. Question regarding right of a person to receive a benefit payment. In
determining the existence or identity of anyone entitled to a benefit
payment, the City and the Trustees may rely conclusively upon
information supplied by the participant's personal representative. In
the event of a lack of adequate information being supplied to the City, or
in the event that any question arises as to the right of any person to
receive a benefit payment as aforesaid, or in the event that a dispute
arises with respect to any such payment, then, notwithstanding the
foregoing, the City, in its sole discretion, may, in complete discharge of
the City and the Trustees, and without liability for any tax or other
consequences which might flow therefrom, direct the Trustees to:
(1) Distribute the payment to the participant's estate;
(2) Retain such payment, without liability for interest, until the rights
thereto are determined; or
(3) Deposit the payment into any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 38-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-49
1:133
§ 38-49. Location of participants and beneficiaries.
§ 38-50. Investment of funds.
A. Notice to last post office address. Any communication, statement or
notice addressed to a participant or beneficiary at the last post office
address filed with the City, or if no such address was filed with the City,
then at the last post office address as shown on the City's records, shall
be binding on the participant or beneficiary for all purposes of the plan.
Except for the City's sending of a registered letter to the last known
address, neither the Trustees nor the City shall be obliged to search for
any participant or beneficiary.
B. Distribution to next of kin if participant or beneficiary fails to claim
amount. If the City notifies any participant or beneficiary that he or she
is entitled to an amount under the plan and the participant or
beneficiary fails to claim such amount or make his or her or location
known to the City within three years thereafter, then, except as
otherwise required by law, if the location of one or more of the next of
kin of the participant, including the participant's surviving spouse, is
known to the City, it may direct distribution of such amount to any one
or more or all of such next of kin, and in such proportions as the City
determines.
C. If location of participant, beneficiary, or next of kin cannot be
determined. If the location of none of the foregoing persons can be
determined, the City shall have the right to direct that the amount
payable shall be deemed to be a forfeiture and treated in accordance
with § 38-24, except that the dollar amount of the forfeiture, unadjusted
for gains or losses in the interim, shall be reinstated if a claim for the
benefit is made by the participant or beneficiary to whom it was
payable. If any benefit payable to an unlocated participant or
beneficiary is subject to escheat pursuant to applicable state law,
neither the Trustees nor the City shall be liable to any person for any
payment made in accordance with such law.
A. All contributions under the plan shall be paid to the Trustees and
deposited in the trust.
B. Such contributions, all investments made therewith and proceeds
thereof and all earnings and profits thereon, less the authorized
disbursements therefrom, shall constitute the trust, which trust, and
the agreement under which it is maintained, shall in all respects
constitute a part of the plan.
C. The City reserves the right to select, and from time to time to change,
the Trustees, to amend the trust with the consent of the Trustees, or to
adopt a different funding vehicle.
§ 38-49 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-51
1:134
§ 38-51. Diversion of funds prohibited.
It shall be impossible by operation of the plan or trust, by natural
termination of either, by power of revocation or amendment, by the
happening of any contingency, by collateral arrangement or by other means,
for any part of the corpus or income of the trust, or any funds contributed
thereto, to inure to the benefit of the City or otherwise be used for or
diverted to purposes other than providing benefits to participants and
beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of administering the plan,
except as otherwise set forth in the trust with respect to the conditions
under which trust assets may be returned to the City.
§ 38-52. Assignment of benefits prohibited.
A. Except as provided below, no benefit payable at any time under this
plan may be anticipated, assigned (either at law or in equity), alienated
or subject to attachment, garnishment, execution, levy or other legal
and equitable process.
B. However, the prohibitions of the preceding sentence shall not apply to,
and the Trustees shall fully recognize the creation, assignment or
recognition of a right to any benefit payable with respect to a
participant pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order.
C. For the purposes hereof, a "qualified domestic relations order" shall
mean a judgment, decree or order made pursuant to a state domestic
relations law which related to the provision of child support, alimony
payments or marital property rights and:
(1) Which clearly specifies:
(a) The names and last known mailing addresses of the participant
and each payee;
(b) The amount or percentage of the participant's benefits to be
paid by this plan to each payee (or the manner in which such
amount or percentage is to be determined);
(c) The number of payments or period to which such order relates;
and
(2) Which does not:
(a) Require this plan to provide increased benefits; or
(b) Require the payment of the same benefits to any payee which
are payable to another payee pursuant to a prior qualified
domestic relations order.
(c) Require the payment of benefits to or for the benefit of the
same-sex spouse of a participant or former participant who
does not qualify as the participant's "alternate payee" under
§ 38-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-52
1:135
§ 38-53. Administrative authority.
§ 38-54. City administration. [Amended 4-25-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-04]
The plan shall be operated and administered on behalf of the City by the
Administrator, who shall be governed by the following:
Section 414(p)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code. [Added
6-18-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-0914]
A. Sole responsibility and control. Except as otherwise specifically
provided herein, the City shall have the sole responsibility for and the
sole control of the operation and administration of the plan.
B. Powers, duties and responsibilities. The City shall have the power and
authority to take all action and to make all decisions and interpretations
which may be necessary or appropriate in order to administer and
operate the plan, including, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the power, duty and responsibility to:
(1) Resolve and determine all disputes or questions arising under the
plan, including the power to determine the rights of employees,
participants and beneficiaries, and their respective benefits, and to
remedy any ambiguities, inconsistencies or omissions;
(2) Adopt such rules of procedure and regulations as in its opinion may
be necessary for the proper and efficient administration of the plan
and as are consistent with the plan;
(3) Implement the plan in accordance with its terms and such rules and
regulations;
(4) Direct the Trustees with respect to the eligibility of any employee
as a participant and the crediting and distribution of the trust,
which are to be made only upon the basis of instructions from the
City pursuant to the terms of the plan; and
(5) Establish and carry out a funding policy and method consistent
with the objectives of the plan, pursuant to which the City shall
determine the plan's liquidity and financial needs and communicate
them to the Trustees (or other fiduciaries who are charged with
determining investment policy).
C. Act through City Council. Subject to the power to delegate in the
manner described in § 38-54, the City shall act through the City
Council.
A. Powers of the Administrator. Except to the extent that the City has
retained any power or authority, or allocated duties and responsibilities
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it become effective on 1-1-2013.
§ 38-52 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-54
1:136
to another fiduciary, the Administrator shall have full power and
authority to administer and operate the plan in accordance with its
terms and in particular the authority contained in §§ 38-53 through
38-61, and, in acting pursuant thereto, shall have full power and
authority to deal with all persons in any matter directly connected with
the plan, including, but not limited to, the Trustees, other fiduciaries,
insurance companies, investment advisors, other advisors and
specialists, participants, beneficiaries and their representatives, in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1) To make and enforce rules and regulations as it shall deem
necessary or proper for the efficient administration of the plan;
(2) To make and enforce procedures to be followed by employees in
filing applications for benefits and for furnishing the evidence
necessary to establish the employees' right to benefits;
(3) To make and enforce determinations concerning the rights of
employees applying for or receiving benefits;
(4) To make and enforce procedures which afford a mechanism for
adjusting complaints of an employee dissatisfied with
determinations of the Administrator;
(5) To make and enforce procedures for determining the service credit
of employees which affords employees an opportunity to object, in
writing, and to establish service credit in advance of retirement;
(6) To make and enforce procedures for authorizing disbursements
from the fund created under the plan and to authorize
disbursements from the Trustees of the fund in accordance with the
plan documents;
(7) To make and enforce procedures and standards and make
determinations concerning total and permanent disability in
accordance with the plan documents;
(8) To compute the amount of benefits that shall be payable to any
person in accordance with the plan documents;
(9) To interpret the plan;
(10) To otherwise decide questions concerning the eligibility of any
employee to participate in the plan or to receive benefits from the
plan;
(11) To employ or engage actuaries to make actuarial evaluations of the
liabilities under the plan, to recommend the mortality and other
tables and interest rates to be used from time to time in actuarial
and other computations for any purpose of the plan, to recommend
the amounts of contributions to be made by the City and to perform
such other services as the Administrator shall deem necessary or
desirable in connection with the Administration of the plan;
§ 38-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-54
1:137
(12) To employ or engage accountants as it shall deem necessary or
desirable in connection with the administration of the plan;
(13) To employ or engage legal counsel as it shall deem necessary or
desirable in connection with the administration of the plan;
(14) To employ or engage any other experts as it shall deem necessary
or desirable in connection with the administration of the plan;
(15) To determine the mortality and other tables and interest rates to be
used from time to time in actuarial or other computations for any
purpose of the plan;
(16) To recommend to the City the amounts of contributions to be made
by the City, from time to time, under the provisions of the plan; and
(17) To act for the City before all persons in any matter directly
pertaining to the plan.
B. Limits on power.
(1) The Administrator shall have no power to:
(a) Amend or terminate the plan;
(b) Determine City contributions;
(c) Exercise authority to direct the Trustees with respect to the
investment of the trust;
(d) Affect the employer-employee relationship between the City
and any employee; or
(e) Retain and/or discharge the Trustees;
(2) All of which powers are reserved to the City unless expressly
granted to the Administrator.
C. Fiduciary powers, duties and responsibilities. Fiduciary duties, powers
and responsibilities (other than those reserved to the Trustees, with
respect to management or control of trust assets) may be allocated
among the fiduciaries (if there be more than one) to whom such duties,
powers and responsibilities have been delegated, so long as such
allocation is pursuant to action of the City or by written agreement
executed by the involved fiduciaries and approved by the City in which
case, such fiduciary shall have any liability, with respect to any duties,
powers or responsibilities not allocated to him, for the acts or omissions
of any other fiduciary. Any person may serve in more than one fiduciary
capacity under the plan, including those of Administrator and Trustee.
D. Specialized advice or assistance.
(1) Appoint persons or firms; rely upon advice.
§ 38-54 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-54
1:138
(a) The Administrator may appoint any persons or firms, or
otherwise act to secure specialized advice or assistance, as it
deems necessary or desirable in connection with the
administration and operation of the plan.
(b) The Administrator shall be entitled to rely conclusively upon,
and shall be fully protected in any action or omission taken by
it in good-faith reliance upon, the advice or opinion of such
firms or persons.
(2) Delegate duties, powers or responsibilities to City employee.
(a) The Administrator shall have the power and authority to
delegate from time to time by written instrument all or any
part of his or her duties, powers or responsibilities under the
plan, both ministerial and discretionary, as the Administrator
deems appropriate, to an employee of the City of Hagerstown,
who shall be designated by the Administrator as the plan
Coordinator (the "Coordinator"), and in the same manner to
revoke any such delegation of duties, powers or
responsibilities.
(b) Any action of the Coordinator in the exercise of such delegated
duties, powers or responsibilities shall have the same force and
effect for all purposes hereunder as if such action had been
taken by the Administrator.
(c) Further, the Administrator may authorize the Coordinator to
execute any certificate or document on behalf of the
Administrator, in which event any person notified by the
Administrator of such authorization shall be entitled to accept
and conclusively rely upon any such certificate or document
executed by such person as representing action by the
Administrator until such third person shall have been notified
of the revocation of such authority.
(d) The Administrator shall not be liable for any act or omission of
any person to whom the Administrator's duties, powers or
responsibilities have been delegated, nor shall any person to
whom any duties, powers or responsibilities have been
delegated have any liabilities with respect to any duties,
powers or responsibilities not delegated to him or her.
E. Liability.
(1) All representatives of the City, and/or members of the Retirement
Plan Committee shall use ordinary care and diligence in the
performance of their duties pertaining to the plan, but no such
individual shall incur any liability:
§ 38-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-54
1:139
(a) By virtue of any contract, agreement, bond or other instrument
made or executed by the individual or on his or her behalf in
the individual's official capacity with respect to the plan;
(b) For any act or failure to act, or any mistake or judgment made,
in his or her official capacity with respect to the plan, unless
resulting from the individual's gross negligence or willful
misconduct; or
(c) For the neglect, omission or wrongdoing of any other person
involved with the plan.
(2) The plan shall indemnify and hold harmless each such individual
from the effects and consequences of the individual's acts,
omissions and conduct in his or her official capacity with respect to
the plan, except to the extent that such effects and consequences
shall result from the individual's own willful misconduct or gross
negligence; provided, however, that any person who shall claim the
right to any payment or damage as a result of the actions of any
individual in connection with the performance of their duties
pertaining to the plan, shall be entitled to look only to the trust fund
created by the plan for payment. Such individual shall have no
other right, claim or demand therefor against the City.
F. Liability insurance.
(1) The plan may purchase, using plan assets and as an expense of the
plan, liability insurance for the plan and/or for its fiduciaries to
cover liability or losses occurring by reason of an act or omission of
a fiduciary, provided such insurance contract permits recourse by
the insurer against the fiduciary in the case of breach of fiduciary
obligation by such fiduciary.
(2) Any fiduciary may purchase, from and for his or her own account,
insurance to protect the fiduciary in the event of a breach of
fiduciary duty and the City may also purchase insurance to cover
the potential liability of one or more persons who serve in a
fiduciary capacity with regard to the plan.
G. Fiduciary's benefits.
(1) Nothing in the plan shall be construed so as to prevent any
fiduciary from:
(a) Receiving any benefit to which he or she may be entitled as a
participant or beneficiary; or
(b) Receiving any reasonable compensation for services rendered,
or for the reimbursement of expenses properly incurred in the
performance of his or her duties under the plan (except that no
person so serving who receives compensation as an employee
§ 38-54 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-54
1:140
§ 38-55. Retirement Plan Committee. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-24; 4-25-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-04]
The Retirement Plan Committee shall serve as an advisor to the
Administrator, the Coordinator and the City Council with respect to the
investment of the plan's assets and any other matters that may be referred
to that Committee by the Administrator, the Coordinator or the City Council.
shall receive compensation from the plan, except for
reimbursement of expenses properly incurred); or
(c) Serving as a fiduciary in addition to being an officer, employee,
agent, or other representative of the City or any related entity.
(2) However, the fiduciary shall not be entitled to vote or act upon, or
execute on behalf of the plan, documents specifically relating to,
his or her own participation in the plan.
A. Individuals serving on the Committee.
(1) The Committee shall consist of those individuals who hold the
following positions:
(a) Human Resources Director;
(b) Finance Director;
(c) Representative of Local 3373 of the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal employees;
(d) Representative of Local 1605 of the International Association
of Firefighters;
(e) Representative of the City of Hagerstown Police Department
management employees;
(f) Representative of the City of Hagerstown Fire Department
management employees;
(g) Member of the Hagerstown City Council who shall be entitled
to vote only upon matters which do not require Council
approval;
(h) A citizen of Washington County, Maryland, with investment or
financial experience who shall be appointed by the Mayor and
City Council; and
(i) A retiree receiving benefits from the plan who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and City Council.
(2) The Committee shall elect its own Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson annually.
§ 38-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-55
1:141
§ 38-56. Mutual exclusion of responsibility.
Neither the Trustees nor the City shall be obliged to inquire into or be
responsible for any act or failure to act, or the authority therefor, on the
part of the other.
§ 38-57. Uniformity of discretionary acts. [Amended 4-25-2017 by
Ord. No. O-17-04]
Whenever in the administration or operation of the plan discretionary
actions by the City, the Administrator or the Trustees are required or
permitted, such action shall be consistently and uniformly applied to all
persons similarly situated, and no such action shall be taken which shall
discriminate in favor of highly compensated employees as defined in Section
414(q) of the Internal Revenue Code.
§ 38-58. Fiduciary standards. [Amended 4-25-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-04]
The Administrator and all other persons in any fiduciary capacity with
respect to the plan shall discharge their duties with respect to the plan:
B. Compensation, acceptance of duties and responsibilities. Subject to his
or her right to resign at any time, each member of the Committee shall
serve without compensation at the pleasure of the City, and the City
may appoint, and may revoke the appointment of, additional members
to serve with the Committee as may be determined to be necessary or
desirable from time to time. Each member of the Committee, by
accepting appointment to the Committee, shall thereby be deemed to
have accepted all of the duties and responsibilities of such
appointment, and to have agreed to the faithful performance of his or
her duties thereunder.
C. Organization; voting.
(1) The Committee shall adopt such formal organization and method of
operation as it shall deem desirable for the conduct of its affairs.
(2) The Committee shall act as a body, and the individual members of
the Committee shall have no powers and duties as such, except as
provided herein.
(3) The Committee shall act by vote of a majority of its members at the
time in office (other than those disqualified from voting pursuant to
§ 38-54G), either at a meeting or in writing without a meeting.
D. Recommendations. The Committee shall make nonbinding
recommendations to the Administrator, the Coordinator and the City
Council on matters referred to the Committee. Those recommendations
shall be advisory only and shall not be binding on the Administrator, the
Coordinator or the City Council.
§ 38-55 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-58
1:142
§ 38-59. Litigation.
In any action or judicial proceeding affecting the plan and/or the trust,
except as may be otherwise required by law, no participant or beneficiary
shall be entitled to any notice or service of process, and any final judgment
entered in such action shall be binding on all persons interested in, or
claiming under, the plan.
§ 38-60. Payment of administration expenses.
Expenses incurred in the administration and operation of the plan shall be
paid by the Trustees out of the trust unless the City, in its discretion, elects
to pay them.
§ 38-61. Review procedure. [Amended 4-25-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-04]
An employee aggrieved by a decision of the Administrator may request that
the Administrator review his or her decision, and the Administrator shall
then review its decision. The decision of the Administrator following such
review upon request of an employee shall be final and conclusive.
§ 38-62. (Reserved)
§ 38-63. (Reserved)
§ 38-64. (Reserved)
A. Solely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries and for the
exclusive purposes of providing benefits to participants and their
beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of administering and
operating the plan;
B. With the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances
then prevailing that a prudent individual acting in a like capacity and
familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of
a like character and with like aims; and
C. In accordance with the documents and instruments governing the plan.
§ 38-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-64
1:143

ARTICLE VII
Amendments; Termination of Plan
§ 38-65. Right to amend.
§ 38-66. Right to terminate.
It is the present intention of the City to maintain the plan throughout the
City's existence. Nevertheless, the City reserves the right, at any time, to
permanently discontinue further contributions to the trust or to terminate
the entire Plan and trust.
§ 38-67. Automatic termination of contributions.
The liability of the City to make contributions to the trust shall automatically
terminate upon liquidation of the City, upon its adjudication as a bankrupt
or upon the making of a general assignment for the benefit or creditors.
§ 38-68. Allocation and distribution.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, all rights, benefits and obligations
of officers or employees of the City with respect to pensions or
retirement are provided under the terms of this plan, and this plan
supersedes and prevails over the terms of any rules, regulation,
resolution or ordinance concerning such matters.
B. The City of Hagerstown shall have the right to amend the plan, at any
time, by amendment to the Code of the City of Hagerstown and all
parties thereto or claiming any interest thereunder shall be bound
thereby. Notwithstanding any other provision of City law, no City
resolution or ordinance which relates to the subject matter of the plan
or conflicts with, narrows, or expands any term of this plan shall be
effective unless the City acts by ordinance which specifically amends
the provisions of this plan and which has been passed in accordance
with the City Code and Charter. No amendment which affects the
rights, duties, responsibilities or immunities of the Trustees shall be
binding upon the Trustees in the absence of their consent thereto.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the plan and trust may
be amended at any time, by amendment to the Code of the City of
Hagerstown, retroactively if required, if found necessary in order to
conform to the provisions and requirements of the Internal Revenue
Code or any similar act or any amendments thereto or regulations
promulgated thereunder; no such amendment shall be considered
prejudicial to any interest of a participant or beneficiary hereunder.
A. Causation.
(1) This section shall become operative in any of the following events:
(a) A complete termination of the City's liability to make further
contributions to the trust;
§ 38-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-68
1:145
§ 38-69. Priorities for allocation of trust assets.
Upon termination of the trust, the Trustees shall liquidate all assets
remaining in the trust. After deduction of estimated expenses in liquidating
and distributing the trust, and any reasonable compensation for the
Trustees agreed upon with the City, the balance of the trust assets shall be
allocated so as to provide the accrued benefits otherwise payable under the
plan pursuant to the following order of priorities:
(b) A complete discontinuance of contributions by the City to the
trust; or
(c) A complete termination of the plan.
(2) The provisions of this section shall also become operative in the
event of a partial termination of the plan, but only with respect to
that portion of the plan attributable to the participants to whom the
termination is applicable.
B. Effective date set by resolution of the City. The effective date of any
termination or discontinuance of contributions shall be as set forth in a
resolution adopted by the City.
C. Actions upon termination or discontinuance of contributions.
(1) Upon the effective date of any such event, then, notwithstanding
any other provisions of the plan, subject to the remainder of this
section:
(a) No persons who were not theretofore participants shall be
eligible to become participants;
(b) No further benefits shall accrue; and
(c) The accrued benefits of all participants not theretofore vested,
and not theretofore forfeited shall immediately become fully
vested.
(2) The accrued benefits of all participants and beneficiaries shall be
determined and distributed to them, as soon as is practicable after
such termination or discontinuance, in accordance with §§ 38-28
through 38-36 and §§ 38-41 through 38-44.
(3) The assets in the trust shall be allocated for the purposes set forth
below and in the order set forth below, to the extent the assets are
sufficient therefor. The allocations may be implemented by
distribution of trust assets, or by the purchase and distribution by
the Trustees of insurance company annuity contracts, or by a
combination of these methods.
A. Participants in first priorities. To provide accrued benefits for each
participant who:
§ 38-68 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-69
1:146
(1) Had begun to receive benefits at least three years prior to the
effective date of the termination of the plan;
(2) Would have begun to receive retirement or disability benefits at
least three years prior to the effective date of the termination of the
plan but for the fact that commencement of benefits was deferred;
or
(3) Would have been eligible to receive retirement benefits at least
three years prior to the effective date of the termination of the plan
but for the fact that the participant did not actually retire; and
B. Other participants. To provide accrued benefits for all other
participants, in the following order of preference:
(1) For each participant who would have qualified under Subsection A
above, but for the fact that the entitling event occurred or would
have occurred within three years of the effective date of the
termination of the plan; and
(2) For all other participants in this Subsection B.
C. Trust assets utilized according to priority.
(1) Trust assets shall be utilized under a particular priority only after
all accrued benefits set forth in all preceding priorities shall have
been fully provided for.
(2) For purposes of the allocation of funds within each priority, as set
forth above, funds will be credited to each participant to provide
the accrued benefits to which the participant is so entitled, but only
to the extent that such accrued benefits have not been provided
under a preceding priority.
(3) Any reductions in accrued benefits within a particular priority (or
within any particular preference set forth within a priority) as set
forth above, due to insufficient trust assets, shall be allocated pro
rata among the participants within that priority (or preference) on
the basis of then present values of the respective accrued benefits
described in that priority (or preference) for each such participant.
(4) Any reference to accrued benefits payable to participants shall also
be deemed to include accrued benefits payable to beneficiaries of
deceased participants.
(5) If any balance of trust assets remains after all of the allocations
described above, and after all liabilities with respect to participants
and retired participants and their beneficiaries, if any, are satisfied,
then the balance shall be returned to the City, and the trust shall
terminate. Upon making such distribution, the Trustees shall be
discharged from all obligations under the trust and no participant
shall have any further right or claim therein.
§ 38-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-69
1:147
§ 38-70. Alternative to immediate distribution of the trust.
§ 38-71. Modification of allocation provisions.
The provisions set forth in §§ 38-68 through 38-70 shall be subject to
such modification, retroactively if required, without necessity of formal
amendment to the plan, as may be necessary in order to cause the
termination of the plan and/or trust, and any distributions made pursuant
thereto and to conform to any requirements which may be imposed by
the Internal Revenue Service to prevent disqualification of the plan and/or
trust, and no such modification shall be deemed prejudicial to the interest
of any participant or beneficiary.
§ 38-72. (Reserved)15
D. Death of participant after effective date of termination.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in § 38-68 or this § 38-69,
if a participant dies or otherwise terminates employment with the City
during the interim between the effective date of termination and the
distribution of trust assets, and if the participant's benefit
commencement date had not yet occurred as of the effective date of
termination, the amount distributable to the participant or to his or her
beneficiary, and the timing thereof, shall be determined pursuant to
§§ 38-39 and 38-40.
A. Event entitling participant to benefit. As an alternative to immediate
distribution of the trust, the City, in its discretion, and subject to its
option at any time to require the complete distribution of the trust to
the then participants in accordance with § 38-68, may defer
commencement of benefits to each participant until such participant
reaches an event which would otherwise entitle him or her to benefit
commencement pursuant to §§ 38-28 through 38-32, at which time the
provisions of §§ 38-41 through 38-44 shall become applicable.
B. Separate account. During the interim period, there shall be established
and maintained a separate account in the name of each participant,
based upon the values established pursuant to §§ 38-68 through 38-72.
The separate account shall thereafter define and measure the amount
available for benefits distributable to the participant, and there shall be
credited or charged thereto any income, expenses, gains or losses
(whether or not realized, based upon fair market value of invested
assets) attributable or allocable thereto as of each trust valuation date
(or the date of complete distribution of the trust) with respect to the
period since the last valuation date.
15.Editor's Note: Former § 38-72, Benefits for highly compensated employees and restricted
participants, was repealed 8-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-22.
§ 38-69 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-73
1:148
§ 38-73. Plan combinations and transfers.
In the case of any merger or consolidation of the plan with, or transfer
of assets or liabilities of the trust to, any other plan, the transaction shall
be structured so that each participant in the plan would (if the plan then
terminated) receive a benefit immediately after the transaction which is at
least equal to the benefit the participant would have been entitled to receive
immediately before the transaction (if the plan had then terminated).
§ 38-74. (Reserved)
§ 38-75. (Reserved)
§ 38-76. (Reserved)
§ 38-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-76
1:149

ARTICLE VIII
Liability of City; Construction of Plan
§ 38-77. Limitations on liability of City.
§ 38-78. Construction.
A. No rights except as provided by law, plan, provisions, or terms of
insurance of annuity policy. Neither the establishment of the plan or
trust, nor any modification thereof, nor the creation of any fund or
account, nor the payment of any benefits, shall be construed as giving
to any participant or other person any legal or equitable right against
the City (or any person connected therewith) the Trustees or any
insurance company, except as provided by law, by any plan provision or
by the terms of any insurance or annuity policy.
B. City does not guarantee the trust. The City does not in any way
guarantee the trust from loss or depreciation, nor does the City
guarantee the payment of any money which may be or become due to
any person from the trust. Any person having a right or claim under the
plan shall look solely to the trust assets, and in no event shall the City
(or any person connected therewith) be liable to any person on account
of any claim arising by reason of the provisions of the plan or of any
instrument or instruments implementing its provisions, or for the
failure of any participant, beneficiary or other person to be entitled to
any particular tax consequences with respect to the plan, the trust or
any contribution thereto or distribution therefrom.
C. City not liable for failure to make contributions. The City shall not be
liable to any person for failure on its part to make contributions as
provided in § 38-23 nor shall any action lie to compel the City to make
such contributions.
D. City not liable for failure of plan to qualify under Internal Revenue
Code. The City (or any person connected therewith) shall not have any
liability to any person by reason of the failure of the plan to attain and/
or maintain qualified status under Section 401(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, or the failure of the trust to attain and/or maintain taxexempt
status under Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,
regardless of whether or not such failure is due to any act or omission
(willful, negligent or otherwise) of the City (or any person connected
therewith).
A. Intended to comply with requirements for qualification under Internal
Revenue Code. The plan is intended to comply with all requirements for
qualification under Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and, if
any provision of the plan is subject to more than one interpretation or
construction, such ambiguity shall be resolved in favor of that
interpretation or construction which is consistent with the plan being so
qualified.
§ 38-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-78
1:151
B. Severability. In case any provision of the plan shall be held to be illegal
or void, such illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining
provisions of the plan, but shall be fully severable, and the plan shall be
construed and enforced as if said illegal or invalid provisions had never
been inserted herein.
C. Laws of State of Maryland shall govern. Except to the extent preempted
by the laws of the United States of America, the laws of the State of
Maryland shall govern, control and determine all questions arising with
respect to the plan and the interpretation and validity of its respective
provisions. Participation under the plan will not give any participant the
right to be retained in the service of the City nor any right or claim to
any benefit under the plan unless such right or claim has specifically
accrued hereunder.
§ 38-78 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 38-78
1:152
Chapter 39
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police employees' retirement plan — See Ch.
38.
§ 38-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-78
1:153

ARTICLE I
Disposition of Abandoned Personal Property
[Adopted 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-13]
§ 39-1. Custody of property.
All tangible personal property recovered, abandoned, unclaimed or stolen
that comes into the possession of the Hagerstown Police Department shall
be held until the Police Department determines that its custody is no longer
necessary in connection with any prosecution or claim.
§ 39-2. Return of property.
After expiration of the period referred to in § 39-1, any tangible personal
property shall be delivered to the person who satisfactorily establishes his
right to its possession and gives a proper receipt therefor.
§ 39-3. Disposition of property.
§ 39-4. Disposition of proceeds.
The amount received from the sale of personal property in accordance with
this article shall be distributed in the following order of priority:
A. Any remaining tangible personal property that has been in the
possession of the Police Department for a period of at least 30 days may
be disposed of as follows:
(1) By giving notice of the disposition of such property by ordinary mail
to those persons entitled to its possession and to those lienholders
whose names and addresses can be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence.
(2) By advertising notice of the disposition of such property in the local
newspaper 30 days before and one day before disposition.
B. Thereafter, such property may be destroyed, sold at auction, donated to
charitable causes or become part of the Police Department inventory. A
bill of sale by the Police Department, or its agent, that personal
property has been sold pursuant to this section shall constitute
sufficient evidence of title to such property for all purposes.
C. The Police Department shall coordinate all activities described in this
section with the City Purchasing Department.
A. To lienholders in order of their priority; and
B. Subject to the provisions of § 39-5, to the general fund of the City of
Hagerstown.
§ 39-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-5
1:155
§ 39-5. Claims to proceeds.
At any time within three years from the date of such sale, any person
submitting satisfactory proof of his right to possession of such personal
property shall be paid, without interest, the amount distributed to the
General Fund pursuant to § 39-4B. After the expiration of three years from
the date of such sale, such claims shall be absolutely barred.
§ 39-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 39-5
1:156
Chapter 42
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS: GENERAL AUTHORIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Downtown Redevelopment Area I — See Ch.
43.
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
§ 42-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words have the meanings indicated:
BLIGHTED AREA — Any area in which a majority of buildings have declined
in productivity by reason of obsolescence, depreciation or other causes to
an extent that they no longer justify fundamental repairs and adequate
maintenance; or in which dwellings predominate that, by reason of
depreciation, overcrowding, faulty arrangement or design, lack of
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities or any combination of these factors,
are detrimental to the public safety, health or morals.
BONDS — Any bonds (including refunding bonds), notes, interim
certificates, certificates of indebtedness, debentures or other obligations.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT — The United States of America or any agency
or instrumentality, corporate or otherwise, of the United States of America.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association or body politic. "Person" includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee or other person acting in a similar representative
capacity.
PROPERTY — Land or other property of every kind. "Property" includes
any right, interest, franchise, easement or privilege in that land or other
property.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — A blighted area or any part or combination of
one or more blighted areas that the City designates as appropriate for a
redevelopment project.
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan, as it exists from time to time, for a
redevelopment project in a redevelopment area.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Undertakings and activities of the City in a
redevelopment area to eliminate or to prevent the development, recurrence
or spread of blight, slums or deterioration.
§ 42-2. Legislative authority; construal of provisions.
A. Express redevelopment authority. This chapter restates and codifies the
powers and authority granted to the City by Chapter 830 of the Acts of
the General Assembly of 1961, as reaffirmed and incorporated by
§ 39-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-2
1:157
§ 42-3. Powers and duties of City.
reference in Article IV, § 401, b, 57, of the City Charter, generally
authorizing and empowering the City to establish and carry out a
program for the redevelopment, rehabilitation, clearance or renewal of
blighted areas.
B. Chapter supplemental of other authority. The powers and authority
restated and codified in this chapter are in addition and supplemental
to and not in substitution of any other express or implied powers and
authority conferred on the City by its Charter or by the Constitution and
laws of this state.
C. Construction. This chapter shall be construed and applied liberally to
promote its purposes and objectives.
A. In general. The City may establish and carry out redevelopment
projects for the redevelopment, rehabilitation, conservation, clearance
or renewal of all or any part or combination of one or more blighted
areas.
B. Authorized undertakings and activities. Redevelopment projects may
involve all or any combination of the following undertakings and
activities:
(1) Acquisition of all or any part of a redevelopment area.
(2) Demolition and removal of buildings or other improvements in a
redevelopment area.
(3) Installation, construction or reconstruction in a redevelopment
area of streets, utilities, parks, playgrounds or other improvements
necessary for carrying out the purposes or objectives of this
chapter.
(4) Disposition of any property acquired in a redevelopment area,
including sale, initial leasing or retention of that property by the
City itself, at its fair value for uses in accordance with a
redevelopment plan.
(5) Carrying out plans for a program of voluntary or compulsory repair
and rehabilitation of buildings or other improvements in
accordance with a redevelopment plan.
(6) Carrying out plans for the preservation, improvement or
embellishment of historic structures or monuments in a
redevelopment area.
(7) Acquisition of any property in a redevelopment area as may be
necessary to:
(a) Eliminate unhealthful, unsanitary or unsafe conditions;
§ 42-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 42-3
1:158
§ 42-4. Additional powers and duties of cities.
(b) Lessen the density;
(c) Eliminate obsolete or other uses detrimental to the public
welfare;
(d) Otherwise eliminate or prevent the development, recurrence
or spread of blight, slums or deterioration; or
(e) Provide land for needed public facilities.
C. Acquisition and disposition of property.
(1) The City may acquire, in connection with a redevelopment project,
any property within the corporate limits of the City, including
property already devoted to public use, by purchase, lease, gift,
condemnation or any other legal means.
(2) The City may sell, lease, convey, transfer or otherwise dispose of
any of this property, regardless of whether or not it has been
developed, redeveloped, altered or improved, and irrespective of
the manner or means in or by which it may have been acquired, to
any private, public or quasi-public corporation, partnership,
association, legal entity or other person.
D. Eminent domain. Property to be acquired by the City for any of the
purposes or objectives of this chapter or in connection with the exercise
of any of the powers granted by this chapter may not be taken by the
City through the exercise of the power of eminent domain without just
compensation, as agreed upon between the parties or as awarded by a
jury, being first paid or tendered to the party entitled to that
compensation.
E. Declaration of public purpose and governmental function.
(1) All property needed or taken by the City through the exercise of the
power of eminent domain for any of the purposes or objectives of
this chapter or in connection with the exercise of any of the powers
granted by this chapter is hereby declared to be needed or taken
for public uses and purposes.
(2) All undertakings, activities and powers authorized by this chapter
are hereby declared to constitute governmental functions
undertaken for public uses and purposes, and the power of taxation
may be exercised, public funds expended and public credit
extended in furtherance of any of them.
A. In general, the City has the additional powers set forth in this section.
These additional powers are hereby found and declared to be necessary
and proper to carry into full force and effect the other powers granted
by this chapter and to fully accomplish the purposes and objectives
contemplated by this chapter.
§ 42-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-4
1:159
B. Plans and surveys.
(1) The City may make, or have made, adopt or approve and modify or
amend all surveys and plans necessary to carry out the purposes or
objectives of this chapter.
(2) These surveys and plans may include but are not to be limited to:
(a) Plans for carrying out a program of voluntary or compulsory
repair and rehabilitation of buildings and improvements.
(b) Plans for the enforcement of codes and regulations relating to
the use of land, the use and occupancy of buildings and
improvements and the compulsory repair, rehabilitation,
demolition or removal of buildings and improvements.
(c) Appraisals, title searches, surveys, studies and other plans and
work necessary to prepare for the undertaking of
redevelopment projects and related activities.
C. Relocation of displaced persons. The City may prepare plans for the
relocation of persons (including families, business concerns and others)
displaced from a redevelopment area and may make relocation
payments to or with respect to these persons for moving expenses and
property losses for which reimbursement or compensation is not
otherwise made, including the making of payments financed by the
federal government.
D. Appropriations and expenditures. The City may appropriate whatever
funds and make whatever expenditures are necessary to carry out the
purposes or objectives of this chapter.
E. Taxes and assessments. The City may make assessments and levy taxes
for the purposes or objectives of this chapter.
F. Financial assistance. The City may borrow money and apply for and
accept advances, loans, grants, contributions and any other form of
financial assistance from the federal government, from state, county or
other public bodies or from any other source, public or private, for any
of the purposes or objectives of this chapter, and may give whatever
security is required for this financial assistance.
G. Investments. The City may invest any redevelopment funds held in
reserves or sinking funds or any redevelopment funds not required for
immediate disbursement in any property or securities that are legal
investments for other municipal funds.
H. Holding, use and protection of property. The City may:
(1) Hold, improve, clear or prepare for redevelopment any property
acquired in connection with a redevelopment project;
§ 42-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 42-4
1:160
§ 42-5. Initiation of project.
(2) Mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or otherwise encumber that
property; and
(3) Insure or provide for the insurance of that property and of the
operations of the City against any risks or hazards, and pay
premiums for that insurance.
I. Contracts and other instruments. The City may:
(1) Make and execute all contracts and other instruments necessary or
convenient to the exercise of its powers under this chapter,
including agreements with other public bodies or agencies (which
agreements may extend over any period, notwithstanding any
provision or rule of law to the contrary); and
(2) Include in any contract for financial assistance with the federal
government for or with respect to a redevelopment project and
related activities any conditions imposed under federal law that the
City considers reasonable and appropriate.
J. Right of entry. The City may:
(1) Enter into any building or property in a redevelopment area in
order to make inspections, surveys, appraisals, soundings or test
borings; and
(2) If entry is denied or resisted, obtain an order for this purpose from
the Circuit Court for Washington County.
K. Public improvements. The City may plan, replan, install, construct,
reconstruct, repair, close or vacate streets, roads, sidewalks, public
utilities, parks, playgrounds, streetlights, street trees and other public
improvements in connection with a redevelopment project.
L. Building regulations. The City may make exceptions from building
regulations as necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes or
objectives of this chapter.
M. General administration. The City may generally organize, coordinate
and direct the administration of the provisions of this chapter so that
the objective of remedying blighted areas and preventing their causes
within the City are most effectively promoted and achieved.
N. General exercise of powers and authority. The City may exercise all or
any part or combination of the powers and authority granted by this
chapter.
A. Resolution required. To initiate a redevelopment project, the Mayor and
Council shall adopt a resolution as provided in this section.
B. Contents of resolution. The resolution shall:
§ 42-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-5
1:161
§ 42-6. Redevelopment plan procedure.
(1) Find that one or more blighted areas exist in the City;
(2) Find that the rehabilitation, redevelopment, conservation,
clearance or renewal of the blighted area or areas is necessary in
the interest of the public health, safety, morals or welfare of the
residents of the City; and
(3) Locate and define the blighted area or areas to which the proposed
redevelopment project will apply.
A. In general, in order to carry out the purposes and objectives of this
chapter, the City shall:
(1) Prepare or cause to be prepared a Redevelopment Plan for any
blighted area or any part or combination of one or more blighted
areas that the City designates as appropriate for a redevelopment
area; and
(2) Formally approve that plan.
B. Contents of plan. The Redevelopment Plan shall be sufficiently
complete to indicate, with respect to the redevelopment area covered
by the plan, any proposals for:
(1) Land acquisition;
(2) Demolition and removal of structures;
(3) Redevelopment, improvements or rehabilitation;
(4) Zoning or planning changes;
(5) Permitted land uses;
(6) Permitted maximum densities; and
(7) Building requirements.
C. Review by Planning Commission.
(1) Prior to its approval of a redevelopment project, the City shall
submit the proposed Redevelopment Plan to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendations as to its conformity
with the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City. The
Planning Commission shall submit its written recommendations to
the City within 60 days after it receives the proposed plan for
review.
(2) Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission
or if no recommendations are received within 60 days, then without
those recommendations the City may proceed with a public hearing
on the proposed redevelopment project.
§ 42-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 42-6
1:162
D. Public hearing.
(1) The City shall hold a public hearing on a proposed redevelopment
project after public notice by publication in a newspaper having a
general circulation within the corporate limits of the City.
(2) The notice shall:
(a) Describe the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing;
(b) Generally identify the redevelopment area subject to the
proposed redevelopment project; and
(c) Outline the general scope of the redevelopment project under
consideration.
E. Approval of plan. Following the hearing, the City may approve a
redevelopment project and the Redevelopment Plan for that project if
the City finds that:
(1) A feasible method exists for the relocation of any families who will
be displaced from the redevelopment area to decent, safe and
sanitary dwelling accommodations within their means and without
undue hardship to those families;
(2) The Redevelopment Plan substantially conforms to the
Comprehensive Development Plan of the City; and
(3) The Redevelopment Plan will afford maximum opportunity,
consistent with the sound needs of the City as a whole for the
redevelopment, rehabilitation, conservation, clearance or renewal
of the redevelopment area by private enterprise.
F. Modification to plan.
(1) The City may modify a Redevelopment Plan at any time.
(2) If the City modifies a Redevelopment Plan after the lease or sale of
real property in the redevelopment area, the modification may be
conditioned upon whatever approval of the purchaser, lessee or
successor in interest the City considers advisable and, in any event,
shall be subject to whatever rights at law or in equity a purchaser,
lessee or successor in interest is entitled to assert.
(3) If the proposed modification will substantially change the
Redevelopment Plan as previously approved by the City, the
modification shall be formally approved by the City as in the case of
an original plan.
G. Effect of approved plan or modification. Upon the approval by the City
of a Redevelopment Plan or of any modification of a Redevelopment
Plan:
§ 42-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-6
1:163
§ 42-7. Disposition of property in redevelopment area.
(1) The plan or modification shall be deemed to be in full force and
effect for the respective redevelopment area; and
(2) The City may then cause the plan or modification to be carried out
in accordance with its terms.
A. In general.
(1) The City may sell, lease or otherwise transfer real property
acquired by it for a redevelopment project to any person for
residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, educational or
other uses or for public use, or may retain that property for public
use in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan, subject to
whatever covenants, conditions and restrictions, including
covenants running with the land, that the City considers necessary
or desirable to assist in eliminating or preventing the development,
recurrence or spread of blight, slums or deterioration or otherwise
to carry out the purposes or objectives of this chapter.
(2) If the City acquires real property to be transferred in accordance
with a Redevelopment Plan, the City shall transfer that property as
rapidly as feasible in the public interest consistent with carrying
out the provisions of the Redevelopment Plan.
B. Fair value.
(1) Real property acquired by the City for a redevelopment project may
not be sold, leased, otherwise transferred or retained at less than
its fair value for uses in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan.
(2) In determining fair value for this purpose, the City shall take into
account and give consideration to:
(a) The uses provided in the Redevelopment Plan for that
property;
(b) The restrictions imposed upon and the covenants, conditions
and obligations assumed by the purchaser or lessee or the City
retaining the property; and
(c) The objectives of the Redevelopment Plan for the elimination
or prevention of the development, recurrence or spread of
blight, slums or deterioration.
C. Use of property by transferees.
(1) Purchasers or lessees and their successors in interest shall be
obligated to devote the real property only to the uses specified in
the Redevelopment Plan and may be further obligated to comply
with any other requirements that the City determines to be in the
public interest, including the obligation to begin within a
§ 42-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 42-7
1:164
reasonable time any improvements required by the Redevelopment
Plan.
(2) The City may provide in any instrument of conveyance to a private
purchaser or lessee that the purchaser or lessee shall be without
power to sell, lease or otherwise transfer the real property without
the prior written consent of the City until the purchaser or lessee
has completed the construction of any or all improvements that the
purchaser or lessee is obligated to construct on the property.
D. Recordation of plan or contract. Any redevelopment plan and any
contract for the transfer of real property under a Redevelopment Plan
(or any part or parts of the plan or contract that the City determines to
be appropriate) may be recorded in the land records of Washington
County so as to afford actual or constructive notice of the plan or
contract.
E. Competitive bidding process.
(1) The City may dispose of real property in a redevelopment area to
private persons only:
(a) Under the procedures provided in this subsection; or
(b) Under any other reasonable competitive bidding procedures
that the City prescribes.
(2) By publication of public notice in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the community (not less than 60 days prior to the
execution of any contract to sell, lease or otherwise transfer real
property and prior to the delivery of any instrument of conveyance
under the provisions of this section), the City may invite proposals
from and make available all pertinent information to private
redevelopers or other persons interested in undertaking to
redevelop, rehabilitate, conserve, clear or renew all or any part of a
redevelopment area. The notice shall identify the redevelopment
area or the applicable part of that area, shall state that proposals
by those interested shall be made within a specified period of not
less than 60 days after the first date of publication of the notice and
shall specify the office at which further available information may
be obtained.
(3) The City shall consider all proposals and the financial and legal
ability of the persons making the proposals to carry them out. The
City may negotiate with any persons for proposals for the purchase,
lease or other transfer of any real property acquired by the City in
the redevelopment area.
(4) The City may accept any proposal that it considers to be in the
public interest and in furtherance of the purposes and objectives of
this chapter. Thereafter, the City may execute and deliver
§ 42-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-7
1:165
§ 42-8. Condemned property.
Condemnation of property under the provisions of this chapter shall be in
accordance with the procedures provided in the Real Property Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 42-9. Encouragement of private enterprise.
To the greatest extent it determines to be feasible in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the City shall afford maximum opportunity,
consistent with the sound needs of the City as a whole, for the
redevelopment, rehabilitation, conservation, clearance or renewal of any
redevelopment area by private enterprise. The City shall give consideration
to this objective in exercising its powers under this chapter.
§ 42-10. General obligation bonds.
§ 42-11. Revenue and refunding bonds.
contracts, deeds, leases and other instruments and may take all
other steps necessary to effectuate these transfers.
F. Temporary operation of property by City. Pending the disposition of
property acquired under this chapter, the City may temporarily operate
and maintain that property, without regard to the preceding
requirements of this chapter, for any uses and purposes that the City
considers desirable, even though not in conformity with the
Redevelopment Plan.
G. Presumed validity of instruments. Any instrument executed by the City
and purporting to convey any right, title or interest in any property
under this chapter shall be conclusively presumed to have been
executed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter insofar as
the title or other interest of any bona fide purchaser, lessee or
transferee of that property is concerned.
A. Authority to issue. For the purposes of financing and carrying out a
redevelopment project and related activities, the City may issue and sell
its general obligations bonds.
B. Limitations. Bonds issued by the City under this section shall be issued
in the manner and within the limitations prescribed by applicable law
for the authorization and issuance by the City of general obligation
bonds and within any other limitations the City determines.
A. Authority to issue. In addition to the authority conferred by § 42-10 of
this chapter, the City may issue:
(1) Revenue bonds to finance the undertaking of any redevelopment
project and related activities; and
§ 42-7 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 42-11
1:166
(2) Refunding bonds for the payment or retirement of bonds previously
issued by it.
B. Source of payment; security.
(1) Bonds issued under this section shall be made payable, as to both
principal and interest, solely from the income, proceeds, revenues
and funds of the City derived from or held in connection with its
undertaking and carrying out redevelopment projects under this
chapter.
(2) Payment of the bonds, both as to principal and interest, may be
further secured by a pledge of any loan, grant or contribution from
the federal government or other source, in aid of any
redevelopment project of the City under this chapter, or by a
mortgage of any redevelopment project or any part of a
redevelopment project, title to which is in the City. In addition, the
City may enter into an indenture of trust with any private banking
institution of this state having trust powers and may agree in that
indenture of trust to any covenants and commitments required by
any purchaser for the adequate security of the bonds.
C. Bonds not indebtedness; exemption from restrictions. Bonds issued
under this section:
(1) Do not constitute an indebtedness within the meaning of any
constitutional or statutory debt limitation or restriction;
(2) Are not subject to the provisions of the City Charter or of any other
law relating to the authorization, issuance or sale of bonds; and
(3) Are hereby specifically exempted from the restrictions contained in
§§ 9, 10 and 11 of Article 31 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
D. Tax exemption. Bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental
purpose and, together with the interest payable on them and the
income derived from them, shall be exempted from all taxes.
E. Issuance, form and tenor.
(1) Bonds issued under this section shall be authorized by resolution or
ordinance of the Mayor and Council.
(2) The bonds may be issued in one or more series.
(3) The resolution or ordinance or the trust indenture or mortgage
issued pursuant to the resolution or ordinance may determine and
provide for:
(a) The date or dates of issue.
(b) The time or times of maturity.
§ 42-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-11
1:167
(c) The rate or rates of interest, not exceeding 6% per annum.
(d) The denomination or denominations of the bonds.
(e) The form of the bonds, either with or without coupon or
registered.
(f) Conversion or registration privileges.
(g) Rank or priority.
(h) The manner of execution.
(i) The medium and the place or places of payment.
(j) The terms of redemption, with or without premium.
(k) The manner in which the bonds are to be secured.
(l) Other characteristics as may be provided by the resolution,
ordinance, trust indenture or mortgage.
F. Sale.
(1) The bonds may be sold at not less than par at public sales held after
prior notice is published in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the area in which the City is located and in any other
medium of publication that the City determines. The bond may be
exchanged for other bonds on the basis of par.
(2) The bonds may be sold to the federal government at private sale at
not less than par. If less than all of the authorized principal amount
of the bonds is sold to the federal government, the balance may be
sold at private sale at not less than par at an interest cost to the
City that does not exceed the interest cost to the City of the portion
of the bonds sold to the federal government.
G. Execution. If any official of the City whose signature appears on any
bond or coupon issued under this chapter ceases to be an official of the
City before delivery of the bond or if any official of the City shall have
become such after the date of issue of any bond, the bond nevertheless
shall be a valid and binding obligation of the City in accordance with its
terms.
H. Negotiability. Any provision of any law to the contrary notwithstanding,
any bond issued under this chapter shall be fully negotiable.
I. Conformity with chapter. In any suit, action or proceeding involving the
validity or enforceability of any bond issued under this chapter or of any
security for it:
(1) Any bond that recites in substance that it has been issued by the
City in connection with a redevelopment project under this chapter
§ 42-11 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 42-11
1:168
§ 42-12. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application of any provision to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and
the application of the provision to persons or circumstances other than
those as to which it is held invalid shall not be affected. For this purpose,
the provisions of this chapter are declared severable.
Chapter 43
shall be conclusively deemed to have been issued for that purpose;
and
(2) The redevelopment project shall be conclusively deemed to have
been planned, located and carried out in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
J. Authorized investment.
(1) All banks, trust companies, bankers, savings banks and institutions,
building and loan associations, savings and loan associations,
investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking or
investment business, all insurance companies, insurance
associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business
and all executors, administrators, personal representatives,
curators, trustees and other fiduciaries may legally invest any
sinking funds, money or other funds belonging to them or within
their control in any bonds or other obligations issued by the City
under this chapter, provided that the bonds and other obligations
are secured by an agreement between the issuer and the federal
government in which the issuer agrees to borrow from the federal
government, and the federal government agrees to lend to the
issuer, prior to the maturity of the bonds or other obligations,
money in an amount (together with any other money irrevocably
committed to the payment of principal and interest on the bonds or
other obligations) that will suffice to pay the principal of the bonds
or other obligations with interest to maturity, which money under
the terms of the agreement are required to be used for the purpose
of paying the principal of and the interest on the bonds or other
obligations at their maturity. These bonds and other obligations
shall be authorized security for all public deposits.
(2) The purpose of this section is to authorize all persons, political
subdivisions and officers, public or private, to use any funds owned
or controlled by them for the purchase of any of these bonds or
other obligations of the City.
(3) Nothing contained in this section with regard to legal investments
shall be construed as relieving any person of any duty of exercising
reasonable care in selecting securities.
§ 42-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-12
1:169
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS: DOWNTOWN
REDEVELOPMENT AREA I
GENERAL REFERENCES
General authority of redevelopment
projects — See Ch. 42.
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
§ 43-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words have the meanings indicated:
PROJECT AREA — Downtown Redevelopment Area I, as established by
§ 43-2 of this chapter.
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN — The Redevelopment Plan for Downtown
Redevelopment Area I, as approved and adopted by § 43-3 of this chapter.
§ 43-2. Project area.
§ 43-3. Redevelopment Plan. [Amended 9-29-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-4316 ; 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-16]
The Redevelopment Plan identified as "Redevelopment Plan for Downtown
Redevelopment Area I," dated July 8, 1991, with amendments dated August
11, 1992, and June 7, 1996, is hereby approved and adopted. A copy of the
Redevelopment Plan, as amended, shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk as a permanent public record, available for public inspection and
information.
A. Establishment of area. A redevelopment project area for the City of
Hagerstown, to be known as the "Downtown Redevelopment Area I," is
hereby established.
B. Description of area. The geographic confines of Downtown
Redevelopment Area I are as shown and described on the Project Area
Map identified as "Drawing No. 82-054-01," dated March 1991. A copy
of this Project Area Map shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk as a permanent public record, available for public inspection and
information.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that all work necessary to comply with any
new requirements or applications imposed by this ordinance shall be completed promptly
and, in any event, within 60 days from the issuance of a repair order by the Building
Inspector, unless that 60-day period is extended by the Building Inspector, for good cause
shown, in accordance with Section I of the Redevelopment Plan for Downtown
Redevelopment Area I, and that if the amendments approved and adopted by this
ordinance do not meet the requirements of Chapter 42 of the City Code as to the content
of a redevelopment plan or as to the procedures for the preparation, approval, and
adoption of amendments to a redevelopment plan, those requirements are hereby waived
and the amendments approved and adopted by this ordinance are hereby exempted from
those requirements.
§ 42-12 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 43-4
1:170
§ 43-4. Land use and zoning.
Land uses and zoning in the project area shall be as provided in Section D
of the Redevelopment Plan.
§ 43-5. Acquisition of property; relocation.
§ 43-6. City action upon property acquisition.
Upon its acquisition of any property under § 43-5 of this chapter, the City
may undertake any of the actions described in Section F of the
Redevelopment Plan.
§ 43-7. Obligations of redeveloper.
The regulations, controls and restrictions specified in Section G of the
Redevelopment Plan shall be imposed upon the sale, lease or other
conveyance to a redeveloper of any property acquired by the City under
§ 43-5 of this chapter.
§ 43-8. Property rehabilitation standards.
A. Acquisition authorized. The City may acquire, by purchase or
condemnation, for demolition, clearance, rehabilitation or
redevelopment purposes or for use as public facilities, the fee simple
interest or any lesser interest in and to the following properties within
the project area, together with all right, title, interest and estate that
the owners of those interests may have in all streets, alleys, ways or
lanes, public or private, contained within or abutting the project area:
[Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-16]
(1) Any property specifically designated for acquisition on Exhibit B
(Property Acquisition Map, dated June 7, 1996, City of Hagerstown
Drawing No. 82-054-03) of the Redevelopment Plan.
(2) Any one or more other properties that, as provided in Section E2 of
the Redevelopment Plan, the City Administrator considers to be
necessary and proper to effect full implementation of the
Redevelopment Plan.
B. Relocation. The relocation of individuals, families, business concerns
and others who might be displaced as a result of the acquisition of
property under this section shall be undertaken as provided in Section
E3 of the Redevelopment Plan.
A. In general, the rehabilitation standards set forth in Exhibit C (Property
Rehabilitation Standards for Downtown Redevelopment Area I, dated
July 8, 1991, with amendments dated August 11, 1992) shall apply to all
properties within the project area. [Amended 9-29-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-417]
§ 43-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-8
1:171
§ 43-9. Review and approval of development plans.
§ 43-10. Board of Technical Appeals.
§ 43-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of Section I of the Redevelopment
Plan or who violates any provision of the Property Rehabilitation Standards
established by the Redevelopment Plan or who violates any order of or
condition or restriction imposed by the Building Inspector or the Board
B. Compliance required. The owners of all properties within the project
area, whether those properties are occupied or vacant, shall comply
with these property rehabilitation standards within the periods, in the
manner and subject to the reviews and approvals required by Section I
of the Redevelopment Plan.
A. Designs and plans. Designs and plans for all exterior rehabilitation,
renovation or change of any kind for all new construction and for all
demolition in the project area, whether the proposed work is required
by the Redevelopment Plan or is being undertaken voluntarily or
otherwise, shall be submitted to the Building Inspector for review and
required approvals as provided in Section I of the Redevelopment Plan.
B. Required approvals. All approvals required by Section I of the
Redevelopment Plan and all building or other permits or approvals
otherwise required by law shall be obtained before proceeding with the
proposed work. These approvals and permits may be issued only if the
Building Inspector determines that the proposed work is consistent
with the objectives and requirements of the Redevelopment Plan and, in
addition, the Preservation Design District Commission approves all
proposed work subject to its approval under Article III of Chapter 68 of
this Code.
A. Appeals to Board. Any person aggrieved by a decision, order or other
action of the Building Inspector under the Redevelopment Plan may
request a hearing before the Board of Technical Appeals as provided in
Section I9 of the Redevelopment Plan.
B. Waivers from Board. The Board may waive compliance with one or more
of the requirements of the Redevelopment Plan, in accordance with and
under the conditions specified in Section I9 of the Redevelopment Plan.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that all work necessary to comply with any
new requirements or applications imposed by this ordinance shall be completed promptly
and, in any event, within 60 days from the issuance of a repair order by the Building
Inspector, unless that 60-day period is extended by the Building Inspector, for good cause
shown, in accordance with Section I of the Redevelopment Plan for Downtown
Redevelopment Area I and that the amendments approved and adopted by this ordinance
do not meet the requirements of Chapter 42 of the City Code as to the content of a
redevelopment plan or as to the procedures for the preparation, approval, and adoption of
amendments to a redevelopment plan, those requirements are hereby waived and the
amendments approved and adopted by this ordinance are hereby exempted from those
requirements.
§ 43-8 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 43-11
1:172
of Technical Appeals under the Redevelopment Plan shall be guilty of a
municipal infraction and subject to a fine of $100 for each initial violation
and $200 for each day thereafter that the violation continues.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 46
ADULT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land management — See Ch. 140.
§ 46-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, welfare, safety, morals
and general welfare of the citizens of the City by addressing the deleterious
secondary effects of certain adult-oriented businesses operating within the
City: to prevent the impairment of or detriment to neighboring properties;
to promote safe, sanitary conditions and combat the spread of sexually
transmitted disease; and to protect children who may be attracted to such
establishments. This chapter does not have, and is not intended to have, the
purpose or effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative material or to infringe upon the reasonable exercise of
a legitimate business.
§ 46-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ADULT BUSINESS — Any commercial establishment located in the City
that:
Has 5% or more of its stock on the premises or has 5% or more
of its stock on display in books, magazines, periodicals, photographs,
drawings, sculptures, motion pictures, films, videos or other similar
images by any medium which depict specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas;
A.
Displays on its premises, or provides for display or viewing on its
premises, any motion pictures, films, videos or other similar images
by any medium which depict specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
B.
Has 5% or more of its stock on the premises or has 5% or more of
its stock on display in products, devices or novelties designed or sold
primarily for the purpose of stimulation of human genitalia or other
sexual gratification.
C.
§ 43-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:173
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
DEPARTMENT — The City Clerk's office of the City of Hagerstown,
Maryland.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — This term has the same meaning as
defined in § 68-38 of the Code of the City of Hagerstown.18
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — This term has the same meaning as
defined in § 68-38 of the Code of the City of Hagerstown.19
§ 46-3. License required.
§ 46-4. Application for license; fee.
An applicant for an adult business license shall register with and provide
the following information on the appropriate application form provided by
the Department:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage or maintain
an adult business in the City without first obtaining an adult business
license from the Department. Adult businesses currently in existence
and actually operating as of the effective date of this chapter shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days of
its effective date.
B. Each adult business license issued shall expire on the anniversary of its
issuance. Applicants shall apply for a renewal license 30 days prior to
the expiration of the current license.
A. The address at which the adult business will be operated.
B. The name, street address and telephone number of all owners of the
adult business.
C. If the owner of the adult business is not an individual, the applicant
shall provide the name, street address, resident agent, resident agent
address and telephone number of the owner. [Amended 7-27-2004 by
Ord. No. O-04-36]
D. The name, street address and telephone number of a designated
contact person for the owner(s).
E. A nonrefundable annual license fee of $250.
F. The Department shall issue or deny a license to an applicant within 30
days of receipt of the completed application and license fee. [Added
1-25-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-02]
18.Editor's Note: See now § 140-19.
19.Editor's Note: See now § 140-19.
§ 46-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 46-5
1:174
§ 46-5. Adult business regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all adult businesses in the City:
§ 46-6. Denial, revocation or suspension. [Amended 1-25-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-02]
An adult business license may be denied, as provided for herein, or revoked
or suspended at any time by the Department if, after receipt of written
notice, the owner fails to eliminate any violations of the regulations
contained herein within 10 days. Any applicant or licensee who has a license
denied, revoked or suspended shall have a right to appeal such action
of the Department to the Circuit Court for Washington County, Maryland,
within 30 days of receipt of the notice of said action. Denial, revocation or
suspension of an adult business license shall be in addition to, and not in
substitution of, the penalties provided for in § 46-8 of this chapter.
§ 46-7. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not effect the other provisions or applications of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
§ 46-8. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the sanctions outlined herein, any person who owns, operates,
manages or maintains an adult business without a license, or in violation
of the regulations contained in this chapter, shall be punished as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II of the Code of the City of
A. No adult business shall operate or be open to the public between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. No adult business shall be located within 500 feet of another legally
operating and licensed adult business. Adult businesses existing and
actually operating on the effective date of this chapter shall be exempt
from this regulation.
C. No adult business shall permit anyone under the age of 18 years of age
to be on the premises of the adult business for any purpose.
D. No booth, cubicle or area used for viewing motion pictures, films,
movies, videos or other similar images by the general public shall be
capable of being completely closed. Any such booth, cubicle or area
shall be and remain open at all times.
E. No booth or cubicle used for viewing motion pictures, films, movies,
videos or other similar images by the general public shall have any
holes or openings, nor shall any booth or cubicle be accessible by any
adjacent booth or cubicle, except for the primary opening for ingress
and egress to said booth or cubicle.
§ 46-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-8
1:175
Hagerstown. Each day any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 47
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 47, Adequate Public Facilities, adopted 4-25-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-04, as amended, was repealed 3-25-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-07.]
Chapter 48
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 39.
Excessive use of police services — See Ch. 95.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
§ 48-1. Adoption of County Ordinance.
A. The Board of County Commissioners, as the duly constituted legislative
body for Washington County, Maryland, enacted a certain ordinance to
provide for the regulation of alarm systems in Washington County and a
resolution to adopt a fine schedule (hereinafter called "resolution").
Said ordinance and resolution, having been enacted on February 3,
2009. The Washington County Alarm Ordinance and Resolution are
incorporated herein and made a part hereof as from time to time
amended as the Alarm Ordinance of the City of Hagerstown.
B. That three copies of the Alarm Ordinance and Resolution are on file in
the office of the City Clerk for the City of Hagerstown at 1 East Franklin
Street, Hagerstown, Maryland, and the office of the Chief of Police for
the City of Hagerstown at 50 North Burhans Boulevard, Hagerstown,
Maryland.
C. All references in the County Ordinance and Resolution to "County" shall
be interpreted to include and apply to the City of Hagerstown.
D. All resolutions, rules and regulations adopted now or in the future by
Washington County which are applicable in the implementation of the
Alarm Ordinance of the County shall apply to the City of Hagerstown.
§ 46-8 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 48-1
1:176
Chapter 52
AUCTIONS AND SPECIAL SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddlers and transient merchants — See Ch.
176.
Signs — See Ch. 204.
§ 48-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-1
1:177

ARTICLE I
Auctions
[Adopted as Ch. 31, Art. I, of the 1967 Code]
§ 52-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to cry any sale within the corporate
limits of the City without first having obtained a license therefor.
§ 52-2. License period; fee. [Amended 2-23-1971]
§ 52-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any person or persons violating any provision of this article shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be issued only
on an annual basis for a period beginning January 1 and ending on the
following December 31.
B. For each and every license so issued, there shall be charged a fee of
$25, regardless of the date that such license may be applied for and
issued after January 1 of any year. [Amended 11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-46]
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-3
1:179

ARTICLE II
Special Sales
[Adopted as Ch. 31, Art. V, of the 1967 Code]
§ 52-4. Regulations prerequisite to issuance of license.
Every person, whether principal or agent, who has not been engaged in a
permanent business within the corporate limits of the City for a period of at
least 12 months and who desires to enter into or is about to begin a special
sale, auction or advertising campaign of any goods, wares or merchandise
whatsoever, including the occasions when the same shall be represented
or held forth to be sales of a bankrupt, assignee or person about to quit
business or to be goods damaged by fire or water or goods advertised in
any other attractive or conspicuous manner whatsoever, shall, before being
granted a license to conduct such business, apply to the City Clerk and
comply with each of the following regulations:
§ 52-5. Limitation on merchandise offered for sale; hours of sale.
§ 52-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any person or persons violating any provision of this article shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
A. Pay the sum of $200 for each month or fraction thereof such person may
be engaged in the business above mentioned. [Amended 11-24-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-46]
B. File with the Clerk a complete inventory of all goods, wares and
merchandise which the person has on hand for the purpose of making
the sale and make affidavit as to the correctness thereof.
C. File with the Clerk a sum of not less than $2,000, the same to be held by
the Clerk for a period of 60 days after the close of the aforesaid sale.
Such sum may be used to pay any fines incurred by breach of any
provision of this article and may be levied on for payment of any
judgment which might have been secured against the person
conducting any such sale in any court of record. [Amended
11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-46]
A. Any person, whether principal or agent, who shall sell or offer for sale
any merchandise not constituting a part of the stock described for sale
without stating clearly and distinctly to the purchaser or without
causing an announcement to be made by the auctioneer, in the case of
an auction sale, that such merchandise is not a part of the stock
advertised for sale shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. No public auction of such goods, wares or merchandise shall be
conducted between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.
§ 52-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-6
1:181
Chapter 57
BICYCLES AND OTHER HUMAN-POWERED VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 60.
§ 57-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
BICYCLE — A vehicle that is designed to be operated by human power,
has two or three wheels, of which one is more than 14 inches in diameter,
and has a wheel configuration as follows: If the bicycle has two wheels,
with both wheels in tandem, or if the vehicle has three wheels, with one
front wheel and with two rear wheels that are spaced equal distant from
the center of the bicycle, or a vehicle that is otherwise considered a bicycle
under the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
BIKE LANE — Any portion of a roadway or shoulder designated for single
directional bicycle flow.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Minibikes, motorbikes, motor scooters, go-carts and
other mechanically propelled vehicles of a similar nature.
PLAY VEHICLES — Skateboards, roller skates, soap box vehicles and other
similar devices. Play vehicles shall not include tricycles and/or other threeor-
more-wheeled toys commonly used by small children under the
supervision of an adult, parent or other responsible person unless specified
herein.
ROADWAY — Any part of a highway, street, road or alley that is improved,
designed or ordinarily used for motor vehicle travel other than the shoulder
or designated bike path.
§ 57-2. Proper riding control; compliance with traffic regulations
required. [Amended 7-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-20]
The rider or operator of a bicycle or play vehicle, as defined herein, shall
have said vehicle under proper control and shall not operate or propel the
bicycle or play vehicle on any streets of the City or upon any City-owned
property, of whatsoever nature or kind, wherever located, including but not
limited to parking lots and public sidewalks of the City, recklessly or at a
rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper so as to endanger the
person and/or the property of any person. All operators of bicycles or play
vehicles shall at all times comply with all other traffic regulations in force in
the City of Hagerstown and pursuant to the traffic regulations for the State
of Maryland.
§ 52-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 57-3
1:182
§ 57-3. (Reserved)20
§ 57-4. Riding in parks and playgrounds restricted. [Amended
8-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-39]
It shall be unlawful for any person, operator or group of persons except
for a law enforcement officer and emergency services personnel acting in
the performance of his duties to ride or operate a bicycle, motor vehicle or
play vehicle, as defined in this chapter, in any park or playground owned,
operated and/or maintained by the City of Hagerstown, except in those
areas designated as "riding areas" or except in such areas as are public
ways or public highways or roads and commonly used in said park or
playground areas.
§ 57-5. Impounding and disposition of vehicles in violation.
§ 57-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Any bicycle, motor vehicle or play vehicle, as defined herein, found to
be in violation of this chapter shall be impounded by the Police
Department and removed from the public thoroughfares of the City.
B. In the event that any bicycles, play vehicles or motor vehicles, as
defined herein, are located or turned into the Police Department that
have been abandoned within the City of Hagerstown, the Police
Department shall impound the same if they are unable to locate the true
owners of said bicycle, play vehicle or motor vehicle.
C. If any of the foregoing impounded bicycles, play vehicles and/or motor
vehicles are not redeemed within 30 days from the impounding of the
same if the owner is not known or within 30 days of the impounding
where the owner is known and has been notified in writing of the
impoundment of said bicycle, play vehicle and/or motor vehicle then
said Police Department, in compliance with the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Chief of Police, who is the chief administrative
officer in charge of this program, shall sell said bicycles, play vehicles
and/or motor vehicles at a public sale to the highest bidder, after having
been duly advertised by publishing notice of the time and place of such
sale at least once 10 days prior to the sale in some newspaper published
in the City.
A. Any person found guilty by the court of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and may be ordered by
the court to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000.
[Amended 8-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-39]
B. In addition to the penalties set forth in Subsection A in the event that
any law enforcement officer acting within the jurisdictional limits of the
20.Editor’s Note: Former § 57-3, Riding in parking lots and sidewalks prohibited, as
amended, was repealed 7-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-20.
§ 57-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-6
1:183
Chapter 60
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and other human-powered
vehicles — See Ch. 57.
Railroads — See Ch. 194.
Snow emergencies — See Ch. 207.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
City of Hagerstown observes any minor child operating a play vehicle,
motor vehicle and/or bicycle in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the law enforcement officer may confiscate the play vehicle,
motor vehicle and/or bicycle operated by said minor child and shall
return said play vehicle, motor vehicle and/or bicycle to said minor's
parent or guardian. The law enforcement officer shall be authorized to
confiscate a bicycle, play vehicle and/or motor vehicle as defined by this
chapter under the provisions of this chapter whether or not he or she
issues a citation for a violation of this section.
C. In addition to the fines and the penalties herein described, the Mayor
and Council of the City of Hagerstown may avail themselves of any and
all civil and equitable remedies for the purposes of stopping continuing
offenses of this chapter.
§ 57-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 57-6
1:184
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 60-1. Definitions; continuation of prior enactments.
§ 60-2. Authority of Mayor and Council; effect of sign placement;
form of orders; amendment of regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Maryland Vehicle Law (Titles 11 through 27 of
the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland), as now
in force or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. The term "holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and include the
following: New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, Good Friday,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
A. Authority of Mayor and Council.
(1) The Mayor and Council of the City, except as otherwise directed by
this chapter, resolution or ordinance, shall have the power and is
hereby authorized to regulate the operation and parking of vehicles
within the corporate limits of the City by the erection or placing of
proper signs or markers indicating prohibited or limited parking,
restricted speed areas, one-way streets, through or arterial streets,
stop streets, U-turns, play zones, quiet zones and other signs or
markers indicating the place and manner of operating or parking
vehicles within the corporate limits of the City. The Mayor and
Council shall also have the power and is hereby authorized to
regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and
sidewalks of the City by the erection or placing of proper signs or
markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. The Mayor and
Council shall also have the power to designate bus stops and
taxicab stands and to erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles
other than buses and taxicabs in such stands. The Mayor and
Council shall also have the power to designate truck routes and to
regulate the parking of vehicles of various sizes and weights.
(2) The Mayor and Council shall further have power and is hereby
authorized to secure all such necessary signs or markers to be
erected or placed on any street or part of a street when it deems
such action necessary.
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-2
1:185
§ 60-3. Enforcement. [Amended 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-22;
6-18-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-13]
This chapter and the regulations adopted thereby may be enforced by peace
officers. The immobilizing and impounding provisions contained in § 60-9
hereof, and the parking provisions contained in Article IV, Article IVA and
Article V hereof, may also be enforced by the auxiliary police and any
individual duly authorized and assigned by the City Administrator or his
designee, all hereinafter called "enforcement officer," to enforce municipal
infractions as provided in Article 23 A, § 3, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
§ 60-4. Authority to summon witnesses.
All police officers shall have authority to summons witnesses to give
testimony under oath upon any charge preferred under this chapter.
§ 60-5. Applicability to governmental vehicles; exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon
the streets shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by
the United States, the state, the county or the City, subject to such specific
exceptions set forth in this chapter with reference to authorized emergency
vehicles.
§ 60-6. Emergency vehicles.
The operator(s) of an emergency vehicle(s) using the highways, streets
and alleys within the corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown shall be
governed by the Maryland Transportation Article, § 21-106.
(3) The Mayor and Council is further empowered and authorized to
mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and
directing the flow of traffic when, in its judgment, such action is
necessary.
B. The existence of such signs or markers at any place within the
corporate limits of the City shall be prima facie evidence that such signs
or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the Mayor
and Council and in accordance with the provisions of this section.
C. All of the orders issued by the Mayor and Council pursuant to this
section shall be in writing and filed with the City Clerk.
D. Regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
amended or added to from time to time, as deemed necessary by the
Mayor and Council, by ordinance, resolution or motion adopted in
accordance with law.
§ 60-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-7
1:186
§ 60-7. Applicability to animals and animal-drawn vehicles.
Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon
a highway, street or alley within the corporate limits of the City of
Hagerstown shall be subject to provisions of this chapter, except as such by
their nature can have no application.
§ 60-8. Vehicles used for advertising purposes.
No person shall operate or park on any street any vehicle for the primary
purpose of advertising without first having procured a permit from the Chief
of Police.
§ 60-9. Immobilizing and/or impounding of vehicles for unsatisfied
summonses or citations. [Added 4-26-1988 by Res. No. 1988-13;
amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-11; 6-22-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-14; 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-15]
A. Authorization. When any vehicle is found parked or moving at any time
on any street in the City of Hagerstown against which there are three or
more unsatisfied or unpaid summonses, citations for parking violations
or any other legal processes, and when at least 30 days have elapsed
since the issuance of the third unsatisfied summons, citation for
parking violations or any other legal process, the Hagerstown
Department of Police or any person, official or enforcement officer
assigned to enforce this chapter is hereby authorized and empowered
to install or cause to be installed vehicle immobilization equipment,
hereinafter called "boot" or "booting," on the vehicle or to remove or
cause to be removed said vehicle, either by towing, conveying or in any
other manner and impounding pursuant to the provisions of § 60-28.1 of
the Code. The decision to boot or tow shall be in the discretion of the
enforcement officer based upon the availability of boots and the
location of the vehicle.
B. Notice of booting. A notice shall be placed on the vehicle as well as on
the boot that:
(1) The vehicle has been booted by the City of Hagerstown for a
violation of this section.
(2) The owner of the vehicle has the right to contest the validity of the
booting of the vehicle at a hearing within 48 hours of the
immobilization by contacting the City of Hagerstown during
regular business hours or the Hagerstown Police Department after
hours.
(3) Any vehicle not claimed within two business days may be towed
and impounded as set forth herein.
C. Responsibility of owner. The registered owner of a vehicle having
against it three or more violations as set forth herein shall be presumed
to be the driver and owner of the vehicle at the time the summons,
§ 60-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-9
1:187
§ 60-10. Applicability to private property and public property.
[Added 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-14]
citation for parking violations or any other legal process was issued
and shall be severally responsible for the offenses and the costs of the
impoundment, except where the use of the vehicle was obtained by the
operator without the owner's consent.
D. Hearing rights.
(1) Time. The owner shall have a right to contest the booting and/or
impoundment of the vehicle by requesting a hearing. The request
for hearing shall be granted within 48 hours, excluding Sundays
and holidays, from the time the owner files the application for
hearing before the hearing officer.
(2) Hearing officer. The hearing shall be held before a hearing officer
consisting of the following: a supervisor in the Department of
Public Works during regular business hours or any sworn police
supervisor after hours.
(3) Procedure.
(a) The hearing shall be held in an informal manner.
(b) The findings of the hearing officer shall be in writing. A copy of
the same shall be furnished to the owner.
(c) If it is determined by the hearing officer that the vehicle should
not have been booted and/or impounded, the owner shall not
be required to pay the towing, storage and preservation
charges provided for under this section to secure the release of
said vehicle. If the charges were paid prior to the hearing, a
refund shall be made to the owner who paid said charges in
order to have the vehicle released.
(d) The decision of the hearing officer shall not have any effect on
or be considered a determination of the outstanding
unsatisfied summonses, citations or any other legal processes
against the vehicle impounded.
(e) The owner is and shall be entitled to a hearing in the District
Court on said charges.
A. A person may not drive, operate, or maintain a motor vehicle in
violation of the provisions of this chapter on any private property that is
used by the public in general.
B. A person may not drive, operate, or maintain a motor vehicle in
violation of the provisions of this chapter on property that is owned or
controlled by the State of Maryland, a political subdivision of the state,
or the Board of Education, that is open to vehicular traffic and used by
the public in general.
§ 60-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-10
1:188
C. Any person who violates any provision of this § 60-10 is in violation of
Chapter 60 to the same extent and is subject to the same penalties as if
the motor vehicle were driven, operated or maintained on a highway,
street, or alley.
§ 60-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-10
1:189

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 60-11. Speed limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle over any street
in the City at a rate of speed in excess of 25 miles per hour, except that the
speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts thereof
contained on a list maintained by the City Clerk are hereby established at
the rate of speed indicated.
§ 60-12. Cruising. [Added 11-28-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-43]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CRUISING — Driving a motor vehicle on a street past a traffic control
point, designated by a police officer, in the designated no-cruising area
enumerated herein, three or more times within any two-hour period
from 7:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. Passing the traffic control point a third
time under the conditions stated herein shall constitute unnecessary,
repetitive driving and cruising.
PERSON HAVING CARE, CUSTODY OR CONTROL OF A MOTOR
VEHICLE — The owner of said vehicle if the owner is present in the
vehicle at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the owner is
driving the vehicle at the time of the violation; or if the owner is not
present in the vehicle at the time of the violation, the person operating
the vehicle at the time of the violation.
TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT — A clearly marked and consistent
reference point on a designated street, as determined and marked from
time to time by officers of the Hagerstown Police Department.
B. Cruising prohibited; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to
engage in cruising, as defined in this section, within the corporate
limits of the City of Hagerstown in the designated area provided
hereinafter. For purposes of this section, the individual having care,
custody or control of a motor vehicle shall be considered the person
cruising, without regard as to whether that person was actually driving
the motor vehicle each time it passed the traffic control point. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any municipal,
governmental, police, fire, ambulance or other emergency vehicle when
the same is being operated in an official capacity. Additionally, this
section shall not apply to any duly licensed public transportation
vehicle, or any vehicle being utilized for business or commercial
purposes.
C. Designated no-cruising area. The designated area within the corporate
boundaries of the City of Hagerstown to which this section applies
means:
§ 60-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-12
1:191
§ 60-13. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets contained on a list maintained by the City
Clerk are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 60-14. Intersections.
(1) That part of US Route 40 West (Franklin Street and the Dual
Highway) between Cleveland Avenue on the east and Potomac
Street on the west;
(2) That part of US Route 40 East (Washington Street and the Dual
Highway) between Potomac Street on the west and Cleveland
Avenue on the east; and
(3) That part of North Potomac Street between Franklin Street on the
north and Washington Street on the south.
D. Posting. At reasonable intervals within the designated area, and at
every point where a public street or alley provides ingress to the
designated area, there shall be posted signs which designate the area
as a no-cruising area between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a municipal
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $250.
F. Any person issued a citation alleging a violation of any of the provisions
of this section may elect to pay a preset fine of $125. [Added
7-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-28]21
A. Stop intersections. The intersections contained on a list maintained by
the City Clerk are hereby established as stop intersections, and official
stop signs shall be erected upon those highways designated as
controlled by stop signs in such a position as to face traffic approaching
said intersection on such highway.
B. Yield intersections. The intersections contained on a list maintained by
the City Clerk are hereby established as yield intersections, and official
yield signs shall be erected upon those highways designated as
controlled by yield signs in such a position as to face traffic approaching
said intersection on such highway.
C. Turns at intersections. No person shall make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right or all) at any of the intersections contained on a
list maintained by the City Clerk.
D. Through highways. The streets or parts of streets contained on a list
maintained by the City Clerk are hereby designated as through
21.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Expiration, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 8-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-25.
§ 60-12 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-14
1:192
§ 60-15. Driving vehicles over curbs and sidewalks.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle across, over or upon a curb or
sidewalk along any street except within the area and at those places where
there has lawfully been permitted and constructed an entrance to a private
road or driveway or except in those cases where it is reasonably necessary
to do so in making a delivery of coal, lumber or other heavy material to
the adjacent property, and then only with the permission and consent of the
abutting property owner.
§ 60-16. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of those streets contained on a list maintained by the City Clerk. Each of
these traffic control devices shall conform to the manual and specifications
of the State Highway Administration. (Annotated Code 1957, Article 66 1/2,
§ 15-106;22 Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 2.)
highways, and stop signs shall be placed at all entrances to said
through highways from intersecting highways, within the limits
indicated, except where yield signs may be provided for in the
designation.
22.Editor's Note: See now § 25-106 of the Transportation Article.
§ 60-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-16
1:193

ARTICLE III
Traffic Control Devices
[NOTE: This article may be repealed as enforcement and
specifications of traffic control devices are defined in the Maryland
Vehicle Law, Transportation Article, and supersede local
regulations.]
§ 60-17. Speed-monitoring systems in school zones. [Added
1-31-2012 by Ord. No. O-11-26]
A. The City of Hagerstown hereby adopts § 21-809 of the Transportation
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, hereinafter "the Law," and
incorporates the terms thereof into this section except as modified
herein.
B. That the City of Hagerstown Police Department is authorized to
implement the use of speed-monitoring systems within school zones
pursuant to the Law.
C. That reasonable notice be provided by newspaper and on the City
website of the enactment of this section as required by the Law.
D. That pursuant to Subsection (b)(v) of the Law that for at least 30 days
after the monitoring system is placed that a violation be enforced only
by the issuance of a warning.
E. That pursuant to Subsection (b)(vii) of the Law if unmanned stationary
speed-monitoring systems are to be used that the appropriate notices
and signs indicating their use be provided in accordance with the
provisions of the Law and that their operation be limited to the period
6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, as provided in the Law
and that appropriate training of the operators and calibration of the
system be provided as required in the Law.
F. The City Council shall establish by separate ordinance school zones and
maximum speed limits where not already established by the State
Highway Administration pursuant to § 21-803.1 of the Transportation
Article.
G. The City Police shall be the operators of the speed monitoring system
but may enter into an agreement with a contractor to supply and
maintain the equipment.
H. That Subsection (c)(2) of the Law is hereby amended to read as follows:
(c)(2) A civil penalty is established of $40 per violation, subject,
however, to a discount of $5 if paid within seven days of the issuance
of the citation or subject to an additional late fee of $20 if paid more
than 30 days after the issuance of the citation.
§ 60-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-17
1:195
§ 60-18. School zones. [Added 1-31-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-01]
I. The immobilizing and impounding provisions of § 60-9 of the
Hagerstown City Code apply to a failure to pay citations under this
section.
A. The City of Hagerstown pursuant to § 21-803.1(a)(2)(ii) may establish
school zones for the purpose of regulating maximum speed limits in
such areas.
B. The City of Hagerstown does hereby designate the following school
zones within the City:
(1) Northern Avenue within 200 yards of Fountaindale Elementary
(901 Northern Avenue) and Northern Middle (701 Northern
Avenue), 200 yards each direction.
(2) Pennsylvania Avenue within 200 yards of Fountaindale Elementary
or North Hagerstown High (1200 Pennsylvania Avenue), 200 yards
each direction.
(3) South Potomac Street within 200 yards of Bester Elementary (30
East Memorial Boulevard).
(4) Memorial Boulevard for 200 yards east of Potomac Street.
(5) South Potomac Street within 200 yards each direction of Emma K
Daub Elementary (1121 South Potomac Street).
(6) Salem Avenue within 200 yards of Delaware Lane.
(7) Washington Avenue within 200 yards of Alexander Street.
(8) Franklin Street within 200 yards of Winter Street.
(9) Marshall Street within 200 yards each direction of Western Heights
(1300 Marshall Street) or the Marshall Street School 200 yards
each direction (1350 Marshall Street).
(10) Pangborn Boulevard within 200 yards of Pangborn Elementary
(195 Pangborn Boulevard).
(11)Washington Street 200 yards west from Potomac Street.
(12) South Potomac Street 200 yards south of Washington Street.
(13) Oak Ridge Drive within 200 yards each direction of the Washington
County Technical School (50 West Oak Ridge Drive) or the Antietam
Academy.
(14) Hagers Crossing Drive within 200 yards of Jonathan Hager
Elementary School (12615 Sedgwick Way). [Added 2-21-2017 by
Ord. No. O-17-01]
§ 60-17 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-18
1:196
§ 60-19. (Reserved)
§ 60-20. (Reserved)
§ 60-21. (Reserved)
§ 60-22. (Reserved)
C. All distances which name schools would be measured from the property
line of the school property.
D. All distances involving streets would be measured from the center line
of the street.
E. To the extent that the State Highway Administration has already
established school zones or establishes them in the future with respect
to the above-mentioned schools which are different from those
designated above, such State Highway Administration designations
shall control.
F. Appropriate signage designating the school zones shall be erected
pursuant to the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland and the guidelines for school zones as established by the
State Highway Administration.
G. In accordance with § 21-809(b)(1)(v) of the Transportation Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, this ordinance must provide that when a
speed monitoring system is placed in a location where one had not
previously been moved or placed, the City may not issue a citation until
signage has been installed in accordance with § 21-809 of said Article,
and for at least 15 calendar days after said signage is installed. [Added
2-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-01]
§ 60-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-22
1:197

ARTICLE IV
Parking, Stopping and Standing Generally
§ 60-23. Parking, stopping and standing restricted.
A. Parking is prohibited in the following specific places:
(1) When signs prohibiting parking are erected on narrow streets, no
person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(2) When signs are erected upon approaches to hazardous or
congested places, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated places.
(3) No person shall park a vehicle within an alley or upon a street or
highway in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the
free movement of vehicular traffic.
(4) No automobile or vehicle of any description shall be parked and/or
left unattended upon any street, highway, alley or public place in
the City for a continuous period longer than 48 hours.
(5) When signs are erected or posted in each block giving such notice,
no person shall park any vehicle, either attended or unattended,
upon any street over which any scheduled parade shall pass, notice
of such scheduled parade having been given to the public by radio
announcement or through the columns of the local press at least 12
hours in advance.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for longer than
the time limit shown at any time between the hours specified of any
day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of
streets contained on a list maintained by the City Clerk.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle between the
hours specified of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of
the streets or parts of streets contained on a list maintained by the
City Clerk.
(8) When a section of the curb along any street is colored red by the
application of paint or other material and by proper authority, no
person shall park a vehicle there at any time.
(9) When a section of the curb along any street is designated by signs
for loading and unloading, no person shall stop, stand or park in
said designated area except for that purpose.
(10)No person shall park a vehicle other than a motorbus at any place
established and designated as a motorbus stop or station.
(11)No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab at any place
established as a taxicab stand.
§ 60-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-23
1:199
(12) Upon those streets or public parking lots which have been marked
or signed for angle parking, no person shall park a vehicle
otherwise than is indicated by such marks or signs.
(13)No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of
the following places: [Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-22]
(a) On a sidewalk.
(b) At a location which obstructs the entrance to any private
driveway or the entrance to any building or garage or which
prevents passage over and upon any private driveway or
private vehicle entrance connecting private property with an
abutting street.
(c) Within an intersection.
(d) Within eight feet of a fire hydrant.
(e) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of such entrance.
(14)Within 15 feet in either direction from a bus stop sign.
(15) Nearer than three feet to the vehicle parked in front of or in the
rear thereof.
(16) For the duration of an emergency, within 25 feet of any sign or
device posted by the Police Department indicating that parking is
prohibited because of an emergency, unless such sign or device
sets forth the area in which parking is prohibited because of an
emergency, then, in such cases, within the designated area.
(17) At a location contrary to directions given by any member of the
Police Department or Fire Department to keep clear fire lines or
police lines or to facilitate the flow of traffic at or near the scene of
a fire, accident or other emergency, provided that the prohibition of
parking at such a location is made known to the person so parking.
(18) In front of any barricade or sign that has been placed for the
purpose of closing a street.
(19)Within 25 feet of, in either direction from, any treadle- or vehicleoperated
control of any traffic signal on the side of the street on
which the treadle or control is located.
(20)No person shall park a vehicle at any place on any street posted
with signs properly designating work being performed by various
City departments, including but not limited to the construction,
§ 60-23 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-23
1:200
§ 60-24. (Reserved)
§ 60-25. Parallel parking restrictions; exceptions.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic and with the
curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway,
except as provided:
repair and cleaning of streets. However, where street cleaning is to
be performed, signs restricting parking must be posted by a duly
designated City employee at least 24 hours prior to the scheduled
time of cleaning.
(21) It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle requiring
a license plate on any public street within the City or on any
property owned or leased by the City unless said vehicle shall have
affixed or attached thereto license plates or markers displayed
conspicuously on the front and rear of said vehicle in accordance
with the provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland or, in the
case of a nonresident, the state, county or territory where such
vehicle is registered.
(22) A person may not park a motor vehicle in a space designated for
the handicapped unless the vehicle bears a special registration,
plate or permit. [Added 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-49]
(23)No person shall park a vehicle at any place on any street posted
with signs properly designating work being performed or other
activity being carried out by private individuals, so long as said
signs are properly issued by or under the supervision of a
Department Head of the City of Hagerstown, and said signs are
posted at least 24 hours prior to the scheduled time of the
restricted parking. [Added 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-18]
B. Wherever a space shall be marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop a vehicle upon any of the
streets or parts of streets contained on a list maintained by the City
Clerk.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand a vehicle upon any of the
streets or parts of streets contained on a list maintained by the City
Clerk.
A. Upon those streets or public parking lots which have been marked or
signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the
curb indicated by such mark or signs.
§ 60-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-26
1:201
§ 60-26. Display or repair of vehicle on street prohibited.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway, street or alley
for the principal purpose of displaying it for sale or washing, greasing or
repairing such vehicle, including the elevation of such vehicle on repair
ramps or jacks, except repairs necessitated by an emergency or to render
the vehicle operable in order to remove it to a service garage.
§ 60-27. (Reserved)
§ 60-28. Towing and impounding of vehicles illegally parked.
[Amended 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-14; 6-18-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-14]
A. Irrespective of other provisions of this chapter for penalizing illegal
parking of vehicles in the following specified instances and in addition
thereto, the Police Department or any enforcement officer assigned to
enforce this chapter pursuant to § 60-3 (hereinafter called
"enforcement officer") of the City Code is hereby authorized to tow
away or have towed away by a competent person all vehicles violating
parking prohibitions contained in this article.
B. When it becomes necessary for the Police Department or any
enforcement officer to carry out the provisions of this section by moving
a vehicle illegally parked as aforesaid, it shall be the duty of the Police
Department or enforcement officer to provide storage space for such
vehicle, either in a municipal garage or impound area or in a safe and
dependable private garage or impound area, but, nevertheless, nothing
herein shall be taken or construed as obligating the Police Department
or other municipal department for damage done to or destruction of
such vehicle so stored, unless by law otherwise provided.
C. The cost of towing and storage shall be as provided in the guidelines,
requirements and policies of the Washington County Emergency
Communication Center.
D. Upon a determination by the Police Department or enforcement officer
of the cost of towing and storing an illegally parked vehicle, the same
shall be charged against the owner of the vehicle and shall be added to
and be made a part of any fine thereafter imposed for such violation.
E. Irrespective of any method for collecting fines for traffic violations
otherwise provided and in addition thereto, all towing and storage costs
imposed under this section shall constitute and be a lien against any
vehicle so found to be illegally parked, and such lien shall not be lost,
nor shall the same be considered waived, by reason of the owner's
taking possession of the vehicle before the costs are paid.
§ 60-26 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-28.1
1:202
§ 60-28.1. Towing company requirements. [Amended 6-22-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-14]
Towing companies utilized by the Hagerstown City Police for the towing or
impounding of vehicles must meet the guidelines, requirements and policies
of the Washington County Emergency Communications Center which are
expressly adopted herein and for such purpose.
§ 60-28.2. Obstruction or reservation of parking spaces. [Added
3-31-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-0423]
Except for legally parked vehicles and as otherwise permitted in Chapter
216 of the Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or attempt
to reserve a public parking space located within the City right-of-way by
the placement of any materials or items of personal property thereon. Any
personal property placed in a public parking space in violation hereof shall
be deemed abandoned and is subject to removal and disposal by the City. In
addition to the removal and disposal of such property and the responsibility
for payment of the associated costs therefor, any person found to be in
violation of this section shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and subject
to a fine of $100.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance originally added this material as to the Code § 60-52. It was
renumbered as § 60-28.2 to maintain the organizational structure of Ch. 60.
§ 60-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-28.2
1:203

ARTICLE IVA
Metered Parking; Municipal Lots
§ 60-29. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article,
have the meanings indicated in this section:
OPERATOR — Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the
owner or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner or who is in
actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARKING METER — Includes any mechanical device or meter not
inconsistent with this article, placed or erected for the regulation of parking
by authority of this article. Each "parking meter" installed shall indicate by
proper legend the legal parking time and, at the expiration of such period,
shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING-METER SPACE — Any space within a parking-meter zone,
adjacent to a parking meter and duly designated for the parking of a single
vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the
surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meter.
PARKING-METER ZONE — Any street or highway or portion thereof and/
or any parking lot or portion thereof or other designated location set aside
under provisions of this article for the installation of parking meters and
upon which parking meters have been installed and are in operation. Such
zones shall not include locations where fire hydrants have been installed
nor such spaces as have been designated as bus stops, taxicab stands or
entrances to post offices, churches, hotels, theaters or banks nor other
places where parking has been prohibited.
PARK; PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon
a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading
merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals or the
involuntary stopping of a vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of
the operator of the vehicle.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.
§ 60-29.1. Designation of parking-meter zones.
A. On-street parking-meter zones. The streets or parts of streets contained
on a list maintained by the City Clerk are hereby established as onstreet
parking-meter zones.
B. Off-street parking-meter zones. The municipal parking lots or other
properties owned or leased by the City and contained on a list
§ 60-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-29.1
1:205
§ 60-30. Marking of individual parking spaces.
§ 60-31. Rental or lease of individual parking spaces. [Amended
7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-39]
The City Signal Division is directed and authorized to mark off individual
parking spaces to be rented or leased on a monthly or yearly basis during
the hours specified at a rental rate to be set by the Mayor and Council,
provided that such rented or leased parking spaces are clearly marked so
as to indicate to the public that such parking spaces are rented or leased
and not available to anyone other than the lessee of such parking space. It
shall be unlawful for any person other than the lessee to park or permit his
vehicle to be parked in any such leased or rented parking space during the
hours specified.
§ 60-32. Installation of meters. [Amended 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
In the parking-meter zones the City Signal Division shall cause parking
meters to be installed upon the curb or sidewalk immediately adjacent to
the parking spaces provided in § 60-30 of this Code. Each device shall be
so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the
appropriate coin or coins, lawful money of the United States of America,
for the period of time prescribed by this article. Each device shall be so
arranged that, upon the expiration of the lawful time limit, it will indicate
by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and
in such cases the right of the vehicle to occupy such space shall cease, and
the operator, owner, possessor or manager of such vehicle shall be subject
to the penalties provided in this chapter.
§ 60-33. Responsibility for control and maintenance of meters.
maintained by the City Clerk are hereby established as off-street
parking-meter zones.
A. The City Signal Department is directed and authorized to mark off
individual parking spaces in the following manner:
(1) In the parking-meter zones designated and described in § 60-29.1A.
(2) In the off-street parking areas described in § 60-29.1B.
(3) In such other zones as may be established from time to time and
contained on a list maintained by the City Clerk.
B. Such parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or durably
marked on curbing or the surface of the street.
A. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the regulation, control,
operation and use of parking meters installed as provided in § 60-32.
§ 60-29.1 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-33
1:206
§ 60-34. Coin deposit required.
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or
Police Department or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any
parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the
operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking-meter space,
immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in the meter such proper
coin of the United States as is required for such parking meter and as is
designated by proper directions on the meter, and, when required by the
directions of the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the deposit of the
proper coin or coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on
such meter in accordance with the directions properly appearing thereon,
and failure to deposit such proper coin and to set the timing mechanism
in operation when so required shall constitute a violation of this article.
Upon the deposit of such coin and the settling of the timing mechanism
in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle
during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the
street in which the parking space is located, provided that any person
placing a vehicle in a parking-meter space adjacent to a meter which
indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous
occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a coin as long as
his occupancy of such space does not exceed the indicated unused parking
time. If such vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond
the parking time limit set for such parking space and if the meter shall
indicate such illegal parking, then and in that event such vehicle shall be
considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time,
and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this article.
§ 60-35. Time limits and rates.
§ 60-36. Extension of time limits prohibited.
During the time that such parking meters are being operated, no person
shall park or stand a vehicle in a designated space in a parking-meter zone
for a longer period than that indicated on the dial of the parking meter, and
B. The City Signal Division and the City Treasurer shall be jointly
responsible for the maintenance of parking meters. [Amended
7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-39]
A. Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a parking-meter
zone shall be lawful upon deposit of the appropriate coin or coins. The
amount of deposit shall be posted on each meter and shall indicate the
length of time the vehicle may lawfully occupy the space for such
deposit.
B. The Council shall establish, from time to time, by resolution, the time
periods when a deposit will be required at a parking meter and the
amount of such deposit.
§ 60-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-36
1:207
it shall be unlawful for any person whose car shall have already been parked
in the meter zone for the maximum time indicated on the dial of the meter
to return and deposit additional coins in the parking meter in order to park
his vehicle for a longer period of time than that indicated on the parking
meter dial.
§ 60-37. Municipal lots.
§ 60-38. Loading and unloading of commercial vehicles in metered
parking spaces.
The loading or unloading of a truck, van or other commercial vehicle may
be conducted for a reasonable period at any one time on a parking space
adjacent to which a parking meter has been installed under this article
without the deposit of a coin in such meter.
§ 60-39. Collection of money from meters.
The Chief of Police and/or the City Treasurer shall designate an individual
or individuals to make regular collections of the money deposited in parking
meters installed under the provisions of this article. Such designees shall
remove the coins deposited in such meters and deliver such coins to the
City Treasurer, who shall deposit such funds to the account of the City
designated by the Mayor and Council.
§ 60-40. Hours of operation.
§ 60-41. Impounding of vehicles illegally parked in parking-meter
zones.
A. The fee or charge with respect to parking meters in municipal parking
lots during the time that such parking meters are being operated shall
be at the rate established by resolution by the Mayor and Council.
B. In all lots that are not controlled by parking meters or any other
mechanical devices, parking costs shall be in accordance with rates as
determined by the Mayor and Council.
A. Parking meters shall be operated in the parking-meter zones, including
any and all metered parking lot or lots under the control of the City
(except those parking meters operated in areas designated "hospital
zone"), between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday of each week, except that such meters shall not be operated
on designated public holidays or Sundays.
B. Parking meters operated in areas designated "hospital zone" shall be
operated between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., seven days a
week, excluding designated public holidays and Sundays.
A. In the event that any vehicle is unlawfully parked in accordance with
the provisions of this article for a period of 24 hours, the Police
§ 60-36 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-41
1:208
§ 60-42. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to:
§ 60-43. Permit required for parking in unmetered areas of
municipal lots.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle to remain or be
placed in any parking space in any municipal lot with reference to which no
Department of the City is hereby authorized and directed to tow away
or have towed away by a competent person all such vehicles violating
the parking prohibitions contained in this article.
B. All provisions of Article IV, § 60-28, Towing and impounding of vehicles
illegally parked, are hereby declared to be and are made a part of this
section and incorporated herein by reference.
A. Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the time
period of legal parking time established for any parking-meter zone as
described in this article or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for
the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the
particular parking-meter zone.
B. Permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent
to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal indicating
that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked
beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
C. Park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking-meter space or
in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area
designated by such lines or markings.
D. Deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair
the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article.
E. Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device
or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
F. Sell or offer for sale any goods, commodities, foodstuffs, merchandise
or products of whatsoever nature or kind from any parking space
adjacent to any parking meter. This provision shall not apply during any
special event sponsored by the City of Hagerstown. [Added 8-25-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-35]
G. Exit a City parking deck in a vehicle after parking there without paying
the parking fee due as posted at the deck. [Added 6-22-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-14]
§ 60-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-43
1:209
parking meter has been installed unless the vehicle in question displays a
current permit issued to the lessee for the parking area from the City.
§ 60-44. Responsibility for violation.
The owner of any vehicle parked in violation of or failing to comply with this
article or Article IV shall be prima facie responsible for such violation or
failure to comply.
§ 60-45. Written reports of violations.
With reference to parking-meter zones (on- and off-street) and off-street
leased parking spaces, as provided in this article, it shall be the duty of
the police officers or other duly designated employees of the City to submit
a written report of each violation of or failure to comply with parking
requirements of this article, which report shall state:
§ 60-46. Notification of violation.
A police officer or other duly designated employee making a report as
provided for in § 60-45 shall notify the defendant that the vehicle has been
parked in a manner that violates or fails to comply with the provisions
of Chapter 60, Article IV or IVA, and in the event that said vehicle is
unattended shall attach said notice in a conspicuous place upon the vehicle
of the defendant that the vehicle has been parked in a manner that violates
or fails to comply with the provisions of Chapter 60, Article IV or IVA.
§ 60-47. Right to trial.
Upon notification or attachment to the vehicle of said notice of violation,
said notice shall notify the defendant that if he desires to stand trial he
may notify the Hagerstown Department of Police at least five days prior to
the payment date set forth in the citation, and said Police Department will
obtain a trial date within 15 days of the date of notification by the defendant
of his desire to stand trial. Further, said notice shall contain appropriate
verbiage to notify the defendant of his right to stand trial.
A. The number of the parking meter or parking space which indicates that
the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter
or space is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of
this article of Article IV.
B. The state license number of such vehicle.
C. The date and approximate time of such violation.
D. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
E. That an oath by the officer or designated employee is attached and
certifying, under penalty or perjury, that the matter set forth on said
citation is, to the best of his knowledge, true.
§ 60-43 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-47
1:210
ARTICLE V
Trucks, Commercial Vehicles and Camping Vehicles
§ 60-48. Parking restricted.
§ 60-49. Operation on certain streets restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck or commercial
vehicle upon any of the streets, highways or alleys contained on a list
maintained by the City Clerk; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
prohibit the operation of any truck or commercial vehicle upon any highway
or portion thereof listed on said list where such operation thereon shall
be necessary in order to pick up or deliver any goods, wares, merchandise
or material from or to any premises located upon any such highway or
portion thereof, but then only by entering such highway or part thereof at
the intersection nearest the destination and proceeding thereon no farther
than the nearest intersection thereafter.
A. No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semitrailer, or any
combination thereof, or any commercial vehicle designed for or capable
of carrying a load in excess of 4,000 pounds (two tons) on any street,
highway or alley for a longer period than four hours, unless the owner
or person in charge thereof is actually using the same for the purpose of
or in connection with the performance of work or service in the
immediate area.
B. No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semitrailer, or any
combination thereof, or any commercial vehicle designed for or capable
of carrying a load in excess of 4,000 pounds (two tons) for a longer
period than one hour on any street or highway in front of any property
used or intended to be used exclusively for residence purposes;
provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to
commercial trucks which are parked for the purpose of or in connection
with the performance of work or services for or on behalf of any person
within a radius of one block from such property used or intended to be
used exclusively for residence purposes.
C. No person shall park any house trailer, camping trailer, homemade
trailer or any other similar trailer, licensed or unlicensed, designed to
be towed by a vehicle on any public street, highway, alley or public
property for a period longer than 24 hours.
D. No person shall park, dismantle or allow to remain on any street, alley
or highway any unlicensed unit of whatsoever nature or kind designed
for use on a motor vehicle chassis, either to be permanently affixed or
temporarily affixed. This shall include but is not limited to units
commonly known and designated as "pickup" or "slide-in" camper units.
§ 60-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-50
1:211
§ 60-50. Routing of heavy vehicles.
The Chief of Police is empowered and authorized to restrict the routing
of heavy trucks and buses over certain thoroughfares within the corporate
limits of the City at such times as vehicles are causing damage to the street,
creating crowded conditions on the roadway, impeding the flow of traffic or
causing a situation dangerous to life, limb or property. In any such event,
the Chief of Police shall designate which streets said trucks and/or buses
shall traverse, keeping in mind the utmost expediting of said truck or bus
traffic insofar as is possible. This section shall also apply to convoys of heavy
trucks or buses passing through the City, including all types of industrial
machinery and equipment.
§ 60-50 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-50
1:212
ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 60-51. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-18-1986 by Res. No.
1986-5; 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-49]
§ 60-52. through § 60-54. (Reserved)
A. Any person who violates the provisions of Article II, Article IV, Article
IVA or Article V and is convicted thereof shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $25, except as otherwise provided in Subsection B below.
B. Schedule of parking fines. [Amended 7-16-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-12; 6-18-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-18; 7-28-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-38; 6-6-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-27A; 5-27-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-18; 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-14]
Violation
On or Before
Payment Date
After 10
Days
After 30
Days
Fire station and fire hydrant,
Article IV, § 60-23A(13)(d) and
(e)
$100 $110 $120
Handicapped parking, Article
IV, § 60-23A(22)
$100 $110 $120
Expired meters and designated
spaces, Article IV, § 60-42
$10 $25 $35
Nonmetered permit spaces,
Article IV, § 60-43
$15 $25 $35
Violation of Article IV, § 60-42G $50 $100 $200
All other violations, Article IV,
§ 60-23A (except as otherwise
provided herein), and Article V,
§§ 60-48 and 60-49
$15 $25 $35
C. Each day of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered a separate offense.
D. The penalties provided for in this provision shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any other penalties provided for and all towing and/
or storage charges as provided for in Article IV, § 60-28, and Article
IVA, § 60-41, and as is provided in the Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 60-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-52
1:213

ARTICLE VII
Towing From Privately Owned Facilities
[Added 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-16]
§ 60-55. Definitions; applicability.
§ 60-56. Signage requirements.
The owner or operator of a parking lot, or the agent thereof, may not have a
vehicle towed or removed from said parking lot, unless the owner, operator
or agent has placed in conspicuous locations, signs that:
§ 60-57. Regulations.
Any person or entity which undertakes the towing, removal, or the storage
of a vehicle from a parking lot:
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — A motor vehicle that remains upon a parking
lot as defined herein without the permission of the owner, the owner's
agent or the owner's lessee for a period of time exceeding 48 hours.
PARKING LOT — A privately owned facility consisting of five or more
spaces for motor vehicle parking that is accessible to the general
public, and intended by the owner of the facility to be used by the owner
or the owner's customers, clients, lessees, or invitees.
B. This article does not apply to towing and impounding of illegally parked
vehicles, vehicles illegally parked in parking-meter zones, vehicles
immobilized, towed or impounded pursuant to § 60-9 of this chapter, or
abandoned vehicles as defined herein.
A. Are clearly visible to the driver of a motor vehicle entering or being
parked in said parking lot;
B. Identify the location to which the vehicle will be towed or removed;
C. Identify a telephone number of a person who can be contacted to
arrange for the reclaiming of a towed or removed vehicle by the owner,
which number shall be attended or monitored by an individual, 24 hours
per day, seven days per week;
D. Identify that a towed or removed vehicle may be reclaimed from the
location to which it has been towed at any time, 24 hours per day, seven
days per week; and
E. States that the maximum amount that the owner of the vehicle may be
charged for the towing or removal of the vehicle, including storage fees,
is set by the Washington County Emergency Communication Center.
[Amended 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-14]
§ 60-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-57
1:215
§ 60-58. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any applicable penalties found in this Chapter 60, any person
who violates the provisions of this Article VII shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined up to $1,000.
A. May not tow, remove, or store the vehicle outside of the corporate limits
of the City of Hagerstown;
B. May not prohibit access to or the removal of a vehicle from a parking lot
by the vehicle owner or operator prior to said vehicle being towed;
C. Must immediately deliver any towed or removed vehicle to a storage
facility located within the corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown,
which location shall be identified on the signage required by § 60-56;
D. Must have the express authorization of the owner or operator, of the
parking lot, or the agent thereof, to effectuate the towing, removal and
storage of a particular vehicle prior to the removal of said vehicle;
E. Must notify the Hagerstown Police Department within two hours of
towing and removing the vehicle of the tow or removal, identifying by
make, model and registration plate number, the vehicle so towed or
removed, the time of tow or removal and the current location of the
stored vehicle;
F. May not charge fees for towing, removal or storage in excess of the
maximum amounts permitted by the Washington County Emergency
Communication Center pursuant to its standardized tow service rates,
as from time to time amended; [Amended 6-22-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-14]
G. May not employ individuals commonly referred to as "spotters" whose
primary task is to report the presence of unauthorized parked vehicles
on parking lots for the purposes of towing, removal or storage;
H. May not pay any remuneration or consideration of any kind to the
owner or operator of the parking lot, or the agent thereof;
I. Must provide immediate and continuous opportunity to the owner or
operator of any towed, removed, or stored vehicle to retake possession
of said vehicle, and shall provide access thereto after being contacted
by said owner or operator within 30 minutes if contacted between 6:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight, or within 45 minutes if contacted at any other
time; and
J. May not require payment of the fees permitted hereunder be made in
cash, must accept any commercially reasonable form of payment from
the owner or operator of a towed, removed or stored vehicle for such
fees, and shall provide the owner or operator of such vehicle a written
receipt upon payment of said fees.
§ 60-57 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 60-58
1:216
Chapter 62
BOTTLE CLUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment clubs — See Ch. 92.
§ 62-1. Definitions.
§ 62-2. Prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, keep, maintain, operate, or
to permit another to conduct, keep, maintain or operate a bottle club in the
City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
§ 62-3. Exception; bottle club license.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOTTLE CLUB — A premises or establishment that serves, gives,
dispenses, keeps, or allows to be consumed by a patron, alcoholic
beverages from supplies that the patron purchased, reserved, or
otherwise brought to the premises or establishment. "Bottle club"
includes any business, enterprise, public or private club, restaurant,
hotel, room, dance studio, place of public entertainment, or other
location open to the general public. "Bottle club" does not include an
establishment for which a license has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of Article 2B of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
B. All other terms contained in this Chapter 62 shall be interpreted as
defined in Article 2B of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as from time
to time amended.
A. License. Section 62-2 hereof notwithstanding, it shall be permissible for
a restaurant which has accommodations for no more than 74 customers
and is not regulated or licensed by the provisions of the Article 2B, to
allow the consumption of beer and wine on its premises, so long as the
establishment has a valid bottle club license issued by the City Clerk
pursuant hereto.
B. Application for license; fee. An applicant for a bottle club license must
provide the following:
(1) The name, address and contact information of the applicant, and
the resident agent.
(2) Name, address and contact information for the applicant if not an
individual.
§ 60-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-3
1:217
(3) The name, address and contact information of a manager or
supervisor designated by applicant.
(4) The specific location of the premises upon which the bottle club is
to be operated.
(5) Proof of approval of the owner of the premises, if different from the
applicant, for the operation of a bottle club upon said premises.
(6) Proof of zoning, fire department, and health department
certifications or approvals for the operation of a restaurant at the
premises.
(7) Proof of a valid state restaurant license and trader's license for the
business operated at the premises.
(8) Proof of completion of a state approved and certified alcohol
awareness program by the applicant or the applicant's supervisory
designee.
(9) A nonrefundable annual license fee of $100, or a nonrefundable
annual license renewal fee of $50 for a current, valid licensee
applying for a subsequent license year.
C. Operating rules and regulations. The following operating rules and
regulations shall apply to all bottle clubs licensed pursuant hereto:
(1) The bottle club shall be operated in accordance with all federal,
state, and local laws, and shall maintain current, valid licenses,
certifications and approvals as required.
(2) The bottle club shall not operate between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(3) The bottle club may only permit the consumption of beer, wine, and
nonalcoholic beverages on the premises.
(4) The bottle club shall only permit the consumption of beer and wine
during the hours that prepared food is being served by the
restaurant.
(5) One employee certified by a state-approved alcohol awareness
program must be present on the licensed premises at all times
during hours of operation of the bottle club.
(6) No nudity or sexual displays shall be permitted on the premises of
the bottle club.
(7) The licensee or any employee thereof may not permit the
consumption of beer or wine on the premises by a person under 21
years of age or by a person who at the time of the consumption is
visibly under the influence of any alcoholic beverage.
D. Issuance of license; suspension and revocation. The City Clerk shall
issue or deny an annual, nontransferable, nonassignable bottle club
§ 62-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 62-3
1:218
§ 62-4. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the sanctions outlined § 62-3D above, any person, firm,
corporation, or other entity violating this chapter, or any rule or regulation
hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a penalty of
up to a maximum of 90 days in jail and/or a $500 fine. A separate offense
shall be deemed to have occurred on each day upon which a violation of this
chapter occurs.
§ 62-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any portion of this chapter or
its application is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or applications of this chapter, which can be given effect without
the invalid provisions or applications.
Chapter 64
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal infractions — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Board of Code Appeals — See Ch. 10, Art. XIV.
Property maintenance habitual
offender — See Ch. 65.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 98.
Gas installations — See Ch. 120.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 184.
Signs — See Ch. 204.
Sediment control — See Ch. 209.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 213.
Water — See Ch. 238.
license within 30 days of receipt of a completed application. The Clerk
may, at any time after a hearing, suspend or revoke a bottle club
license for a violation of the requirements hereof. Any person adversely
affected by any decision of the City Clerk may appeal to the City Review
Board established in Chapter 92 of the City Code, within 30 days of the
date of the adverse decision.
§ 62-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-5
1:219

ARTICLE I
Building Standards
[Amended 8-24-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-13; 6-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-18; 5-21-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-13; 11-24-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-55; 6-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-20; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-24; 7-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-32; 12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-33; 10-23-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-14; 6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-14; 6-23-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-17; 11-24-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-27; 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-13; 9-24-2019 by Ord. No.
O-19-14]
§ 64-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain code known as the "International Building Code," 2018 Edition,
including Appendixes F, G, H, and I, and the whole thereof, of which a copy
is on file with the office of the Clerk of the City of Hagerstown, be and the
same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein.
§ 64-2. Amendments.
The following sections of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, are
amended as follows:
A. Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: The following sections are
amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building
Code of the City of Hagerstown, hereinafter referred to as the "City
Building Code" or "this code."
(2) Section 101.2, Scope, Exception, is amended to read as follows:
Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories
above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress
and their accessory structures shall comply with International
Residential Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendixes E, F, H, O,
and Q, therein with the following amendments:
(a) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is hereby deleted in its
entirety and replaced with Chapter 1, Scope and
Administration, of the International Building Code referenced
above with amendments contained herein.
(b) Chapter 2, Section R202, Definitions, Townhouse, the
definition is amended to read as follows:
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in
a group of three or more attached units in which each unit
§ 64-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:221
extends from foundation to roof and with open space on at
least two sides and is separated by a property line.
(c) Chapter 3, Building Planning, the following sections and table
are amended to read as follows:
[1] TABLE R301.2(1), Climatic and Geographic Design
Criteria, is amended to read as follows:24
[2] Section R315.2.2, Exception No. 2 is hereby deleted in its
entirety.
[3] Section R321.3, Accessibility, is amended to read as
follows:
R321.3 Accessibility. Elevators or platform lifts that are
part of an accessible route required by the Maryland
Accessibility Code shall comply with the Maryland
Accessibility Code [COMAR 05.02.02] as may be amended
or restated from time to time.
(d) Chapter 4, Foundations, the following sections are amended to
read as follows:
[1] Section R403.1, General, is amended to read as follows:
R403.1 General. All exterior walls shall be supported
on continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete
footings, wood foundations, or other approved structural
systems which shall be of sufficient design to
accommodate all loads according to Section R301 and
to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the
limitations as determined from the character of the soil.
Footings shall be supported on undisturbed natural soils
or engineered fill. Concrete footing shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section
R403 or in accordance with ACI 332. All structures
requiring continuous footings shall be reinforced with a
minimum of two No. 4 reinforcing bars or as specified by a
design professional.
Exception: Footings are not required to be stepped or
continuous where changes of footing elevations exceed
four feet (1,220 mm). Such footing can be connected by
masonry lintels with a minimum 18 inches (457 mm) of
bearing on steel reinforced footings.
[2] Section R403.1.4.1, Frost protection, is amended to read
as follows:
24.Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:222
R403.1.4.1 Frost protection. Except where erected
upon solid rock or otherwise protected from frost,
foundation walls, piers and other permanent supports of
all buildings and structures shall extend no less than 30
inches (762 mm) below finished grade.
Exception: Storage buildings and other structures, 170
square feet (16 m2) or less in area and 10 feet (3,048 mm)
or less in eave height.
[3] Section R403.1.6, Foundation Anchorage, is amended to
read as follows:
R403.1.6 Foundation anchorage. Wood sill plates and
wood walls supported directly on continuous foundations
shall be anchored to the foundation in accordance with
this section.
Cold-formed steel framing shall be anchored directly to
the foundation or fastened to wood sill plates anchored
to the foundation. Anchorage of cold-formed steel framing
and sill plates supporting cold-formed steel framing shall
be in accordance with this section and Section R505.3.1 or
R603.3.1, as applicable. Wood sill plates supporting coldformed
steel framing shall be anchored to the foundation
in accordance with this section.
Wood sole plates at all exterior walls on monolithic slabs,
wood sole plates of braced wall panels at building interiors
on monolithic slabs and all wood sill plates shall be
anchored to the foundation with minimum one-half-inchdiameter
(12.7mm) anchor bolts spaced a maximum of
four feet (1,220 mm) on center or approved anchors or
anchor straps spaced as required to provide equivalent
anchorage to one-half-inch-diameter (12.7 mm) anchor
bolts. Bolts shall extend a minimum of seven inches (178
mm) into concrete or grouted cells of concrete masonry
units. The bolts shall be located in the middle third of the
width of the plate. A nut and washer shall be tightened
on each anchor bolt. There shall be a minimum of two
bolts per plate section with one bolt located not more than
12 inches (305 mm) or less than seven bolt diameters
from each end of the plate section. Interior bearing wall
sole plates on monolithic slab foundation that are not part
of a braced wall panel shall be positively anchored with
approved fasteners. Sill plates and sole plates shall be
protected against decay and termites where required by
Sections R317 and R318.
Exceptions:
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:223
1. Walls 24 inches (610 mm) total length or shorter
connecting offset braced wall panels shall be
anchored to the foundation with a minimum of one
anchor bolt located in the center third of the plate
section and shall be attached to adjacent braced wall
panels at corners as shown in Item 9 of Table
R602.3(1).
2. Connection of walls 12 inches (305 mm) total length or
shorter connecting offset braced wall panels to the
foundation without anchor bolts shall be permitted.
The wall shall be attached to the adjacent braced wall
panels at corners as shown in Item 9 of Table
R602.3(1).
[4] The following sections, figures and tables are hereby
deleted in their entirety:
R403.3, Frost protected shallow foundations
R403.3.1, Foundations adjoining frost protected shallow
foundations
R403.3.1.1, Attachment to unheated slab-on-ground
structure
Figure R403.3 (1)
Table R403.3 (1)
Figure R403.3 (2)
Table R403.3 (2)
Figure R403.3 (3)
Figure R403.3 (4)
R403.3.1.2, Attachment to heated structure
R403.3.2, Protection of horizontal insulation below ground
R403.3.3, Drainage
R403.3.4, Termite protection
[5] Section R404.3, Wood sill plates, is amended to read as
follows:
R404.3 Wood sill plates. Wood sill plates shall be a
minimum of two-inch by six-inch (51 mm by 152 mm)
nominal lumber for basements and crawl spaces with walls
supporting unbalanced fill in excess of 48 inches (1,220
mm) in height. Other sill plates shall be a minimum of twoinch
by four-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) nominal lumber.
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:224
Sill plate anchorage shall be in accordance with Section
R403.1.6 and R602.11.
[6] Section R407.3, Structural requirements, is amended to
read as follows:
R407.3 Structural requirements. The columns shall be
restrained to prevent lateral displacement at the bottom
end. Wood columns shall not be less in nominal size than
four inches by four inches (102 mm by 102 mm). Steel
columns shall not be less than three-inch diameter (76
mm) Schedule 40 pipe manufactured in accordance with
ASTM A 53 Grade B or approved equivalent.
[7] Section R408.6, Finished grade, is amended to read as
follows:
R408.6 Finished grade. The finished grade of underfloor
surface shall not be any lower than the top of the
footings, and crawlspace piers must be dug in or backfilled
to top; however, where there is evidence that the
groundwater table can rise within six inches (152 mm) of
the finished floor at the building perimeter or where there
is evidence that the surface water does not readily drain
from the building site, the grade in the under-floor space
shall be as high as the outside finished grade, unless an
approved drainage system is provided.
(e) Chapter 5, Floors: The following sections are amended to read
as follows:
[1] Section R502.6, Bearing, is amended to read as follows:
R502.6 Bearing. The ends of each joist, beam or girder
shall have not less than 1.5 inches (38 mm) of bearing on
wood or metal and not less than three inches (76 mm) on
masonry or concrete except where supported on a oneinch
by four-inch (25.4 mm by 102 mm) ribbon strip and
nailed to adjacent stud or by the use of approved joist
hangers. The bearing on masonry or concrete shall be
direct, or a sill plate of two-inch minimum (51 mm)
nominal thickness shall be provided under the joist, beam
or girder. The sill plate shall provide a minimum nominal
bearing area of 48 square inches (30,865 mm). When steel
shims are used, the shim length and width shall provide
full bearing area for the beam or girder and shall not
exceed 1.5 inches (38 mm) in height.
[2] Section R507.1, Decks, is amended to read as follows:
R507.1 Decks. Wood-framed decks shall be in accordance
with this section or Section R301 for materials and
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:225
conditions not prescribed herein. Where supported by
attachment to an exterior wall, decks shall be positively
anchored to the primary structure and designed for both
vertical and lateral loads as applicable.
Such attachment shall not be accomplished by the use
of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal. Where positive
connection to the primary building structure cannot be
verified during inspection, decks shall be self-supporting.
For decks with cantilevered framing members,
connections to exterior walls or other framing members
shall be designed and constructed to resist uplift resulting
from the full live load specified in Table R301.5 acting on
the cantilevered portion of the deck.
(f) Chapter 6, Wall Construction, Figure R602.3(2), Framing
details, is amended to read as follows:
FIGURE
R602.3(2)
FRAMING
DETAILS
(g) The following chapters are hereby deleted in their entirety:
Chapter 11
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:226
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Chapter 21
Chapter 22
Chapter 24
Chapter 25
Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28
(h) Chapter 29, Water Supply and Distribution: The following
sections are amended to read as follows:
[1] The following sections are hereby deleted in their entirety:
Section P2901 through Section P2903.
[2] Section P2904.2.3, Freezing areas, is amended to read as
follows:
P2904.2.3. Freezing areas. Piping shall be protected
from freezing as required by Section P2904.2.3.1. Where
sprinklers are required in areas that are subject to
freezing, dry-sidewall or dry-pendent sprinklers extending
from a nonfreezing area into a freezing area shall be
installed.
[3] Section P2904.2.3.1, is added as follows:
P2904.2.3.1. Freeze protection. In localities having a
winter design temperature of 32° F. (0° C.) or lower as
shown in Table R301.2 (1) of this code, a water, soil, or
waste pipe shall not be installed outside of a building, in
exterior walls, in attics, or crawl spaces, or in any other
place subjected to freezing temperature unless adequate
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:227
provision is made to protect it from freezing by insulation
or heat or both. Water service pipe shall be installed not
less than 12 inches (305 mm) deep and not less than six
inches (152 mm) below the frost line.
[4] The following sections are hereby deleted in their entirety:
Section P2905 through Section P2908.
(i) The following chapters are hereby deleted in their entirety:
Chapter 30
Chapter 31
Chapter 32
Chapter 33
Chapter 34
Chapter 35
Chapter 36
Chapter 37
Chapter 38
Chapter 39
Chapter 40
Chapter 41
Chapter 42
Chapter 43
(j) Section AQ102, Definitions, Tiny House, is amended to read as
follows:
TINY HOUSE. A dwelling that is 500 square feet (46.5 m2)
or more in floor area, excluding lofts, subject to the zoning
requirements of the City of Hagerstown Land Management
Code.
(3) Section 101.2 Scope, Exception 2 is added as follows:
Exception 2: Existing buildings undergoing repair, alterations or
additions, and change of occupancy shall comply with the Maryland
Building Rehabilitation Code set forth in COMAR 05.16.
(4) Sections 101.4.1, 101.4.2, 101.4.3, 101.4.4, 101.4.5, 101.4.6 and
101.4.7, are amended to read as follows:
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:228
101.4.1 Gas. Any reference to the International Fuel Gas Code
(IFGC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City of Hagerstown as
adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of Chapter
64, Article V, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply to
all installations and modifications involving fuel gas.
101.4.2 Mechanical. Any reference to the International
Mechanical Code (IMC) shall mean the Mechanical Code of the
City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
The provisions of Chapter 64, Article VI, of the Code of the City
of Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving heating, air conditioning, and mechanical ventilation.
101.4.3 Plumbing. Any reference to the International Plumbing
Code (IPC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City of
Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article V, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving plumbing.
101.4.4 Property maintenance. Any reference to the
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) shall mean the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted
by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64,
Article III, of the City Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
101.4.5 Fire prevention. Any reference to the International Fire
Code (IFC) shall mean the Maryland State Fire Prevention Code
(COMAR 29.06.01), as may be amended or restated from time to
time.
101.4.6 Energy. Any reference to the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) shall mean the International Energy
Conservation Code, as adopted in the Maryland Building
Performance Standards (COMAR 05.02.07), as may be amended
from time to time.
101.4.7 Existing building. Any reference to the International
Existing Building Code (IEBC) shall mean the Maryland Building
Rehabilitation Code (COMAR 05.16), as may be amended or
restated from time to time.
(5) Sections 101.4.8, 101.4.9, 101.4.10, 101.4.11 and 101.4.12 are
added as follows:
101.4.8 Accessibility. All sections of this code relating to
applicable requirements for accessibility and usability of buildings
and facilities by individuals with disabilities shall refer to the
Maryland Accessibility Code (COMAR 05.02.02), as may be
amended or restated from time to time.
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:229
101.4.9 Building. Any reference to the International Building
Code (IBC) shall mean the Building Code of the City of Hagerstown
as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of
Chapter 64, Article I, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown shall
apply.
101.4.10 Residential building. Any reference to the
International Residential Code (IRC) shall mean the Building Code
of the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City
Council. The provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the Code of the
City of Hagerstown shall apply.
101.4.11 Electrical. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the National
Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code of the City
of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article IV, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply to all electrical installations and
modifications.
101.4.12 Swimming pools and spas. Any reference to the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) shall mean the
Building Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor
and City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the
Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
(6) Section 103.1, Creation of enforcement agency, is amended to read
as follows:
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. This code shall be
administered by the Planning and Code Administration
Department, hereinafter referred to as "the Department." The
executive official in charge thereof or his designee(s) shall be
known as the "Code Official." Any reference to the Department of
Building Safety shall mean the Department. Any reference to the
Building Official shall mean the Code Official.
(7) Section 105.1, Required, is amended to read as follows:
105.1 Required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent who
intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or
change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install,
enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical,
gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is
regulated by this code, or to cause such work to be performed, shall
first make application to the Department and obtain the required
permit.
(8) Sections 105.1.1 and 105.1.2 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(9) Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, Building: Item 1 is
amended to read as follows:
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:230
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and
storage shed, playhouses and similar uses, provided that the
floor area does not exceed 100 square feet (9.29 m2).
(10) Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, Building: Item 2 is
amended to read as follows:
2. Fences not over seven feet (2,134 mm) high, unless there is a
vehicular gate. (Note: These fences are still subject to
permitting under the Land Management Code of the City of
Hagerstown.)
(11) Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, Building: Item 10 is
hereby deleted in its entirety.
(12) Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, Electrical, is amended to
read as follows:
Electrical: as noted in the City Electrical Code.
(13) Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, Gas, is amended to read
as follows:
Gas: as noted in the City Plumbing Code.
(14) Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, Mechanical, is amended
to read as follows:
Mechanical: as noted in the City Mechanical Code.
(15) Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, Plumbing, is amended to
read as follows:
Plumbing: as noted in the City Plumbing Code.
(16) Section 105.2.2, Repairs, is amended to read as follows:
105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the Department is not
required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps
or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to
approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not
include the cutting away of any wall, partition, or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing
support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress,
or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements, or the sandblasting of any wall; nor shall ordinary
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation
of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electrical wiring or mechanical
or other work affecting public health or general safety.
(17) Sections 105.3.3, 105.3.4, 105.3.5, 105.3.6 and 105.3.7 are added
as follows:
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:231
105.3.3 Site plan approval. Application for building permits shall
not be accepted prior to approval of the site plan, unless otherwise
authorized by the Code Official.
105.3.4 Associated trade permits. Building permits involving
the installation of any electrical wiring or plumbing associated with
the installation of, remodeling of, or additions to swimming pools,
hot tubs, spas, electrical signs and assemblies, and solar panels
shall not be issued prior to the issuance of all associated plumbing
and/or electrical permits.
105.3.5 Water and sewer permits. Building permits involving
the installation of new water and sanitary sewer services shall not
be issued prior to the issuance of the associated water and sewer
connection permits.
105.3.6 Withholding of permits. Wherever the Code Official
shall find that any person, agent, firm or corporation, whether as
owner, lessee or occupant, is in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the rules and regulations of any other department or
agency of the City of Hagerstown in connection with the erection,
maintenance, use or repair of buildings, structures, lands or
equipment thereon or therein, he may refuse to grant any further
permits or inspections until all violations have been corrected and
approved.
105.3.7 Transfer of permits. Building permits are not
transferable. In the event that a change in ownership of the
referenced property and/or facility occurs prior to the completion
of the permitted construction, renovations, or demolition, the
subsequent owner must secure a replacement permit prior to
starting or resuming work. Fees in effect at the time of the
application for the replacement permit shall apply.
(18) Section 105.5, Expiration, is amended to read as follows:
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Department under
the provisions of this code shall expire and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within
180 days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized
by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180
days at any time after the work is commenced. Work shall be
considered abandoned if no valid request for inspection is received
by the Department for a period of 180 days. Before such work can
be recommenced, the permit must be reactivated by submitting
application for same and paying a fee as established by Department
policy, provided that no changes have been made or will be made
in the original construction documents for such work, and further
that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
Every such permit shall expire one year after issuance, unless an
extension is granted in accordance with Section 105.5.1.
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:232
(19) Section 105.5.1 is added as follows:
105.5.1 Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit
shall have the right to apply for an extension of the time within
which the permittee will commence work under that permit when
work is unable to be commenced within the time required by
this section for good and satisfactory reasons. Unless otherwise
approved by the Chief Code Official, the Department shall extend
the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180
days if there is reasonable cause, in accordance with Department
policy. The fee for an extension shall be as established by
Department policy.
(20) Sections 109.2, Schedule of permit fees, and 109.4, Work
commencing before permit issuance, are amended to read as
follows:
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each building permit
and demolition permit shall be paid prior to the issuance of said
permits as established in the fee schedule. Additional fees, when
applicable, are as follows:
Additional fee for zoning certificate when required: as established
by the Mayor and Council.
Additional fee for Fire Marshal review when required: as specified
in City Code, Chapter 98, Fire Protection.
Reinstatement of expired permit: as specified by Department
policy.
In addition to the calculated permit fee required herein, payment
of a technology fee will be required in connection with the issuance
of all the permits.
109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. In addition
to the building/demolition permit fee, an investigation fee equal to
the amount of the building/demolition permit fee shall be assessed
when the work to be permitted has begun prior to the issuance of
the permit. The maximum additional amount to be charged for this
occurrence shall be $100.
(21) Section 109.6, Refunds, is amended to read as follows:
109.6 Refunds. The Department shall authorize the refunding of
fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.
2. For a permit in which no associated work has been done, the
refund shall consist of the permit fee less the application fee
and any technology fee.
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:233
3. For a permit in which associated work has commenced, no
refund shall be applicable.
The Department shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of the payment.
(22) Section 110.3, Required inspections, is amended to read as follows:
110.3 Required inspections. The Code Official, upon notification
from the permit holder or the permit holder's agent, shall make
the inspections set forth in Sections 110.3.1 through 110.3.12. The
holder of the permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of such
inspections.
(23) Section 110.3.1, Footing and foundation inspection, is amended to
add the following:
110.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and
foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings
are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For
concrete foundations, any required form shall be in place prior to
inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except
where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the
concrete need not be on the job. All required foundation dampproofing
and/or waterproofing materials must be in place.
(24) Section 110.3.11, Ceiling close-in inspection, is added to read as
follows:
110.3.11 Ceiling close-in inspection. The ceiling close-in
inspection shall be made after all work required and other
components to be concealed are complete, prior to the installation
of suspended ceiling systems or finishes.
(25) Section 110.3.11, Final inspection, is amended to read as follows:
110.3.11 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made
after all work required by the building permit is completed. Final
approval shall be issued only after the following conditions, if
applicable, are met:
(a) Final electrical approval.
(b) Final plumbing approval.
(c) Final mechanical approval.
(d) Fire Department approval.
(e) Completion of all site work.
(f) Compliance with any special conditions of permit approval.
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:234
(26) Section 110.5, Inspection requests, is amended to read as follows:
110.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder or their duly authorized agent to notify the Department
when work is ready for inspection. Inspection requests must be
made at least 24 hours in advance. In the event that the premises
are not ready for the requested inspection or the premises are not
safely accessible, a reinspection fee for each additional visit for the
same inspection may be imposed. The fee for a reinspection shall
be as established in the fee schedule.
(27) Section 113.1, General, and 113.2, Limitations on Authority, are
amended to read as follows:
113.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by
a decision of the Code Official or a notice or order issued under
this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20
days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by
other means.
113.2 Board of Appeals. Any reference to a board of appeals
in this code shall be construed to mean the City of Hagerstown
Board of Code Appeals as established by the Code of the City of
Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV. This Board shall administer
the appeal process in accordance with the Code of the City of
Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV.
(28) Section 113.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(29) Section 114.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive
of the Code Official or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, unless such action is specifically identified
as a misdemeanor, shall be deemed to have committed a municipal
infraction and shall be subject to the regulations as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Municipal Infractions,
of the City Code. The fine for committing a municipal infraction
under this code shall be up to $500 for each violation, subject
to the municipality's authority to double the fine pursuant to the
Maryland Annotated Code, Local Government Article,
§§ 6-106(a)(2) and 6-107. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:235
Actions or violations specifically identified as a misdemeanor shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(30) Section 115.2, Issuance, is amended to read as follows:
115.2 Issuance. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall
be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's
agent, or to the person performing the work, or posted at the
property. Upon issuance of a stop-work order, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop-work order shall state the reason for
the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be
permitted to resume.
B. Chapter 3, Use and Occupancy Classification: The following sections
are amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 305.2.3, Five or fewer children in a dwelling unit, is
amended to read as follows:
305.2.3 Eight or fewer children in a dwelling unit. A facility
such as the above within a dwelling unit and having eight or fewer
persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as Group R-3
occupancy or shall comply with the International Residential Code.
(2) Section 308.5.4, Five or fewer persons receiving care in a dwelling
unit, is amended to read as follows:
308.5.4 Eight or fewer persons receiving care in a dwelling
unit. A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having
eight or fewer persons receiving custodial care shall be classified
as Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the International
Residential Code.
C. Chapter 5, General Building Heights and Areas, Table 508.4, Required
Separation of Occupancies, is amended to read as follows:25
D. Chapter 7, Fire-Resistance-Rated Construction, Section 706.6, Vertical
continuity, is amended to add the following to the list of exceptions:
7. In Groups R-2 and R-3, as applicable in Section 101.2, walls are
permitted to terminate at the roof sheathing or deck in Types III, IV,
and V construction, if:
7.1 The roof sheathing or deck is constructed of approved
noncombustible materials or of fire-retardant-treated wood for
a distance of four feet (1,220 mm) on both sides of the wall; or
25.Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:236
7.2 The building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 for Group R-2, and Section 903.3.1.1,
903.3.1.2, or 903.3.1.3 for Group R-3; or
7.3 All of the following:
7.3.1 The roof is protected with five-eighths-inch (15.9 mm)
Type X gypsum board directly beneath the underside of
the roof sheathing or deck, supported by a minimum of
two-inch (51 mm) ledgers attached to the side of the roof
framing members, for a minimum distance of four feet
(1,220 mm) on both sides of the fire wall; and
7.3.2 Openings in the roof are not located within four feet
(1,220 mm) of the firewall; and
7.3.3 The roof is covered with a minimum Class C roof
covering.
E. Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems, Section 907.2.10.2, (Fire Alarm
and Detections Systems) R-2, R-3, R-4, and I-1, is amended to add
Section 907.2.10.2.1, Alterations, repairs and additions, as follows:
907.2.10.2.1 Alterations, repairs and additions. When interior
alterations, repairs or additions requiring a building permit occur, or
when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing
dwellings, the individual dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke
alarms located as required for new dwellings; the smoke alarms shall
be interconnected and hardwired.
Exception: Interconnection and hard-wiring of smoke alarms in
existing areas shall not be required where the alterations or repairs do
not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the
structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available
which could provide access for hard wiring and interconnection without
the removal of interior finishes.
F. Chapter 10, Means of Egress: The following sections are amended to
read as follows:
(1) Section 1015.2, Where required, is amended to read as follows:
1015.2 Where required. Guards shall be located along opensided
walking surfaces, including mezzanines, equipment
platforms, aisles, stairs, ramps, landings and rooftop egress routes
that are located more than 30 inches (762 mm) measured vertically
to the floor or grade below at any point within 36 inches (914 mm)
horizontally to the edge of the open side. Guards shall be adequate
in strength and attachment in accordance with Section 1607.8.
Exception: Guards are not required for the following locations:
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:237
1. On the loading side of loading docks or piers.
2. On the audience side of stages and raised platforms, including
stairs leading up to the stage and raised platform.
3. On raised stage and platform floor areas, such as runways,
ramps and side stages used for entertainment or
presentations.
4. At vertical openings in the performance area of stages and
platforms.
5. At elevated walking surfaces appurtenant to stages and
platforms for access to and utilization of special lighting or
equipment.
6. Along vehicle service pits not accessible to the public.
7. In assembly seating areas at cross aisles in accordance with
Section 1029.17.2.
(2) Section 1015.2.2, Rooftop egress routes, is added as follows:
1015.2.2 Rooftop egress routes. Guards shall be provided where
the rooftop is used as a means of egress from Group R occupancies.
Guards shall be installed the entire length of the designated
walking surface as defined in Section 1024.1.1, from the exit access
doorway or window to the exit access stairway leading to the exit
discharge. The guards shall be constructed so as to prevent the
passage of a sphere 21 inches (533 mm) in diameter, unless the exit
access is within 36 inches (965 mm) of a roof edge or open side of
a walking surface and such edge or open side is located more than
30 inches (762 mm) above the floor, roof, or grade below, then the
requirements of Section 1015.4 shall apply.
(3) Section 1024.1.1, Rooftop egress routes, is added as follows:
1024.1.1 Rooftop egress routes. Where the rooftop is to be used
as a means of egress from Group R occupancies, approval by the
Code Official must be obtained and a designated walking surface
must be provided. The designated walking surface shall be of the
required width to serve the occupant load as specified in Section
1005.1 or be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in width, shall have
a slope less than or equal to a 4:12 slope in any direction, shall have
a slip-resistant coating or other approved surface covering, and
shall be provided guards in accordance with Section 1015.2.2. The
designated walking surfaces shall be maintained free of hazards,
such as sharp or protruding objects, loose boards, corrosion, leaks,
spills, snow, and ice.
G. Chapter 11, Accessibility, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:238
H. Chapter 16, Structural design, Section 1608.2, Ground snow loads, is
amended to read as follows:
1608.2 Ground snow loads. The ground snow loads to be used in
determining the design snow loads for roofs shall be 40 pounds per
square foot.
I. Chapter 18, Soils and Foundations, Section 1809.5, Frost protection, is
amended to read as follows:
1809.5 Frost protection. Except where erected upon solid rock or
otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and other
permanent supports of all buildings and structures shall extend no less
than 30 inches (762 mm) below finished grade.
Exception: Storage buildings and other structures within Use Group U,
170 square feet or less in area and 10 feet or less in eave height.
J. Chapter 23, Wood, Section 2308.3.1, Foundation plates or sills, is
amended to read as follows:
2308.3.1 Foundation plates or sills. Foundation plates or sills
resting on concrete or masonry foundations shall comply with Section
2304.3.1. Foundation plates or sills shall be bolted or anchored to the
foundation with not less than one-half-inch-diameter (12.7 mm) steel
bolts or approved anchors spaced to provide equivalent anchorage as
the steel bolts. Bolts shall be embedded not less than seven inches (178
mm) into concrete or masonry. The bolts shall be located in the middle
third of the width of the plate. Bolts shall be spaced not more than
four feet (1,219 mm) on center and there shall be not less than two
bolts or anchor straps per piece with one bolt or anchor strap located
not more than 12 inches (305 mm) or less than four inches (102 mm)
from each end of each piece. Bolts in sill plates of braced wall lines in
structures over two stories above grade shall be spaced not more than
four feet (1,219 mm) on center. A properly sized nut and washer shall
be tightened on each bolt to the plate.
K. Chapter 24, Glass and Glazing, Section 2406.1, Human impact loads, is
amended by adding Section 2406.1.5, to read as follows:
2406.1.5 Code conflict. In the event of conflict between this chapter
and the requirements for safety glazing set forth in Public Safety
Article, Title 12, Subtitle 4, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the
requirements set forth in the Annotated Code of Maryland shall prevail.
L. Chapter 27, Electrical, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
M. Chapter 29, Plumbing Systems, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
N. Chapter 30, Elevators and Conveying Systems, Section 3001, General,
is amended to read as follows:
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:239
3001.1 Scope. This chapter governs the design, construction,
installation, alteration and repair of elevators and conveying systems
and their components. The provisions of this chapter relate to elevators
and conveying systems and are in addition to and not instead of the
requirements set forth in Public Safety Article, Title 12, Subtitle 8, of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. In the event of a conflict between
this code and the Annotated Code of Maryland, the provisions of the
Annotated Code of Maryland shall prevail.
O. Chapter 31, Special Construction, Section 3109.1.1, Swimming Pool
and Spa Code, is added as follows:
3109.1.1 Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall be added and amended
as follows:
A certain code known as the "International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code," 2018 Edition, and the whole thereof, of which a copy is on file
with the office of the Clerk of the City of Hagerstown, be and the
same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein.
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Swimming
Pool and Spa Code of the City of Hagerstown, hereinafter referred
to as the "Swimming Pool and Spa Code" or "this code."
(2) Section 102.7.1, Application of the International Codes, is amended
to read as follows:
102.7.1 Application of the International Codes. Where the
International Codes are referenced in this code, the provisions of
the International Code shall apply to related systems and shall
be considered as a part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each reference and as further regulated in
Sections 102.7.1.1 through 102.7.1.12.
102.7.1.1 Residential building. Any reference to the
International Residential Code (IRC) shall mean the Building Code
of the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City
Council. The provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the Code of the
City of Hagerstown shall apply.
102.7.1.2 Building. Any reference to the International Building
Code (IBC) shall mean the Building Code of the City of Hagerstown
as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of
Chapter 64, Article I of the Code of the City of Hagerstown shall
apply.
102.7.1.3 Electrical. Any reference to the NFPA 70 or the
National Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code of
the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:240
The provisions of Chapter 64, Article IV, of the Code of the City
of Hagerstown shall apply to all electrical installations and
modifications.
102.7.1.4 Existing building. Any reference to the International
Existing Building Code (IEBC) shall mean the Maryland Building
Rehabilitation Code (COMAR 05.16), as may be amended or
restated from time to time.
102.7.1.5 Mechanical. Any reference to the International
Mechanical Code (IMC) shall mean the Mechanical Code of the
City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
The provisions of Chapter 64, Article VI, of the Code of the City
of Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving heating, air conditioning and ventilation.
102.7.1.6 Fire prevention. Any reference to the International
Fire Code (IFC) shall mean the Maryland State Fire Prevention
Code (COMAR 29.06.01), as may be amended or restated from time
to time.
102.7.1.7 Gas. Any reference to the International Fuel Gas Code
(IFGC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City of Hagerstown as
adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of Chapter
64, Article V, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply to
all installations and modifications involving fuel gas.
102.7.1.8 Energy. Any reference to the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) shall mean the International Energy
Conservation Code, as adopted in the Maryland Building
Performance Standards (COMAR 05.02.07), as may be amended
from time to time.
102.7.1.9 Property maintenance. Any reference to the
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) shall mean the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted
by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64,
Article III, of the City Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
102.7.1.10 Plumbing. Any reference to the International
Plumbing Code (IPC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City
of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article V, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving plumbing.
102.7.1.11 Accessibility. All sections of this code relating to
applicable requirements for accessibility and usability of buildings
and facilities by individuals with disabilities shall refer to the
Maryland Accessibility Code (COMAR 05.02.02), as may be
amended or restated from time to time.
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:241
102.7.1.12 Swimming pools and spas. Any reference to the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) shall mean the
Building Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor
and City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the
Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
(3) Section 103.1, Creation of an enforcement agency, is amended to
read as follows:
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. This code shall be
administered by the Planning and Code Administration
Department, hereinafter referred to as the "Department." The
executive official in charge thereof or his designee(s) shall be
known as the "Code Official." Any reference to the Department of
Building Safety shall mean the Department.
(4) Section 105.1, When required, is amended to read as follows:
105.1 When required. Any owner, or owner's authorized agent
who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish
a pool or spa or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert, or replace any associated pool or spa system, the
installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause such
work to be performed, shall first make application to the
Department and obtain the required permit for the work.
(5) Section 105.2, Application for permit, is amended to read as
follows:
105.2 Application for permit. Each application for a permit, with
the required fee, shall be filed with the Department on a form
furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description
of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be
signed by the owner or owner's authorized agent. The permit
application shall contain such other information required by the
Code Official.
(6) Section 105.5.3, Expiration, is amended to read as follows:
105.5.3 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Department under
the provisions of this code shall expire and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within
180 days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized
by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180
days at any time after the work is commenced. Work shall be
considered abandoned if no valid request for inspection is received
by the Department for a period of 180 days. Before such work can
be recommenced, the permit must be reactivated by submitting
application for same and paying a fee as established by Department
policy, provided that no changes have been made or will be made
in the original construction documents for such work, and further
that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:242
Every such permit shall expire one year after issuance, unless an
extension is granted in accordance with Section 105.5.4.
(7) Section 105.5.4, Extensions, is amended to read as follows:
105.5.4 Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit
shall have the right to apply for an extension of the time within
which the permittee will commence work under that permit when
work is unable to be commenced within the time required by
this section for good and satisfactory reasons. Unless otherwise
approved by the Chief Code Official, the Department shall extend
the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180
days if there is reasonable cause, in accordance with Department
policy. The fee for an extension shall be as established by
Department policy.
(8) Section 105.6.2, Fee schedule, is amended to read as follows:
105.6.2 Fee schedule. Fees for permits shall be paid as
established in the fee schedule.
(9) Section 105.6.3, Fee refunds, is amended to read as follows:
105.6.3 Fee refunds. The Department shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.
2. For a permit in which no associated work has been done, the
refund shall consist of the permit fee less the application fee
and any technology fee.
3. For a permit in which associated work has commenced, no
refund shall be applicable.
The Department shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of the payment.
(10) Section 106.2, Required inspections and testing, is amended to
read as follows:
106.2 Required inspections and testing. Pool and spa
installations or alterations thereto, including equipment, piping,
and appliances related thereto, shall be inspected by the Code
Official to ensure compliance with the requirements of this code.
The holder of the permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of
such inspections.
(11) Section 106.5, Inspection requests, is amended to read as follows:
106.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder or their duly authorized agent to notify the Department
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:243
when work is ready for inspection. Inspection requests must be
made at least 24 hours in advance. In the event that the premises
are not ready for the requested inspection or the premises are not
safely accessible, a reinspection fee for each additional visit for the
same inspection may be imposed. The fee for a reinspection shall
be as established in the fee schedule.
(12) Section 107.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
107.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive
of the Code Official or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, unless such action is specifically identified
as a misdemeanor, shall be deemed to have committed a municipal
infraction and shall be subject to the regulations as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Municipal Infractions,
of the City Code. The fine for committing a municipal infraction
under this code shall be up to $500 for each violation, subject
to the municipality's authority to double the fine pursuant to the
Maryland Annotated Code, Local Government Article,
§§ 6-106(a)(2) and 6-107. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
Actions or violations specifically identified as a misdemeanor shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(13) Section 107.5, Stop-work orders, is amended to read as follows:
107.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Code Official,
work on any gas system that is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall
immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to
the person performing the work, or posted at the property. The
notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to
resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code Official shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any
person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of $500.
(14) Section 108.1, Application for appeal, and 108.2, Membership of
board, are amended to read as follows:
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-2
1:244
108.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by
a decision of the Code Official or a notice or order issued under
this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20
days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by
other means.
108.2 Board of Appeals. Any reference to a board of appeals in
this code shall be construed to mean the City of Hagerstown Board
of Code Appeals as established by Code of the City of Hagerstown,
Chapter 10, Article XIV. This Board shall administer the appeal
process in accordance with the Code of the City of Hagerstown,
Chapter 10, Article XIV.
(15) Sections 108.2.1 through 108.7 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(16) Section 305.1, General, is amended to delete the noted Exceptions
in their entirety.
(17) Section 305.5, Onground residential pool structure as a barrier, is
amended to read as follows:
305.5 On-ground residential pool structure as a barrier. An
on-ground residential pool wall structure or a barrier mounted on
top of an on-ground residential pool structure shall serve as a
barrier where all of the following conditions are present:
1. Where only the pool wall serves as the barrier, the bottom of
the wall is on grade, the top of the wall is not less than 48
inches (1,219 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter of the
pool, the wall complies with the requirements of Section 305.2
and the pool manufacturer allows the wall to serve as a barrier.
2. Where a barrier is mounted on top of the pool wall, the top of
the barrier is not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) above grade
for the entire perimeter of the pool, and the wall and the
barrier on top of the wall comply with the requirements of
Section 305.2.
3. Ladders or steps used as a means of access to the pool must be
surrounded by a barrier that meets the requirements of
Section 305.
4. Barriers that are mounted on top of on-ground residential pool
walls are installed in accordance with the pool manufacturer's
instructions.
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:245
§ 64-3. Licenses and working permits.
P. Chapter 33, Safeguards During Construction: The following sections
are amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 3302.3, Fire safety during construction, is amended to read
as follows:
3302.3 Fire safety during construction. Fire safety during
construction shall comply with the applicable requirements of this
code and the applicable provisions of the Maryland State Fire
Prevention Code (COMAR 29.06.01), as may be amended or
restated from time to time.
(2) Section 3303.7, Fire safety during demolition, is amended to read
as follows:
3303.7 Fire safety during demolition. Fire safety during
demolition shall comply with the applicable requirements of this
code and the applicable requirements of the Maryland State Fire
Prevention Code (COMAR 29.06.01), as may be amended from time
to time.
Q. Appendix H, Signs, is amended by adding Section H112.6, Projecting
signs, to read as follows:
H112.6 Projecting signs. A person shall not erect, install, rehang
or maintain over public property any sign, awning, canopy, or other
overhanging device for which a permit is required under the provisions
of this code until an insurance policy shall have been filed for public
liability insurance in the amount of $300,000 per accident and for
property damage in the amount of $100,000 as herein required.
Such insurance policy shall protect and save the jurisdiction of the
City of Hagerstown harmless from any and all claims or demands for
damages by any reason of defects in the construction or by any damage
resulting from the collapse, failure, or combustion of the sign or parts
thereof, and it shall be required that the City of Hagerstown be named
as additional insured in the certificate of insurance, a copy of which
shall be filed in the office of the Department.
A. Licenses required. All carpenters and/or contractors who desire to
engage or work in the business of real estate repair and/or construction
within the City of Hagerstown are required to procure a license or
working permit, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
association or corporation to do any carpentry or construction work
relating to real estate in the City of Hagerstown unless first licensed to
do so as hereinafter provided.
B. Employment of unlicensed personnel prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any owner, lessee or agent or other person having any authority or duty
in connection with any building or premises within the City of
§ 64-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-3
1:246
Hagerstown to employ any person, firm, association or corporation to
do any construction or repair work in any such building or premises
unless such person, firm, association or corporation is so licensed.
C. Qualifications. The license required hereunder shall be granted by the
Department upon proof by an applicant of at least four years of
practical experience at the trade and the payment of the license fee and
the posting of a bond as hereinafter provided.
D. License duration; fees. The license period shall be for a maximum
period of two years and shall expire December 31 of each odd calendar
year. The license fee shall be as established in the fee schedule.
E. Technology fee. In addition to the annual license fee required herein,
each licensee shall be required to pay a technology fee in connection
with the issuance of each license. The amount of the technology fee
shall be as established in the fee schedule.
F. Filing of bond required. Upon the issuance of a license and before
engaging in business, every licensee shall file with the Department a
bond in the amount of $20,000 with approved security conditioned to
keep and save the City of Hagerstown free and harmless from any
damages or expense in connection with any work or act arising out of
the license so issued by the Department to such carpenters and/or
contractors. These bonds shall be made in favor of the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland, and filed with the Department.
G. Corporate licensing. A construction firm, association or corporation
shall require only one license; provided, however, that all construction
and/or repair work is done by employees of the licensed firm,
association or corporation which shall be responsible for the work and
acts of such employees.
H. Licenses nontransferable. No carpenter, construction firm, association
or corporation shall allow his/her or its name or license to be used by
any other person, firm, association or corporation for doing
construction and/or repair work or for any purpose whatsoever.
I. Suspension or revocation of license. The Code Official may suspend or
revoke any license for failure to correct faulty work, for performing
work without proper permits, for engaging in unsafe acts or operating
in an unsafe manner or for lending his/her name or license to others for
the purpose of obtaining building permits. The holder of said license or
working permit may appeal the suspension or revocation to the Board
of Code Appeals, as outlined in Chapter 10, Article XIV, of the Code of
the City of Hagerstown.
J. Violations and penalties. Any violation of this § 64-3, Licenses and
working permits, shall be considered a municipal infraction and subject
to the regulations as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
III, Municipal Infractions, of the City Code with a maximum fine of
$500.
§ 64-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-4
1:247
§ 64-4. Title.
The International Building Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendixes F, G,
H, and I along with the amendments in § 64-2, shall be known as the
"Building Code of the City of Hagerstown."
§ 64-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-4
1:248
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)26
§ 64-5. through § 64-7. (Reserved)
26.Editor’s Note: Former Art. II, Demolition of Structures, as amended, was repealed
9-24-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-15.
§ 64-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-5
1:249

ARTICLE III
Property Maintenance Standards27
[Amended 4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-24; 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-31; 5-20-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-14; 2-4-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-2; 2-1-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-04; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-04]
§ 64-8. Adoption of standards and regulations.
The Property Maintenance Code is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 64-9. Title.
The regulations contained in this Article III shall be known as the "Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Hagerstown."
§ 64-10. through § 64-13. (Reserved)
27.See also Ch. 184, Property Maintenance.
§ 64-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-10
1:251

ARTICLE IV
Electrical Standards
[Added 10-23-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-15;28 amended 6-23-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-13; 9-24-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-17]
§ 64-14. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain code known as the "National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition (NFPA
70)," and the whole thereof, of which code a copy is on file with the office of
the Clerk of the City of Hagerstown, be and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 64-15. Title.
The National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition (NFPA-70), along with the
additions included in § 64-16 and the revisions included in § 64-17, shall be
known as the "Electrical Code of the City of Hagerstown."
§ 64-16. Additions.
The following article in its entirety is added to the aforesaid National
Electrical Code, 2017 Edition (NFPA 70), to read as follows:
Article 89 - Administration and Enforcement
89.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the
City of Hagerstown," hereinafter referred to as the "City Electrical Code" or
"this code."
89.2 Scope. These regulations shall control all matters concerning the
construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, use, location and
maintenance of electrical systems of all buildings and structures and shall
apply to existing or proposed buildings and structures, except as such
matters are otherwise provided for in other ordinances or statutes or in the
rules and regulations authorized for promulgation under the provisions of
this code.
Exception: The legal use and occupancy of any structure existing on the
date of adoption of this code for which approval has been received may
be continued without change, except as may be specifically covered in
this code, the Building Code of the City of Hagerstown, the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Hagerstown, or as may be deemed
necessary by the Code Official for the general safety and welfare of the
occupants and the public.
89.3 Application of references. Unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code, all references to article or section numbers or to provisions not
specifically identified by number shall be construed to refer to such article,
section or provision of this code.
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. IV, Electrical
Standards, as amended.
§ 64-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-16
1:253
89.4 Code remedial. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed
intent, which is to ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they
are affected by the installation of the electrical system through sanitary
equipment, light, ventilation and fire safety and in general to secure safety
to life and property from all hazards incident to design and installation.
89.5 Matters not provided for. Any requirement essential for fire or
sanitary safety of an existing or proposed building or structure or for the
safety of the occupants thereof and which is not specifically covered by this
code shall be determined by the Code Official.
89.6 Continuation of unlawful use. The continuation of occupancy or use
of a building or structure or of a part thereof contrary to the provisions
of this code shall be deemed a violation and subject to the penalties as
enumerated.
89.7 Other regulations. When the provisions herein specified for safety
and welfare are more restrictive than other regulations, this code shall
control; but in any case, the most rigid requirements of either the Building
Code of the City of Hagerstown, Electrical Code of the City of Hagerstown,
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hagerstown, or the Maryland
State Fire Prevention Code shall apply whenever they conflict.
89.8 Invalidity. In the event that any part of the provisions of this code is
held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or
illegal any of the other parts or provisions thereof, which were determined
to be legal; and, it shall be presumed that this code would have been passed
and shall be interpreted without such illegal or invalid parts or provisions.
89.9 Special professional services. Where applications for unusual
design or magnitude are filed or where code reference standards require
special engineering inspections, the Code Official is authorized to require
full-time project representation by an engineer. This requirement shall be
determined prior to the issuance of a permit and shall be a requisite for
permit issuance. All fees and costs related to the performance of special
professional services shall be borne by the owner.
89.10 Duties and powers of the Code Official. This code shall be
administered by the Planning and Code Administration Department,
hereinafter referred to as the "Department." The executive official in charge
thereof or his designee(s) shall be known as the "Code Official." The Code
Official will enforce all the provisions of this code and shall act on any
question relative to the mode or manner of electrical installation, materials
used or installation of service equipment in all buildings and structures
except as otherwise specifically provided for elsewhere. The Code Official
is hereby granted the authority to cease or cause to be ceased the flow of
electricity to any building, structure, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit
or housing unit or group of units if, in the opinion of the Code Official,
the continued flow of electricity poses a threat of hazard to the health,
safety or welfare of the tenants or the general public. The Code Official
shall serve notice to the owner of the property where such electricity has
§ 64-16 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-16
1:254
been discontinued, stating the reason or reasons for said discontinuance of
electricity and the conditions under which the same may be restored. Notice
shall be served as soon as practicable after an unsafe condition is found to
exist, but shall not be deemed a prerequisite to the termination of the flow
of electricity.
89.11 When permit is required. It shall be unlawful to install or alter any
wiring or equipment or engage in the installation of any electrical system
which is regulated by this code without first making application to the
Department and obtaining the required permit for the work. All applicable
fees must be paid at the time of application. Any exemptions from obtaining
a permit required by this code shall not be construed as to authorize any
work to be performed in violation of the provisions of this code or any other
laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Exception No. 1: Repairs, as defined in this code, which can be effected
without implicating the restrictions and requirements of this code shall be
exempted from this provision.
Exception No. 2: The following items shall be exempted from this provision:
1. Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
2. Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets
therefor.
3. Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required
capacity in the same location.
4. Installation of a groundfault circuit interrupter receptacle to replace
an existing receptacle in the following locations: bathrooms, unfinished
basements, garages, and exterior/outdoors.
5. In residential occupancies, the removal and replacement of an existing
dishwasher, provided that the installation does not require replacement
or rearrangement of wiring.
6. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved
permanently installed receptacles.
7. Replacement of receptacles without alteration of existing wiring or
addition of wiring or devices to a circuit, in accordance with
Department policy.
Exception No. 3: Where equipment and appliance replacements or repairs
must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall
be submitted within the next working business day of the Department.
89.12 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Code Official under the
provisions of this code shall expire and become null and void if the work
authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the
date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended
or abandoned for a period of 180 days at any time after the work is
commenced. Work shall be considered abandoned if no valid request for
inspection is received by the Department for a period of 180 days. Before
§ 64-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-16
1:255
such work can be recommenced, the permit must be reactivated by
submitting application for same and paying a fee as established by
Department policy, provided that no changes have been made or will be
made in the original construction documents for such work, and further that
such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. Every such
permit shall expire one year after issuance, unless an extension is granted
in accordance with Section 89.13.
89.13 Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have
the right to apply for an extension of the time within which the permittee
will commence work under that permit when work is unable to be
commenced within the time required by this section for good and
satisfactory reasons. Unless otherwise approved by the Chief Code Official,
the Department shall extend the time for action by the permittee for a
period not exceeding 180 days if there is reasonable cause, in accordance
with Department policy. The fee for an extension shall be as established by
Department policy.
89.14 Suspension or revocation of permit. The Code Official shall
revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this code in case
of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on
the construction documents upon which the permit or approval was based.
89.15 Fee schedule. Fees for electrical permits shall be paid as
established in the fee schedule. The permit fee shall be double the amount
established when the work to be permitted has begun prior to the issuance
of the permit.
89.15.1 Fee refunds. The Department shall authorize the refunding of fees
as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid
or collected.
2. For a permit in which no associated work has been done, the refund
shall consist of the permit fee less the application fee and any
technology fee.
3. For a permit in which associated work has commenced, no refund shall
be applicable.
The Department shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except
upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180
days after the date of the payment.
89.16 Inspection. The Code Official is authorized to conduct such
inspections as are deemed necessary to determine compliance with the
provisions of this code. Construction or work for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspection by the Code Official, and such construction
or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until
approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be
an approval of any other condition not expressly inspected and approved. It
shall remain the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain
§ 64-16 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-16
1:256
accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the Code Official
nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or
replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
89.16.1 Required inspections and testing. The Code Official, upon
notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's agent, shall make
the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall
either approve that portion of construction or shall notify the permit holder
or an agent of any violations that must be corrected. The holder of the
permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of such inspections.
A. Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated and bedded, conduits or piping are installed, and before any
backfill is put in place.
B. Service inspection shall be made after the metering equipment,
grounding, main disconnect means and all associated service wiring are
installed, prior to being energized by the utility company.
C. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the building is weatherprotected
and all fire-blocking, fire-stopping, draft-stopping and bracing
is in place and all conduits, wiring, and other elements are roughed-in,
prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
D. Ceiling close-in inspection shall be made after all conduits, wiring,
fixtures and other elements to be concealed are complete, prior to the
installation of suspended ceiling systems or finishes.
E. Final inspection shall be made after the building is complete, all
electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the
structure is ready for occupancy.
89.16.2 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above,
the Code Official shall be authorized to make or require other related
inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the
provisions of this code.
89.16.3 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the
permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the Code Official when work
is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide
access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this
code.
89.16.4 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point
indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval
of the Code Official. The Code Official, upon notification, shall make the
requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the
construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder
or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any
portions that do not comply shall be corrected, and such portions shall
not be covered or concealed until reinspected and authorized by the Code
Official.
§ 64-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-16
1:257
89.16.5 Approval agencies. The Code Official is authorized to accept
reports of approved inspection agencies, provided that such agencies satisfy
the requirements as to qualifications and reliability, in the sole discretion of
the Department.
89.16.6 Testing. Installations shall be tested as required in this code and
in accordance with 89.16.6A, B and C. Tests shall be made by the permit
holder and observed by the Code Official.
A. New, altered, extended or repaired installations. New installations and
parts of existing installations which have been altered, extended,
renovated or repaired shall be tested as prescribed herein to disclose
any defects.
B. Apparatus, instruments, material and labor for tests. Apparatus,
instruments, material and labor required for testing an installation or
part thereof shall be furnished by the permit holder.
C. Reinspection and testing. Where any work or installation does not pass
an initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so
as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall
then be resubmitted to the Code Official for inspection and testing.
89.16.7 Approval. After the prescribed tests and inspections indicate that
the work complies in all respects with this code, a notice of approval shall
be issued by the Code Official.
89.16.8 Revocation. The Code Official is authorized to suspend or revoke
a notice of approval issued under the provisions of this code, in writing,
wherever the notice is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect
information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or
structure, premises or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or
regulation or any of the provisions of this code.
89.16.9 Temporary connection. The Code Official shall have the authority
to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the
utility source for the purpose of testing electrical systems or for use under
a temporary certificate of occupancy.
89.16.10 Connection of service utilities. A person shall not make
connections from a utility or other source of power to any building or system
that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required until authorized
by the Code Official.
89.17 Reinspection fees. In the event that the premises are not ready
for a requested inspection or the premises are not safely accessible; the
Code Official may impose a reinspection fee for each additional visit for the
same inspection. The fee for a reinspection shall be as established in the fee
schedule.
89.18 Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Code Official, work on
any electrical system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this
code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such
§ 64-16 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-16
1:258
notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property,
or to the owner's agent, or to the person performing the work, or posted
at the property. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is
authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code Official shall
not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any
person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having
been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
to a fine of $500.
89.18.1 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work
in or about a structure after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation
or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and be subject
to the penalty as described in § 64-18.
89.18.2 Withholding of permits. Whenever the Code Official shall find
that any owner or contractor is in violation of the provisions of this code
or of the rules and regulations of any other department or agency of the
City of Hagerstown, in connection with the erection, maintenance or repair
of buildings, structures, lands or equipment thereon or therein, he/she may
refuse to grant any future permits to such until the violations have been
corrected.
89.19 License requirements.
A. All master electricians who desire to engage or work in the business
of electrical installation within the City of Hagerstown are required
to procure a master electrician license from the Planning and Code
Administration Department. It shall be unlawful for any person to do
electrical work that requires a permit in the City of Hagerstown unless
first licensed to do so.
B. Prior to being issued a license, each master electrician shall file with
the Planning and Code Administration Department proof of liability
insurance coverage or surety in the amount as specified by the
Maryland Statewide Master Electrical Licensing Board conditioned to
keep and save the City of Hagerstown harmless and free from any
damages or expenses in connection with any work or act by a licensed
master electrician performing electrical work in the City of Hagerstown.
C. All master electricians desiring to obtain a license from the City must
present their Maryland State or Washington County master license
together with their certificate of insurance as required by the state,
a photo ID, and payment of fees. The license period shall be for a
maximum period of two years and expire December 31 of the even
calendar year.
D. License fees shall be as follows:
Master electricians: $85 for a two-year period.
Restricted master electricians: $85 for a two-year period.
§ 64-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-16
1:259
An additional application fee of $25 is required for each new license
and for any existing license not renewed within 30 calendar days of its
expiration.
E. Technology fee. In addition to the biannual license fee required herein,
each licensee is required to pay a technology fee of $40 in connection
with the issuance of each license.
F. Any electrical firm, association or corporation may apply for and receive
a master electrician license in the City of Hagerstown, provided that
only one master electrician is authorized to secure permits for that firm,
association, or corporation.
G. No electrician, electrical firm, association or corporation shall allow
his/her or its name or license to be used by any other person, firm,
association or corporation for the purpose of obtaining electrical
permits.
H. The Code Official may suspend or revoke any master electrician's
license for failure to correct faulty or improper work, performing
electrical work without proper permits or for lending his/her name or
license to others for the purpose of obtaining electrical permits. The
holder of said master electrician license may appeal the suspension or
revocation to the Board of Code Appeals.
§ 64-17. Amendments.
The following sections of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition
(NFPA-70), are amended to read as follows:
A. Article 100, Definitions, Part I, General, Repairs, is added to read as
follows:
Repairs. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
electrical system for the purpose of its maintenance or to correct
damage that is limited to work on the item and does not include
complete or substantial replacement or other new work affecting public
health or general safety.
B. Article 210, Branch Circuits, Section 210.8, Ground-fault circuitinterrupter
protection for personnel, Subsection (A), Dwelling units,
Item (7), is amended to read as follows:
(7) Sinks - where receptacles are installed within 1.8 meter (six feet) of
the outside edge of the bowl of the sink
Exception to (7): A receptacle installed behind a refrigerator
located in a designated area constructed or designed specifically
for the refrigerator that is installed as a single receptacle to supply
only that appliance, not the countertop, shall not be required to
have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection.
§ 64-16 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-17
1:260
C. Article 210, Branch Circuits, Section 210.8, Ground-fault circuitinterrupter
protection for personnel, Subsection (B), Other than
dwelling units, Item (5), is amended to read as follows:
(5) Sinks - where receptacles are installed within 1.8 meter (six feet) of
the outside edge of the bowl of the sink
Exception to (5): A receptacle installed behind a refrigerator
located in a designated area constructed or designed specifically
for the refrigerator that is installed as a single receptacle to supply
only that appliance, not the countertop, shall not be required to
have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection.
D. Article 210, Branch Circuits, Section 210.52, Dwelling unit receptacle
outlets, Subsection (A), General provisions, is amended to read as
follows:
210.52(A) General provisions. In every kitchen, family room, dining
room, living room, parlor, library, den, sunroom, bedroom, recreation
room, or similar room or area of dwelling units, receptacle outlets
shall be installed in accordance with the general provisions specified
in 210.52(A)(1) through (A)(3). General lighting branch circuits in
dwellings must not have more than 12 power-consuming outlets. A
duplex receptacle shall be considered and counted as one outlet. Smoke
detectors are not to be counted as power-consuming devices.
E. Article 210, Branch Circuits, Section 210.52, Dwelling unit receptacle
outlets, Subsection (G), Basements and garages, is amended to read as
follows:
210.52(G) Basements and garages. For a one-family dwelling, at
least one receptacle outlet, in addition to any provided for the laundry
equipment, shall be installed in each attached garage, and in each
detached garage with electrical power. At least one readily accessible
120-volt, GFCI-protected convenience receptacle shall be provided for
each car space. The receptacle outlets and all electrical equipment
located in each attached and each detached garage with electrical
power shall be installed at minimum height of 450 mm (18 inches)
above the finished garage floor. Ceiling receptacles installed for garage
door openers are not considered readily accessible. See Section
210.8(A)(2) and (A)(5). Where a portion of the basement is finished into
one or more habitable rooms, each separate unfinished portion shall
have a receptacle outlet installed in accordance with this section.
F. Article 210, Branch Circuits, Section 210.52, Dwelling unit receptacle
outlets, Subsection (B), Small appliance, Item (1), Receptacle outlets
served, Exception No. 2, is amended to read as follows:
Exception No. 2: In addition to the required receptacles specified by
210.52, a receptacle outlet to serve a specific appliance shall be
permitted to be supplied from an individual branch circuit rated 15
amperes or greater. This circuit shall not be required to have ground-
§ 64-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-17
1:261
fault circuit-interrupter protection if the receptacle supplied meets the
requirements of 210.8(A)(7).
G. Article 210, Branch Circuits, Section 210.52, Dwelling unit receptacle
outlets, Subsection (J), Smoke alarms, is added as follows:
210.52(J) Smoke alarms. For individual dwelling units undergoing
a complete rewire of the electrical system, hard-wired interconnected
smoke alarms with battery backup shall be installed in each sleeping
room, in the vicinity immediately outside each sleeping room, and on all
levels within the individual dwelling unit (excluding unconditioned attic
spaces and crawl spaces).
H. Article 210, Branch Circuits, Section 210.64, Electrical service areas,
Exception No. 1 and Exception No. 2 are hereby deleted in their
entirety.
I. Article 210, Branch Circuits, Section 210.65, Other than dwelling unit
receptacle outlets, is added as follows:
210.65 Other than dwelling unit receptacle outlets. Every
bathroom or toilet room shall contain at least one ground-fault-circuitinterrupter-
protected receptacle, located in a readily accessible area.
J. Article 230, Services, Section 230.70, General, Subsection (A),
Location, is amended to read as follows:
230.70 (A) Location. The service disconnecting means shall be
installed in accordance with 230.70(A) (1), (A) (2), (A) (3), and (A) (4).
(1) Readily accessible location. The service disconnecting means shall
be installed at a readily accessible location either outside the
building or structure or inside nearest the point of entrance of the
service conductors.
(2) Bathrooms. Service disconnecting means shall not be installed in
bathrooms.
(3) Remote control. Where a remote control device(s) is used to
actuate the disconnecting means, the service disconnecting means
shall be located in accordance with 230.70(A) (1).
(4) Cable length and protection. SE cable shall not exceed 1.22 meters
(four feet) in length unless otherwise approved. SE cable shall not
exceed 0.91 meter (three feet) in length from the point of entry to
the first overcurrent protection device when concealed within
walls. The cable must be protected from physical damage in
accordance with 230.50 (B) 1, utilizing items 1, 2, and 4 for the
entire length of the concealed cable. Bonding is required in
accordance with 250-V.
§ 64-17 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-17
1:262
K. Article 250, Grounding and Bonding, Section 250.53, Grounding
electrode system, Subsection (A) Rod, pipe, and plate electrodes, is
amended to read as follows:
250.53 (A) Rod, pipe, and plate electrodes. Where practical, rod,
pipe, and plate electrodes shall be embedded below permanent
moisture level. Rod, pipe, and plate electrodes shall be free from
nonconductive coatings such as paint or enamel. The use of two 2.5
meter by 16 mm (eight feet by 5/8 inch) galvanized ground rods spaced
a minimum of 1.8 meters (six feet) apart shall be required for all new
and upgraded residential electrical services.
L. Article 300, Wiring Methods, Section 300.5, Underground installations,
Subsection (D), Protection from damage, Item (3), Service conductors,
is amended to read as follows:
300.5 (D) (3) All underground conductors. Underground
conductors that are not encased in concrete and that are buried below
grade shall have their location identified by a warning ribbon that
is placed in the trench at least 300 mm (12 inches) above the
underground installation.
M. Article 300, Wiring Methods, Section 300.5, Underground installations,
Subsection (D), Protection from damage, Item (4), Enclosure or
raceway damage, is amended to read as follows:
300.5 (D) (4) Enclosure or raceway damage. Where the enclosure
or raceway is subject to physical damage, the conductors shall be
installed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, RTRC-XW,
Schedule 80 PVC conduit, or equivalent.
N. Article 334, Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Types NM, NMC, and NMS,
Section 334.12, Uses not permitted, Subsection (B), Types NM and
NMS, Item (4), Exception, is added as follows:
Exception: Nonmetallic-sheathed cable may be installed on the exterior
of a dwelling if all of the following conditions apply:
(1) All work is under the cover of a dwelling roof which is properly
sealed and weatherproofed.
(2) Cables terminate in a surface-mounted enclosure.
(3) Cables are installed in a weatherproof raceway not exceeding the
allowable fill of NEC Chapter 9 Table 1.
(4) Cable raceways shall be sealed or plugged to the outer end using
approved means to prevent access to the enclosure through the
raceway.
(5) Field-installed enclosures for raceways or cables shall be sealed at
the top and bottom of the enclosure to prevent vermin from
§ 64-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-17
1:263
entering the enclosure. If wood is used for the enclosure cover, the
wood must be no less than 3/8 inch in thickness.
(6) Total length of the exposed cable shall not exceed 60 inches.
O. Article 334, Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Types NM, NMC, and NMS,
Section 334.15, Exposed work, Subsection (B), Protection from physical
damage, is amended to read as follows:
334.15 (B) Protection from physical damage. Cable shall be
protected from physical damage where necessary by rigid metal
conduit, intermediate metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing,
Schedule 80 PVC conduit, Type RTRC marked with suffix- XW, or other
approved means. Where passing through a floor or exposed on the
structure, the cable shall be enclosed in rigid metal conduit,
intermediate metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing, Schedule 80 PVC
conduit, Type RTRC marked with suffix- XW, or other approved means
extending at least 2,438.4 mm (eight feet) above the floor or finished
grade.
P. Article 358, Electrical Metallic Tubing: Type EMT, Section 358.10, Uses
permitted, Subsection (A), Exposed and concealed, is amended to read
as follows:
358.10 (A) Exposed and concealed. The use of EMT shall be
permitted for both exposed and concealed work for the following:
(1) In concrete or in areas subject to severe corrosive influences where
installed in accordance with 358.10(B).
(2) In dry, damp, and wet locations.
(3) In any hazardous (classified) location as permitted by other articles
in this code.
Q. Article 404, Switch Connections, Section 404.2, Switch connections,
Subsection (C), Switches controlling lighting loads, is amended to read
as follows:
404.2 (C) Switches controlling lighting loads. The grounded circuit
conductor (neutral) shall be provided at each switch location that
controls lighting loads.
R. Article 422, Appliances, Section 422.5, Ground-fault circuit-interrupter
(GFCI) protection for personnel, Subsection (A), General, Item (5) is
hereby deleted in its entirety.
S. Article 422, Appliances, Section 422.12, Central heating equipment,
Subsection (A), Remote safety switch, is added as follows:
422.12 (A) Remote safety switch. An approved safety switch must be
provided for every heating appliance utilizing fuel gas or fuel oil. The
switch must be readily accessible, within reach, properly labeled, and
§ 64-17 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-17
1:264
installed in a location remote from the heating appliance nearest the
point of entrance to the space being served.
T. Article 422, Appliances, Section 422.16, Flexible cords, Subsection (B),
Specific appliances, Item (2), Built-in dishwashers and trash
compactors, is amended to read as follows:
422.16 (B) (2) Built-in dishwashers and trash compactors. Builtin
dishwashers and trash compactors shall be permitted to be cordand-
plug-connected with a flexible cord identified as suitable for the
purpose by the appliance manufacturer where all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The flexible cord shall be terminated with a grounding-type
attachment plug.
Exception: A listed dishwasher or trash compactor distinctly
marked to identify it as protected by a system of a double insulation
shall not be required to be terminated with a grounding-type
attachment plug.
(2) For a trash compactor, the length of the cord shall be 0.9 meter to
1.2 meters (three feet to four feet), measured from the face of the
attachment plug to the plane of the rear of the appliance.
(3) For a built-in dishwasher, the length of the cord shall be 0.9 meter
to 2.0 meters (three feet to 6.5 feet), measured from the face of the
attachment plug to the plane of the rear of the appliance.
(4) Receptacles shall be located to protect against physical damage to
the flexible cord.
(5) The receptacle for a trash compactor shall be located in the space
occupied by the appliance or adjacent thereto.
(6) The receptacle for a built-in dishwasher shall be located in the
space adjacent to the space occupied by the appliance or adjacent
thereto.
(7) The receptacle shall be accessible.
U. Article 424, Fixed Electric Space-Heating Equipment, Part II,
Installation, Section 424.14, Energy efficiency, is added as follows:
424.14. Energy efficiency. Permanently installed electric baseboard
heaters shall be installed in existing buildings which conform to the
minimum energy efficiency requirements of COMAR 05.02.07.
V. Article 550, Mobile Homes, Manufactured Homes, and Mobile Home
Parks, Section 550.13, Receptacle outlets, Subsection (B), Ground-fault
circuit-interrupters (GFCI), Item (5), is amended to read as follows:
(5) Sinks - where receptacles are installed within 1.8 meter (six feet) of
the outside edge of the bowl of the sink.
§ 64-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-17
1:265
§ 64-18. Violations and penalties.
§ 64-19. Right to appeal.
Exception to (5): A receptacle installed behind a refrigerator
located in a designated area constructed or designed specifically
for the refrigerator, that is installed to supply only that appliance,
not the countertop, shall not be required to have ground-fault
circuit-interrupter protection.
A. Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, construct, alter or repair electrical work in violation of
an approved plan or directive of the Code Official or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this article, unless such action
is specifically identified as a misdemeanor, shall be deemed to have
committed a municipal infraction and shall be subject to the regulations
as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Municipal
Infractions, of the City Code. The fine for committing a municipal
infraction under this article shall be up to $500 for each violation,
subject to the municipality's authority to double the fine pursuant to the
Maryland Annotated Code, Local Government Article, §§ 6-106(a)(2)
and 6-107. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
B. Misdemeanor violation penalties. Actions or violations specifically
identified as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
A. Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a
notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to
the Board of Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is
filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was
served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or
the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
B. Any reference to a Board of Appeals in this code shall be construed to
mean the City of Hagerstown Board of Code Appeals as established by
Code of the City of Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV. This Board
shall administer the appeal process in accordance with the Code of the
City of Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV.
§ 64-17 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-19
1:266
ARTICLE V
Plumbing Standards
[Added 10-23-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-17; 29 amended 6-23-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-15; 9-24-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-18]
§ 64-20. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain code known as the "International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition,"
including Appendixes B, C, D, E, and F, and the whole thereof, of which a
copy is on file with the office of the Clerk of the City of Hagerstown, be and
the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein.
§ 64-21. Amendments.
A. The following sections of the International Plumbing Code, 2018
Edition, are amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Plumbing
Code of the City of Hagerstown," hereinafter referred to as the
"City Plumbing Code" or "this code."
(2) Section 101.2 Scope, Exception, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(3) Section 102.2, Existing Installations, is amended to read as follows:
102.2 Existing installations. The legal use and occupancy of any
structure existing on the date of adoption of this code for which
approval has been received may be continued without change,
except as may be specifically covered in this code, the Mechanical
Code of the City of Hagerstown, the Property Maintenance Code
of the City of Hagerstown, or as may be deemed necessary by the
Code Official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants
and the public.
(4) Section 102.8, Referenced codes and standards, is amended to
read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and
standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in
Chapter 15 and such codes and standards shall be considered as
a part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent
of each reference and as further regulated in 102.8.1 through
102.8.14.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate
the conditions of the accredited conformity assessment body listing
29.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. V, Plumbing
Standards, as amended.
§ 64-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:267
of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and the
manufacturer's installation instructions shall apply.
102.8.1 Residential building. Any reference to the International
Residential Code (IRC) shall mean the Building Code of the City
of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply.
102.8.2 Building. Any reference to the International Building
Code (IBC) shall mean the Building Code of the City of Hagerstown
as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of
Chapter 64, Article I, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown shall
apply.
102.8.3 Electrical. Any reference to the NFPA 70 or the National
Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code of the City
of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article IV, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply to all electrical installations and
modifications.
102.8.4 Existing building. Any reference to the International
Existing Building Code (IEBC) shall mean the Maryland Building
Rehabilitation Code (COMAR 05.16), as may be amended or
restated from time to time.
102.8.5 Mechanical. Any reference to the International
Mechanical Code (IMC) shall mean the Mechanical Code of the
City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
The provisions of Chapter 64, Article VI, of the Code of the City
of Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving heating, air conditioning and ventilation.
102.8.6 Fire prevention. Any reference to the International Fire
Code (IFC) shall mean the Maryland State Fire Prevention Code
(COMAR 29.06.01), as may be amended or restated from time to
time.
102.8.7 Gas. Any reference to the International Fuel Gas Code
(IFGC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City of Hagerstown as
adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of Chapter
64, Article V, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply to
all installations and modifications involving fuel gas.
102.8.8 Energy. Any reference to the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) shall mean the International Energy
Conservation Code, as adopted in the Maryland Building
Performance Standards (COMAR 05.02.07), as may be amended
from time to time.
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:268
102.8.9 Property maintenance. Any reference to the
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) shall mean the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted
by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64,
Article III, of the City Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
102.8.10 Plumbing. Any reference to the International Plumbing
Code (IPC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City of
Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article V, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving plumbing.
102.8.11 Accessibility. All sections of this code relating to
applicable requirements for accessibility and usability of buildings
and facilities by individuals with disabilities shall refer to the
Maryland Accessibility Code (COMAR 05.02.02), as may be
amended or restated from time to time.
102.8.12 Swimming pools and spas. Any reference to the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) shall mean the
Building Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor
and City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the
Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
102.8.13 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of
this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code
shall apply.
102.8.14 Provisions in referenced codes and standards.
Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard
includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the
provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over
the provisions in the referenced code or standard.
(5) Section 103.1, General, is amended to read as follows:
103.1 General. This code shall be administered by the Planning
and Code Administration, hereinafter referred to as the
"Department." The executive official in charge thereof or his
designee(s) shall be known as the "Code Official." Any reference
to the Department of Plumbing Inspection shall mean the
Department.
(6) Section 106.1, When required, is amended to read as follows:
106.1 When required. Any owner, owner's authorized agent or
contractor who desires to erect, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert, or replace any plumbing system, the installation of which
is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be
performed, shall first make application to the Department and
obtain the required permit for the work.
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:269
Exception: Where appliance and equipment replacements and
repairs are required to be performed in an emergency situation,
the permit application shall be submitted within the next working
business day of the Department.
(7) Sections 106.1.1 and 106.1.2 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(8) Section 106.2 Exempt work, is amended to read as follows:
106.2 Exempt work. The following work shall be exempt from the
requirement for a permit:
1. The stoppage of leaks in drains or vent pipes. However, should
the defect necessitate removal and replacement with new
material, it shall constitute new work and a permit shall be
obtained and inspection made as required by this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages.
3. The repairing of leaks in valves or fixtures.
4. In nonresidential occupancies, the removal and reinstallation
of a water closet, provided that reinstallation does not require
replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, or new
fixtures.
5. In residential occupancies, the removal and replacement of an
existing sink, faucet, showerhead, lavatory, water closet or
dishwasher, provided that the installation does not require
replacement or rearrangement of valves or pipes.
Exemptions from obtaining a permit required by this code shall not
be construed as to authorize any work to be performed in violation
of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
(9) Section 106.3, Application for permit, is amended to read as
follows:
106.3 Application for permit. Each application for a permit, with
the required fee, shall be filed with the Department on a form
furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description
of the proposed work and its location. The application must include
the name of the property owner and must be signed by a master
plumber properly registered in the City of Hagerstown.
(10) Section 106.4, By whom application is made, is amended to read as
follows:
106.4 Registration requirements. All individuals and firms who
desire to engage or work in the business of plumbing or on-site
utility work within the City of Hagerstown are required to procure
a plumbing or on-site utility contractor registration from the
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:270
Department. It shall be unlawful for any person to do plumbing or
on-site utility work in the City of Hagerstown unless first registered
to do so.
(11) Section 106.4.1 through 106.4.6 are added as follows:
106.4.1 Requirements for plumber registration. All individuals
or firms desiring to obtain a City plumbing registration must
present their Maryland State master license, along with photo ID
and payment of fees.
106.4.1.1 Requirements for on-site utility contractor
registration. All individuals or firms desiring to obtain a City onsite
utility contractor registration must present their Washington
County on-site utility contractor license, along with photo ID and
payment of fees.
106.4.1.2 Permit restrictions for on-site utility contractors. A
registered on-site utility contractor may install a building sanitary
or storm sewer and a water service pipe to within five feet of the
building exterior wall, foundation wall or footprint. Installation of
the building sewer and water service pipe must conform to the
requirements of this code, and a plumbing permit for the work
must be obtained from the Department.
106.4.2 Requirements for insurance. Prior to being issued a
registration, each master plumber and on-site utility contractor
shall file with the Planning and Code Administration Department
proof of liability insurance coverage in the amount of $300,000
general liability and $100,000 property damage and save the City
of Hagerstown harmless and free from any damages or expenses in
connection with any work or act by a registered master plumber or
utility contractor performing plumbing or on-site utility work in the
City of Hagerstown.
106.4.3 Registration period. The registration period shall run
from July 1 to June 30 for a maximum period of two years and
expire June 30 of the odd calendar year.
106.4.4 Registration fees. Registration fees are as established in
the fee schedule.
An additional application fee is required for each new registration
and for any existing registration not renewed within 30 calendar
days of its expiration.
Technology fee. In addition to the biannual registration fee
required herein, each applicant is required to pay a technology fee,
the amount of which is established by the fee schedule.
106.4.5 Use of name or registration by others. No plumber,
plumbing firm, on-site utility contractor, association or corporation
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:271
shall allow his/her or its name or registration to be used by any
other person, firm, association or corporation for the purpose of
obtaining plumbing permits.
106.4.6 Suspension or revocation of registration. The Code
Official may suspend or revoke any master plumber's or on-site
utility contractor's registration for failure to correct faulty work,
for performing plumbing work without proper permits or for
lending his/her name or registration to others for the purpose of
obtaining plumbing permits. The holder of said master plumber or
on-site utility contractor registration may appeal the suspension or
revocation to the Board of Code Appeals as outlined in Chapter 10,
Article XIV, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown.
(12) Section 106.5.3, Expiration, is amended to read as follows:
106.5.3 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Department under
the provisions of this code shall expire and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within
180 days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized
by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180
days at any time after the work is commenced. Work shall be
considered abandoned if no valid request for inspection is received
by the Department for a period of 180 days. Before such work can
be recommenced, the permit must be reactivated by submitting
application for same and paying a fee as established by Department
policy, provided that no changes have been made or will be made
in the original construction documents for such work, and further
that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
Every such permit shall expire one year after issuance, unless an
extension is granted in accordance with Section 106.5.4.
(13) Section 106.5.4, Extensions, is amended to read as follows:
106.5.4 Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit
shall have the right to apply for an extension of the time within
which the permittee will commence work under that permit when
work is unable to be commenced within the time required by
this section for good and satisfactory reasons. Unless otherwise
approved by the Chief Code Official, the Department shall extend
the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180
days if there is reasonable cause, in accordance with Department
policy. The fee for an extension shall be as established by
Department policy.
(14) Section 106.5.8 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(15) Section 106.6.2, Fee schedule, is amended to read as follows:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. Fees for permits shall be paid as
established in the fee schedule.
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:272
(16) Section 106.6.3, Fee refunds, is amended to read as follows:
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The Department shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows.
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.
2. For a permit in which no associated work has been done, the
refund shall consist of the permit fee less the application fee
and any technology fee.
3. For a permit in which associated work has commenced, no
refund shall be applicable.
The Department shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of the payment.
(17) Section 107.2, Required inspections and testing, is amended to add
the ceiling close-in inspection requirement as follows:
107.2 Required inspections and testing. The Code Official,
upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's
agent, shall make the following inspections and such other
inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the
construction or shall notify the permit holder or the permit holder's
agent of any violations that must be corrected. The holder of the
permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of such inspections.
a. Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or
ditches are excavated and bedded, piping is installed, and
before backfill is put in place. Where excavated soil contains
rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other rubble that
would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action,
clean backfill shall be on the job site.
b. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire
blocking and bracing is in place and all sanitary, storm and
water distribution piping is roughed-in, and prior to the
installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
c. Ceiling close-in inspection shall be made after all sanitary,
storm and water distribution piping to be concealed is
complete, prior to the installation of suspended ceiling systems
or finishes.
d. Final inspection shall be made after the building is complete,
all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and
the structure is ready for occupancy.
(18) Section 107.8 is added as follows:
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:273
107.8 Reinspection fees. In the event that the premises are not
ready for a requested inspection or the premises are not safely
accessible, the Code Official may impose a reinspection fee for each
additional visit for the same inspection. The fee for a reinspection
shall be as established in the fee schedule.
(19) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
plumbing work in violation of an approved plan or directive of
the Code Official or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, unless such action is specifically identified
as a misdemeanor, shall be deemed to have committed a municipal
infraction and shall be subject to the regulations as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Municipal Infractions,
of the City Code. The fine for committing a municipal infraction
under this code shall be up to $500 for each violation, subject
to the municipality's authority to double the fine pursuant to the
Maryland Annotated Code, Local Government Article,
§§ 6-106(a)(2) and 6-107. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
Actions or violations specifically identified as a misdemeanor shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(20) Section 108.5, Stop-work orders, is amended to read as follows:
108.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Code Official,
work on any plumbing system that is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall
immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to
the person performing the work, or posted at the property. The
notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to
resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code Official shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any
person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of $500.
(21) Section 108.8 is added as follows:
108.8 Withholding of permits. Whenever the Code Official shall
find that any owner or contractor is in violation of the provisions
of this code or of the rules and regulations of any department or
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:274
agency of the City of Hagerstown, in connection with the erection,
maintenance or repair of buildings, structures, lands or equipment
thereon or therein, he/she may refuse to grant any future permits
to such until the violations have been corrected.
(22) Section 109.1, Application for appeal, is amended to read as
follows:
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by
a decision of the Code Official or a notice or order issued under
this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20
days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by
other means.
(23) Section 109.2, Membership of Board, is amended to read as
follows:
109.2 Membership of Board. Any reference to a Board of
Appeals in this code shall be construed to mean the City of
Hagerstown Board of Code Appeals as established by the Code of
the City of Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV. This Board shall
administer the appeal process in accordance with the Code of the
City of Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV.
(24) Sections 109.2.1 through 109.7 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(25) Section 301.8 is added as follows:
301.8 Public systems available. A public water main or public
sewer system shall be considered available to a building when the
building is located within 350 feet (106,680 mm) of a public water
main or sewer. In such cases, plumbing systems serving a building
shall be connected to the public water and sewer mains.
(26) Section 305.4.1, Sewer depth, is amended to read as follows:
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be installed a
minimum of 24 inches (608 mm) below grade.
(27) Table 308.5, Hanger Spacing, footnote b, is amended to read as
follows:
b. For sizes 1 1/2 inches and smaller, a guide shall be installed
midway between required vertical supports. Such guides shall
prevent pipe movement in a direction perpendicular to the axis
of the pipe.
(28) Section 405.3.1.1 is added as follows:
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:275
405.3.1.1 Showers and bathtubs. There shall be a minimum of
21 inches (534 mm) of clearance in front of a shower compartment
opening or bathtub access to any wall, fixture or door.
(29) Section 502.3.1 is added as follows:
502.3.1 Water heaters installed above suspended ceilings.
Water heaters installed above suspended ceilings with removable
ceiling panels shall not be located closer than four inches (102 mm)
and not farther than 16 inches (407 mm) above the ceiling panels.
(30) Section 504.6, Requirements for discharge piping, is amended to
read as follows:
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge
piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve, or
combination thereof shall:
(Items 1 through 13 remain unchanged)
14. Be one nominal size larger than the size of the relief valve
outlet, where the relief valve discharge piping is installed with
insert fittings. The outlet end of such tubing shall be fastened
in place to maintain rigidity in the event of discharge.
(31) Section 504.7.2, Pan drain termination, is amended to read as
follows:
504.7.2 Pan drain termination. The pan drain shall extend full
size and terminate over a suitably located indirect waster receptor
or floor drain or extend to the exterior of the building and
terminate not less than six inches (152 mm) and not more than 24
inches (610 mm) above the adjacent ground surface. Where a pan
drain was not previously installed and cannot terminate by gravity,
a pan drain shall not be required for a replacement water heater
installation.
(32) Section 601.6 is added as follows:
601.6 Water service tracer wiring. Underground nonmetallic
water service piping shall be made detectable by the installation of
tracer wiring that complies with Public Utilities Article, § 12-129 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The wire shall be an insulated copper tracer wire suitable for direct
burial, at least 10 AWG, or equivalent. Insulation shall be 30 mil
minimum thickness, HMWPE or HDPE polyethylene, color coded
blue. The wire shall be installed in the same trench as the piping,
tied or taped to the pipe every five to eight feet in the three o'clock
position or installed within 12 inches of the pipe in fill. One end of
the wire shall terminate within five feet of the building served, at or
above grade, accessible for use, and resistant to physical damage.
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:276
Tracer wiring installations shall be tested by location with line
tracing equipment upon completion of rough grading and again
prior to final acceptance.
(33) Section 605.3, Water service pipe, is amended to read as follows:
605.3 Water service pipe. Water service shall conform to NSF
61 and shall conform to one of the standards listed in Table 605.3
except as specified otherwise herein. All water service pipe or
tubing installed underground and outside of the structure, shall
have minimum working pressure rating of 160 psi (1,100 kPa) at
73.4° F. (23° C.). Where the water pressure exceeds 160 psi (1,100
kPa), piping material shall have a working pressure rating not less
than the highest available pressure. Any copper tubing used for
water service piping shall be Type K. Plastic water service piping
shall terminate within five feet (1,524 mm) of the point of entry
through the exterior wall or slab on grade. All ductile iron water
pipe shall be cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C104.
(34) Table 605.4, Water distribution pipe, is amended to read as follows:
605.4 Water distribution pipe. Water distribution pipe shall
conform to NSF 61 and shall conform to one of the standards listed
in Table 605.4. All hot water distribution pipe and tubing shall have
a minimum pressure rating of 100 psi (690 kPa) at 180° F. (82° C.).
Note: Unless specifically approved by the Code Official, all copper
or copper-alloy tubing used for water distribution piping shall be
Type K or L.
(35) Section 607.3, Thermal expansion control, is amended to read as
follows:
607.3 Thermal expansion control. Where a storage water heater
is supplied with cold water that passes through a check valve,
pressure-reducing valve or backflow preventer, a thermal
expansion control device shall be connected to the water heater
cold water supply pipe at a point that is downstream of all check
valves, pressure-reducing valves and backflow preventers. Where a
main water service meter is replaced or newly installed, a thermal
expansion control device shall be installed. Thermal expansion
tanks shall be sized in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and shall be sized such that the pressure in the water
distribution system shall not exceed that required by Section 604.8.
(36) Section 701.8 is added as follows:
701.8 Building sanitary sewer tracer wiring. Underground
building sanitary sewer nonmetallic piping shall be made
detectable by the installation of tracer wiring that complies with
Public Utilities Article, § 12-129, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:277
The wire shall be an insulated copper tracer wire suitable for direct
burial, at least 10 AWG, or equivalent. Insulation shall be 30 mil
minimum thickness, HMWPE or HDPE polyethylene, color coded
green. The wire shall be installed in the same trench as the piping,
tied or taped to the pipe every five to eight feet in the three o'clock
position or installed within 12 inches of the pipe in fill. One end of
the wire shall terminate within five feet of the building served, at or
above grade, accessible for use, and resistant to physical damage.
Tracer wiring installations shall be tested by location with line
tracing equipment upon completion of rough grading and again
prior to final acceptance.
(37) Table 702.2, Underground building drainage and vent pipe, is
amended to read as follows:
702.2 Underground building sanitary drainage and vent
pipe. Underground building sanitary drainage and vent pipe shall
conform to one of the standards listed in Table 702.2.
Note: Unless specifically approved by the Code Official, all
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe used for underground building
drainage piping shall be Schedule 40 solid wall or equal.
(38) Table 702.3, Building sewer pipe, is amended to read as follows:
702.3 Building sewer pipe. Building sewer pipe shall conform to
one of the standards listed in Table 702.3.
Note: Unless specifically approved by the Code Official, all
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe used for building sewer piping
shall be Schedule 40 solid wall or equal.
(39) Section 703.6 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(40) Section 705.10.2, Solvent cementing, is amended to read as
follows:
705.10.2 Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and
free from moisture. A purple primer that conforms to ASTM F 656
shall be applied. The joint shall be made while the cement is wet
and shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent cement
joints shall be permitted above or below ground.
Exception: A primer is not required where both of the following
conditions apply:
1. The solvent cement used is third-party certified as conforming
to ASTM D 2564.
2. The solvent cement is used only for joining PVC drain, waste
and vent pipe and fittings in nonpressure applications in sizes
up to and including four inches (102 mm) in diameter.
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:278
(41) Section 708.1.5.1 is added as follows:
708.1.5.1 Property line. Cleanouts shall be located at the
property line and shall be installed no further apart than 75 feet.
Cleanouts located at the property line shall be no smaller in size
than the line they serve, but never smaller than six inches.
(42) Section 716.7, Post-installation inspection, is amended to read as
follows:
716.7 Post-installation inspection. The completed replacement
piping section shall be inspected internally by recorded video
camera survey. The video survey shall be reviewed and approved
by the Code Official prior to pressure testing of the replacement
piping system. A copy of this video survey, on compact disc or
comparable video format, shall be given to the Code Official and
retained for record with the permit.
(43) Section 802.4, Waste receptors, is amended to read as follows:
802.4 Waste receptors. For other than hub drains that receive
only clear-water waste and standpipes, a removable strainer or
basket shall cover the outlet of waste receptors. Waste receptors
shall not be installed in concealed spaces. Waste receptors shall
not be installed in plenums, crawl spaces, attics, interstitial spaces
above ceilings and below floors. Waste receptors in food prep areas
shall extend no less than one inch (26 mm) above the finished floor.
Ready access shall be provided to waste receptors.
(44) Section 903.1, Roof extension, is amended to read as follows:
903.1 Roof extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof
shall be terminated not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the
roof, except where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than
weather protection, the vent extensions shall terminate not less
than seven feet (2,134 mm) above the roof.
(45) Section 913.4, Waste stack size, is amended to read as follows:
913.4 Waste stack size. Every building in which plumbing is
installed shall have at least one stack not less than three inches
(76 mm) in diameter. Such stack shall run undiminished in size and
as directly as possible from the building drain through to the open
air or to a vent header that extends to the open air. Where total
discharge for the stack exceeds 24 drainage fixture units (dfu), the
stack shall be sized in accordance with Table 913.4.
(46) Section 1003.4, Oil separators required, is amended to read as
follows:
1003.4 Oil separators required. At repair garages where floor or
trench drains are provided, car washing facilities, factories where
oily and flammable liquid wastes are produced and hydraulic
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:279
elevator pits, oil separators shall be installed into which oilbearing,
grease-bearing or flammable wastes shall be discharged
before emptying into the building drainage system or other point
of disposal. A hydraulic elevator sump pump shall discharge to an
approved storm drain.
Exception: An oil separator is not required in hydraulic elevator
pits where an approved alarm system is installed. Such alarm
systems shall not terminate the operation of pumps utilized to
maintain emergency operation of the elevator by fire fighters.
(47) Section 1003.6, Clothes washer discharge interceptor, is amended
to read as follows:
1003.6 Clothes washer discharge interceptor. Clothes washers
shall discharge through an interceptor that is provided with a wire
basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that prevents
passage into the drainage system of solids 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) or
larger in size, string, rags, buttons, or other materials detrimental
to the public sewage system.
Exceptions:
1. Clothes washers in individual dwelling units shall not be
required to discharge through an interceptor.
2. A single clothes washer designed for use in individual dwelling
units and installed in a location other than an individual
dwelling unit shall not be required to discharge through an
interceptor.
3. Existing installations are exempt from this requirement if the
installation was an approved and legal use at the time of
installation and does not present a hazard as determined by
the Code Official.
(48) Section 1101.10 is added as follows:
1101.10 Building storm sewer tracer wiring. Underground
building storm sewer nonmetallic piping shall be made detectable
by the installation of tracer wiring that complies with Public
Utilities Article, § 12-129 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The wire shall be an insulated copper tracer wire suitable for direct
burial, at least 10 AWG, or equivalent. Insulation shall be 30 mil
minimum thickness, HMWPE or HDPE polyethylene, color coded
green. The wire shall be installed in the same trench as the piping,
tied or taped to the pipe every five to eight feet in the three o'clock
position or installed within 12 inches of the pipe in fill. One end of
the wire shall terminate within five feet of the building served, at or
above grade, accessible for use, and resistant to physical damage.
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:280
Tracer wiring installations shall be tested by location with line
tracing equipment upon completion of rough grading and again
prior to final acceptance.
(49) Appendix F, Fuel Gas Code shall be added and amended as follows:
A certain code known as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018
Edition, including Appendixes A and C, and the whole thereof, of
which a copy is on file with the office of the Clerk of the City of
Hagerstown, be and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein.
(a) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Fuel Gas
Code of the City of Hagerstown," hereinafter referred to as the
"City Fuel Gas Code" or "this code."
(b) Section 101.2 Scope, Exception, is hereby deleted in its
entirety.
(c) Section 102.2, Existing installations, is amended to read as
follows:
102.2 Existing installations. The legal use and occupancy of
any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code for
which approval has been received may be continued without
change, except as may be specifically covered in this code,
the Mechanical Code of the City of Hagerstown, the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Hagerstown, or as may be
deemed necessary by the code official for the general safety
and welfare of the occupants and the public.
(d) Section 102.8, Referenced codes and standards, is amended to
read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and
standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed
in Chapter 15, and such codes and standards shall be
considered as a part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each reference and as further regulated in
102.8.1 through 102.8.14.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would
violate the conditions of the accredited conformity assessment
body listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions
of the listing and the manufacturer's installation instructions
shall apply.
102.8.1 Residential building. Any reference to the
International Residential Code (IRC) shall mean the Building
Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:281
City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the
Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
102.8.2 Building. Any reference to the International Building
Code (IBC) shall mean the Building Code of the City of
Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply.
102.8.3 Electrical. Any reference to the NFPA 70 or the
National Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code
of the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City
Council. The provisions of Chapter 64, Article IV, of the Code of
the City of Hagerstown shall apply to all electrical installations
and modifications.
102.8.4 Existing building. Any reference to the International
Existing Building Code (IEBC) shall mean the Maryland
Building Rehabilitation Code (COMAR 05.16), as may be
amended or restated from time to time.
102.8.5 Mechanical. Any reference to the International
Mechanical Code (IMC) shall mean the Mechanical Code of the
City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
The provisions of Chapter 64, Article VI, of the Code of the City
of Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving heating, air conditioning and ventilation.
102.8.6 Fire prevention. Any reference to the International
Fire Code (IFC) shall mean the Maryland State Fire Prevention
Code (COMAR 29.06.01), as may be amended or restated from
time to time.
102.8.7 Gas. Any reference to the International Fuel Gas
Code (IFGC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City of
Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article V, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving fuel gas.
102.8.8 Energy. Any reference to the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) shall mean the International Energy
Conservation Code, as adopted in the Maryland Building
Performance Standards (COMAR 05.02.07), as may be
amended from time to time.
102.8.9 Property maintenance. Any reference to the
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) shall mean
the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hagerstown
as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions
of Chapter 64, Article III, of the City Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply.
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:282
102.8.10 Plumbing. Any reference to the International
Plumbing Code (IPC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City
of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article V, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving plumbing.
102.8.11 Accessibility. All sections of this code relating to
applicable requirements for accessibility and usability of
buildings and facilities by individuals with disabilities shall
refer to the Maryland Accessibility Code (COMAR 05.02.02), as
may be amended or restated from time to time.
102.8.12 Swimming pools and spas. Any reference to the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) shall mean
the Building Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the
Mayor and City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64, Article
I, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
102.8.13 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions
of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of
this code shall apply.
102.8.14 Provisions in referenced codes and standards.
Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or
standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of
this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take
precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or
standard.
(e) Section 103.1, General, is amended to read as follows:
103.1 General. This code shall be administered by the
Planning and Code Administration Department, hereinafter
referred to as the "Department." The executive official in
charge thereof or his designee(s) shall be known as the "Code
Official." Any reference to the Department of Inspection shall
mean the Department.
(f) Section 106.1, Where required, is amended to read as follows:
106.1 Where required. Any owner's authorized agent or
contractor who desires to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair,
remove, convert, or replace an installation regulated by this
code, or cause such work to be performed shall first make
application to the Department and obtain the required permit
for the work.
Exception: Where appliance and equipment replacements and
repairs are required to be performed in an emergency
situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the
next working business day of the Department.
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:283
(g) Sections 106.1.1 and 106.1.2 are hereby deleted in their
entirety.
(h) Section 106.3, Application for permit, is amended to read as
follows:
106.3 Application for permit. Each application for a permit,
with the required fee, shall be filed with the Department on
a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general
description of the proposed work and its location. The
application must include the name of the property owner and
must be signed by a master plumber properly registered in the
City of Hagerstown or a propane gas fitter duly licensed in the
State of Maryland.
(i) Section 106.5.3, Expiration, is amended to read as follows:
106.5.3 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Department
under the provisions of this code shall expire and become
null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit,
or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for a period of 180 days at any time after the work
is commenced. Work shall be considered abandoned if no valid
request for inspection is received by the Department for a
period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, the
permit must be reactivated by submitting application for same
and paying a fee as established by Department policy, provided
that no changes have been made or will be made in the original
construction documents for such work, and further that such
suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. Every
such permit shall expire one year after issuance, unless an
extension is granted in accordance with Section 106.5.4.
(j) Section 106.5.4, Extensions, is amended to read as follows:
106.5.4 Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired
permit shall have the right to apply for an extension of the
time within which the permittee will commence work under
that permit when work is unable to be commenced within the
time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons.
Unless otherwise approved by the Chief Code Official, the
Department shall extend the time for action by the permittee
for a period not exceeding 180 days if there is reasonable
cause. No permit shall be extended more than once. The fee
for an extension shall be as established by Department policy.
(k) Section 106.5.8 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(l) Section 106.6.2, Fee schedule, is amended to read as follows:
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:284
106.6.2 Fee schedule. Fees for permits shall be paid as
established in the fee schedule.
(m) Section 106.6.3, Fee refunds, is amended to read as follows:
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The Department shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows.
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.
2. For a permit in which no associated work has been done,
the refund shall consist of the permit fee less the
application fee and any technology fee.
3. For a permit in which associated work has commenced, no
refund shall be applicable.
The Department shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not
later than 180 days after the date of the payment.
(n) Section 107.2, Required inspections and testing, is amended to
add the ceiling close-in inspection requirement as follows:
107.2 Required inspections and testing. The Code Official,
upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's
agent, shall make the following inspections and such other
inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion
of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or the
permit holder's agent of any violations that must be corrected.
The holder of the permit shall be responsible for the scheduling
of such inspections.
a. Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or
ditches are excavated and bedded, piping is installed, and
before backfill is put in place. Where excavated soil
contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other
rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause
corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the job site.
b. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fire blocking and bracing is in place and components to be
concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of
wall or ceiling membranes.
c. Ceiling close-in inspection shall be made after components
to be concealed are complete, prior to the installation of
suspended ceiling systems or finishes.
d. Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the
installation.
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:285
The requirements of this section shall not be considered to
prohibit the operation of any heating appliance installed to replace
an existing heating appliance serving an occupied portion of a
structure in the event a request for inspection of such heating
appliance has been filed with the Department not more than 48
hours after replacement work is completed, and before any
portion of such appliance is concealed by any permanent portion
of the structure.
(o) Section 107.7 is added as follows:
107.7 Reinspection fees. In the event that the premises are
not ready for a requested inspection or the premises are not
safely accessible, the Code Official may impose a reinspection
fee as established for each additional visit for the same
inspection. The fee for a reinspection shall be as established in
the fee schedule.
(p) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as
follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or
repair plumbing work in violation of an approved plan or
directive of the Code Official or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, unless such action is
specifically identified as a misdemeanor, shall be deemed to
have committed a municipal infraction and shall be subject to
the regulations as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article III, Municipal Infractions, of the City Code. The fine
for committing a municipal infraction under this code shall
be up to $500 for each violation, subject to the municipality's
authority to double the fine pursuant to the Maryland
Annotated Code, Local Government Article, §§ 6-106(a)(2) and
6-107. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Actions or violations specifically identified as a misdemeanor
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(q) Section 108.5, Stop-work orders, is amended to read as
follows:
108.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Code Official,
work on any gas system that is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner
shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-21
1:286
shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's
agent, or to the person performing the work, or posted at the
property. The notice shall state the conditions under which
work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the
Code Official shall not be required to give a written notice
prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with
a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable to a fine of $500.
(r) Section 108.8 is added as follows:
108.8 Withholding of permits. Whenever the Code Official
shall find that any owner or contractor is in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the rules and regulations of any
department or agency of the City of Hagerstown, in connection
with the erection, maintenance or repair of buildings,
structures, lands or equipment thereon or therein, he/she may
refuse to grant any future permits to such until the violations
have been corrected.
(s) Section 109.1, Application for appeal, is amended to read as
follows:
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected
by a decision of the Code Official or a notice or order issued
under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board of
Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed
within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was
served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code
are adequately satisfied by other means.
(t) Section 109.2, Membership of Board, is amended to read as
follows:
109.2 Membership of Board. Any reference to a Board of
Appeals in this code shall be construed to mean the City of
Hagerstown Board of Code Appeals as established by the Code
of the City of Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV. This Board
shall administer the appeal process in accordance with the
Code of the City of Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV.
(u) Sections 109.2.1 through 109.7 are hereby deleted in their
entirety.
(v) Section 406.4.1 Test pressure, is amended to read as follows:
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:287
§ 64-22. Title.
The International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendixes B, C,
D, E, and F, along with the amendments included in § 64-21 shall be known
as the "Plumbing Code of the City of Hagerstown."
§ 64-23. Violations and penalties.
§ 64-24. (Reserved)
Section 406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used
shall be no less than 30 psi. (207 kPa) on a 30-pound gauge
(207 kPa gauge).
(w) Section 411.1.1, Commercial cooking appliances, is amended
to read as follows:
411.1.1 Commercial cooking appliances. Commercial
cooking appliances installed on casters and appliances that are
moved for cleaning and sanitation purposes shall be connected
to the piping system with an appliance connector listed as
complying with ANSI Z21.69/CSA 6.16. The commercial
cooking appliance connector installation shall be configured in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Movement of
appliances with casters shall be limited by a restraining device
installed in accordance with the connector and appliance
manufacturer's instructions. The restraint device shall be
installed so as not to allow tension on the connector.
A. Any person who shall violate a provision of this article or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of an approved
plan or directive of the Code Official or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this article, unless such action is specifically
identified as a misdemeanor, shall be deemed to have committed a
municipal infraction and shall be subject to the regulations as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Municipal Infractions, of
the City Code. The fine for committing a municipal infraction under this
article shall be up to $500 for each violation, subject to the
municipality's authority to double the fine pursuant to the Maryland
Annotated Code, Local Government Article, §§ 6-106(a)(2) and 6-107.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. Actions or violations specifically identified as a misdemeanor shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 64-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-24
1:288
ARTICLE VI
Mechanical Standards
[Added 10-23-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-16;30 amended 6-23-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-16; 9-24-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-19]
§ 64-25. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain code known as the "International Mechanical Code," 2018 Edition,
including Appendix A, and the whole thereof, of which a copy is on file with
the office of the Clerk of the City of Hagerstown, be and the same is hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 64-26. Amendments.
A. The following sections of the International Mechanical Code, 2018
Edition, are amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. This Code shall be known as the "Mechanical Code
of the City of Hagerstown," hereinafter referred to as the "City
Mechanical Code" or "this code."
(2) Section 101.2 Scope, Exception, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(3) Section 102.2, Existing installations, is amended to read as follows:
102.2 Existing installations. The legal use and occupancy of any
structure existing on the date of adoption of this code for which
approval has been received may be continued without change,
except as may be specifically covered in this code, the Plumbing
Code of the City of Hagerstown, the Property Maintenance Code
of the City of Hagerstown, or as may be deemed necessary by the
Code Official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants
and the public.
(4) Section 102.8, Referenced codes and standards, is amended to
read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and
standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in
Chapter 15, and such codes and standards shall be considered as
a part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent
of each reference and as further regulated in 102.8.1 through
102.8.14.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate
the conditions of the accredited conformity assessment body listing
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. VI, Mechanical
Standards, as amended.
§ 64-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-26
1:289
of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and the
manufacturer's installation instructions shall apply.
102.8.1 Residential building. Any reference to the International
Residential Code (IRC) shall mean the Building Code of the City
of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply.
102.8.2 Building. Any reference to the International Building
Code (IBC) shall mean the Building Code of the City of Hagerstown
as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of
Chapter 64, Article I, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown shall
apply.
102.8.3 Electrical. Any reference to the NFPA 70 or the National
Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code of the City
of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article IV, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply to all electrical installations and
modifications.
102.8.4 Existing building. Any reference to the International
Existing Building Code (IEBC) shall mean the Maryland Building
Rehabilitation Code (COMAR 05.16), as may be amended or
restated from time to time.
102.8.5 Mechanical. Any reference to the International
Mechanical Code (IMC) shall mean the Mechanical Code of the
City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
The provisions of Chapter 64, Article VI, of the Code of the City
of Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving heating, air conditioning and ventilation.
102.8.6 Fire prevention. Any reference to the International Fire
Code (IFC) shall mean the Maryland State Fire Prevention Code
(COMAR 29.06.01), as may be amended or restated from time to
time.
102.8.7 Gas. Any reference to the International Fuel Gas Code
(IFGC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City of Hagerstown as
adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of Chapter
64, Article V, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply to
all installations and modifications involving fuel gas.
102.8.8 Energy. Any reference to the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) shall mean the International Energy
Conservation Code, as adopted in the Maryland Building
Performance Standards (COMAR 05.02.07), as may be amended
from time to time.
§ 64-26 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-26
1:290
102.8.9 Property maintenance. Any reference to the
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) shall mean the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted
by the Mayor and City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64,
Article III, of the City Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
102.8.10 Plumbing. Any reference to the International Plumbing
Code (IPC) shall mean the Plumbing Code of the City of
Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The
provisions of Chapter 64, Article V, of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown shall apply to all installations and modifications
involving plumbing.
102.8.11 Accessibility. All sections of this code relating to
applicable requirements for accessibility and usability of buildings
and facilities by individuals with disabilities shall refer to the
Maryland Accessibility Code (COMAR 05.02.02), as may be
amended or restated from time to time.
102.8.12 Swimming pools and spas. Any reference to the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) shall mean the
Building Code of the City of Hagerstown as adopted by the Mayor
and City Council. The provisions of Chapter 64, Article I, of the
Code of the City of Hagerstown shall apply.
102.8.13 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of
this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code
shall apply.
102.8.14 Provisions in referenced codes and standards.
Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard
includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the
provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over
the provisions in the referenced code or standard.
(5) Section 103.1, General, is amended to read as follows:
103.1 General. This code shall be administered by the Planning
and Code Administration Department, hereinafter referred to as
the "Department." The executive official in charge thereof or his
designee(s) shall be known as the "Code Official." Any reference
to the "Department of Mechanical Inspection" shall mean the
Department.
(6) Section 106.1, Where required, is amended to read as follows:
106.1 Where required. Any owner, owner's authorized agent
or contractor who desires to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair,
remove, convert, or replace a mechanical system, the installation
of which is regulated by this code, or cause such work to be
performed, shall first make application to the Department and
obtain the required permit for the work.
§ 64-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-26
1:291
Exception: Where equipment and appliance replacements or
repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit
application shall be submitted within the next working business
day of the Department.
(7) Sections 106.1.1 and 106.1.2 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(8) Section 106.3, Application for permit, is amended to read as
follows:
106.3 Application for permit. Each application for a permit, with
the required fee, shall be filed with the Department on a form
furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description
of the proposed work and its location. The application must include
the name of the property owner and must be signed by a duly
licensed HVAC contractor licensed by the State of Maryland, or
the owner of the property. The permit application shall indicate the
proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion
of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure and
shall contain such other information required by the Code Official.
(9) Section 106.4.3, Expiration, is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.4.3 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Code
Official under the provisions of this code shall expire and become
null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the
work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a
period of 180 days at any time after the work is commenced. Work
shall be considered abandoned if no valid request for inspection
is received by the Department for a period of 180 days. Before
such work can be recommenced, the permit must be reactivated by
submitting an application for same and paying a fee as established
by Department policy, provided that no changes have been made
or will be made in the original construction documents for such
work, and further that such suspension or abandonment has not
exceeded one year. Every such permit shall expire one year after
issuance, unless an extension is granted in accordance with Section
106.4.4.
(10) Section 106.4.4, Extensions, is amended to read as follows:
106.4.4 Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit
shall have the right to apply for an extension of the time within
which the permittee will commence work under that permit when
work is unable to be commenced within the time required by
this section for good and satisfactory reasons. Unless otherwise
approved by the Chief Code Official, the Department shall extend
the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180
days if there is reasonable cause, in accordance with Department
§ 64-26 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-26
1:292
policy. The fee for an extension shall be as established by
Department policy.
(11) Section 106.4.8 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(12) Section 106.5.2, Fee schedule, is amended to read as follows:
106.5.2 Fee schedule. Fees for permits shall be paid as
established in the fee schedule.
(13) Section 106.5.3, Fee refunds, is amended to read as follows:
106.5.3 Fee refunds. The Department shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.
2. For a permit in which no associated work has been done, the
refund shall consist of the permit fee less the application fee
and any technology fee.
3. For a permit in which associated work has commenced, no
refund shall be applicable.
The Department shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of the payment.
(14) Section 106.5.4 is added as follows:
106.5.4 Reinspection fees. In the event that the premises are
not ready for a requested inspection or the premises are not safely
accessible, the Code Official may impose a reinspection fee for each
additional visit for the same inspection. The fee for a reinspection
shall be as established in the fee schedule.
(15) Section 107.2, Required inspections and testing, is amended to add
the ceiling close-in inspection requirement as follows:
107.2 Required inspections and testing. The Code Official,
upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's
agent, shall make the following inspections and such other
inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the
construction or shall notify the permit holder or the permit holder's
agent of any violations that must be corrected. The holder of the
permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of such inspections.
a. Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or
ditches are excavated and bedded, piping or ducts installed,
and before backfill is put in place. Where excavated soil
contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other
rubble that would damage or break the piping or ducts or
§ 64-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-26
1:293
cause corrosive action to same, clean backfill shall be on the
job site.
b. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire
blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other
components to be concealed are complete, and prior to the
installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
c. Ceiling close-in inspection shall be made after all ducting and
other components to be concealed are complete, prior to the
installation of suspended ceiling systems or finishes.
d. Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the
mechanical system.
Exception: Ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in
accordance with Section 1210.10 shall be permitted to be
backfilled prior to inspection.
The requirements of this section shall not be considered to
prohibit the operation of any heating equipment or appliances
installed to replace existing heating equipment or appliances
serving an occupied portion of a structure, provided that a
request for inspection of such heating equipment or appliance
has been filed with the Department not more than 48 hours
after such replacement work is complete, and before any
portion of such equipment or appliances is concealed by any
permanent portion of a structure.
(All remaining subsections shall remain as written.)
(16) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
mechanical equipment or systems in violation of an approved plan
or directive of the Code Official or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this code, unless such action is specifically
identified as a misdemeanor, shall be deemed to have committed
a municipal infraction and shall be subject to the regulations as
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Municipal
Infractions, of the City Code. The fine for committing a municipal
infraction under this code shall be up to $500 for each violation,
subject to the municipality's authority to double the fine pursuant
to the Maryland Annotated Code, Local Government Article,
§§ 6-106(a)(2) and 6-107. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
Actions or violations specifically identified as a misdemeanor shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 64-26 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-26
1:294
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(17) Section 108.5, Stop-work orders, is amended to read as follows:
108.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Code Official,
work on any mechanical system that is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall
immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to
the person performing the work, or posted at the property. The
notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to
resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code Official shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any
person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of $500.
(18) Section 108.8 is added as follows:
108.8 Withholding of permits. Whenever the Code Official shall
find that any owner or contractor is in violation of the provisions of
this code or of the rules and regulations of any other department or
agency of the City of Hagerstown, in connection with the erection,
maintenance or repair of buildings, structures, lands or equipment
thereon or therein, he/she may refuse to grant any future permits
to such until the violations have been corrected.
(19) Section 109.1, Application for appeal, is amended to read as
follows:
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by
a decision of the Code Official or a notice or order issued under
this code shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20
days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by
other means.
(20) Section 109.2, Membership of Board, is amended to read as
follows:
109.2 Membership of Board. Any reference to a Board of
Appeals in this code shall be construed to mean the City of
Hagerstown Board of Code Appeals as established by the Code of
the City of Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV. This Board shall
administer the appeal process in accordance with the Code of the
City of Hagerstown, Chapter 10, Article XIV.
§ 64-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-26
1:295
(21) Sections 109.2.1 through 109.7 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
(22) Section 301.14, Repair, is amended to read as follows:
301.14 Repair. Defective material or parts shall be replaced or
repaired in such a manner so as to preserve the original approval
or listing. Repairs of a damaged heat exchanger shall not be
permitted without specific approval of the Code Official.
(23) Section 304.13 is added as follows:
304.13 Safety controls. An approved safety switch must be
provided for every heating appliance utilizing fuel gas or fuel oil.
The switch must be readily accessible, within reach, properly
labeled, and installed in a location remote from the heating
appliance nearest the point of entrance to the space being served.
(24) Section 306.1, Access, is amended to add the following exception:
Exception: Where an appliance or piece of equipment is located
above a suspended ceiling and a ladder is the only means to access
the appliance or equipment, a platform is not required for service.
(25) Section 501.3, Exhaust discharge, is amended to read as follows:
501.3 Exhaust discharge. The air removed by every mechanical
exhaust system shall be discharged outdoors at a point where it
will not cause a public nuisance and not less than the distances
specified in Section 501.3.1. The air shall be discharged to a
location from which it cannot again be readily drawn in by a
ventilating system. Air shall not be exhausted into an attic, crawl
space, or be directed onto walkways.
Exception:
1. Whole-house ventilation-type attic fans shall be permitted to
discharge into the attic space of dwelling units having private
attics.
2. Commercial cooking recirculating systems.
3. Recirculating hoods are acceptable if:
(a) The cooking appliance is installed in an existing building;
and
(b) The Code Official deems the installation of a continuous
duct to the outside as unreasonable.
(26) Section 504.8.2, Duct installation, is amended to read as follows:
504.8.2 Duct installation. Exhaust ducts shall be supported at
four-foot (1,219 mm) intervals and secured in place. The insert end
of the duct shall extend into the adjoining duct or fitting in the
§ 64-26 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-26
1:296
direction of airflow. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar
fasteners that protrude into the inside of the duct.
Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in wall or ceiling cavities,
such cavities shall allow the installation of the duct without
deformation.
(27) Section 504.8.4.1, Specified length, is amended to read as follows:
504.8.4.1 Specified length. The maximum length of the exhaust
duct shall be 25 feet (7,620 mm) from the connection to the
transition duct from the dryer to the outlet terminal. Where fittings
are used, the maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be reduced
in accordance with Table 504.8.4.1.
(28) Section 505.1, Domestic systems, is amended to read as follows:
505.1 Domestic systems. Newly installed domestic ranges and
other open cooking appliances shall be provided with hoods. Hoods
for new kitchens shall discharge exhaust air to the outdoors
through ducts constructed of galvanized steel, aluminum or copper.
Such ducts shall have smooth inner walls and shall be air-tight and
equipped with a backdraft damper.
Exception 1: Ducts for domestic kitchen cooking appliances
equipped with downdraft exhaust systems shall be permitted to
be constructed of Schedule 40 PVC pipe, provided that the
installation complies with all of the following:
1. The duct shall be installed under a concrete slab poured on
grade.
2. The underfloor trench in which the duct is installed shall be
completely backfilled with sand or gravel.
3. The PVC duct shall extend not greater than one inch (25 mm)
above the indoor concrete floor surface.
4. The PVC duct shall extend not greater than one inch (25 mm)
above grade outside of the building.
5. The PVC ducts shall be solvent cemented.
Exception 2: Re-circulating hoods are acceptable if:
1. The cooking appliance is installed in an existing building; and
2. The Code Official deems the installation of a continuous duct
to the outside as unreasonable.
For the purpose of this section, a kitchen shall not be considered as
"new" if the space or room had been previously used as a kitchen.
(29) Section 506.3.7.1, Grease duct reservoirs, Item No. 5, is amended
to read as follows:
5. Have a bottom that is sloped to a point for drainage.
§ 64-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-26
1:297
§ 64-27. Title.
The International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix A,
along with the amendments included in § 64-26 shall be known as the
"Mechanical Code of the City of Hagerstown."
§ 64-28. (Reserved)
(30) Section 1305.8 is added as follows:
1305.8 Materials. The minimum size of fill piping shall be 1.5
inches (38 mm) inside diameter nominal pipe or the diameter
specified by the manufacturer's installation instructions. The
minimum size of vent piping shall be 1.25 inches (32 mm) inside
diameter nominal pipe or the diameter specified by the
manufacturer's installation instructions.
§ 64-26 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 64-28
1:298
Chapter 65
HABITUAL OFFENDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance standards. — See Ch.
64, Art. III.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 184.
§ 65-1. Title. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-03]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Hagerstown
Habitual Offender Ordinance."
§ 65-2. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared and ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City
of Hagerstown to be the public policy of the City to preserve, protect,
and improve property maintenance standards and the aesthetic nature of
the community and to prevent and prohibit conditions existing which shall
be detrimental to the property of others or which cause or tend to cause
substantial diminution in the value of properties in the City.
§ 65-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HABITUAL OFFENDER — Any person who shall pay a fine after receipt of
a citation, or who shall be convicted of or have judgment entered against
him or her for violations of the following chapters of the City Code, or
any combination thereof, for three or more separate and distinct violations
occurring during a twenty-four-month period shall be considered a habitual
offender. The chapters of the City Code which apply toward habitual
offender status are Chapter 64, Property Maintenance, Chapter 140, Land
Management Code, Chapter 185, Nuisance Abatement, Chapter 197, Rental
Facilities, Chapter 232, Vacant Nonresidential Structures, and Chapter 233,
Vacant Residential Structures.[Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-03]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association or
other legal entity of whatsoever kind and nature. The person shall include
the owner(s), tenant(s), lessee(s), occupant(s) and/or person(s) in charge of
or using the property.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures thereon
and the public sidewalk or public way abutting such lot, plot or
parcel.[Added 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-03]
§ 65-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 64-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-4
1:299
Chapter 68
(RESERVED)
Chapter 70
CABLE SYSTEM
§ 70-1. Short title.
This chapter shall constitute the "Cable System Ordinance" of the City of
Hagerstown and may be referred to as such.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases and
their derivations have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the
plural number include the singular number.
APPLICANT — Any person or entity that applies for an initial franchise.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended
by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992
and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as any of them may be
amended.
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons, including a
franchisee, who provides cable service over a cable system and directly
A. It shall be unlawful for any person considered a habitual offender under
this chapter to own, use or occupy any premises regulated by Chapter
64, 140, 185, 197, 232, or 233 of the Code of the City of Hagerstown in
conflict with or in violation of the provisions contained therein.
[Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-03]
B. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in the
County Jail, or by both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court.
C. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the court may:
(1) Order a period of probation;
(2) Order that any violation be abated by the defendant, or by the City
at the cost of the defendant; and/or
(3) Order periodic inspections of the property by the City at the cost of
the defendant.
§ 65-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 70-2
1:300
or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable
system or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM — Any facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment
that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming
and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but
such term does not include A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; B) a facility
that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; C) a facility
of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions
of Subchapter II of Chapter 5 of the Federal Communications Act (47 U.S.C.
§ 201 et seq.), except that such facility shall be considered a cable system
{other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 621(c) [47 U.S.C. § 541(c)]} to
the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services; D) an open video system that complies with
federal statutes; or E) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility systems.
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, a municipal corporation of the State of
Maryland, and all of the area within its boundaries, as such may change
from time to time.
CITY COUNCIL — The Hagerstown City Council, or its successor, the
governing body of the City.
FRANCHISE — An agreement that authorizes a person or entity to
construct, operate, maintain or reconstruct a cable system. Upon the
written acceptance by a franchisee, the agreement constitutes a contract
between the City and franchisee.
FRANCHISEE — The person, firm, corporation or entity to whom or which
a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the City Council under
this chapter and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person,
firm, corporation or entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY — All of the following which have been
dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and
maintained under public authority or by others and are located within
the City: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges,
sidewalks, easements and similar public property and areas.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any
purpose, cable service provided by a franchisee by means of or in
connection with the cable system and whose premises are physically wired
and lawfully activated to receive cable service from the franchisee's cable
system.
§ 70-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3
1:301
§ 70-3. Franchise grant.
It is unlawful to engage in or commence construction, operation, or
maintenance of a cable system in the City without a franchise issued under
this chapter. The City Council may, by ordinance, issue a nonexclusive
franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within all or
any portion of the City to any person or entity, whether operating under an
existing franchise or not, who applies for authority to furnish cable service
which complies with the terms and conditions of this chapter, and provided
that such person or entity also agrees to comply with all of the provisions
of the franchise. However, this shall not be deemed to require the grant of
a franchise to any particular person or entity. The City Council may restrict
the number of franchisees should it determine such a restriction would be
in the public interest.
§ 70-4. Franchise purposes.
A franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this chapter shall:
§ 70-5. Nonexclusive franchise.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and
not preclude the City from granting other or future franchises or permits or
preclude the City from using any rights-of-way or other public properties or
affect its jurisdiction over them or any part of them, or limit the full power
of the City to make all necessary changes, as the City in its sole discretion
shall decide, including the dedication, establishment, maintenance and
improvements of all rights-of-way and thoroughfares and other public
properties of any type.
§ 70-6. Application.
A. Permit the franchisee to engage in the business of operating a cable
system and providing cable service within the City;
B. Permit the franchisee to erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild,
reconstruct, replace, maintain and retain cable lines, related electronic
equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances and other property in
connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under,
upon, along and across rights-of-way within the City;
C. Permit the franchisee to maintain and operate said cable system for the
origination, reception, transmission, amplification and distribution of
cable television signals and for the delivery of cable service; and
D. Set forth the obligations of the franchisee under the franchise.
A. An applicant for an initial franchise shall submit to the City a written
application in a format provided by the City, at the time and place
specified by the City for accepting applications, and accompanied by
the designated application fee. An application fee in the amount of
$25,000 shall accompany the application to cover costs associated with
§ 70-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 70-6
1:302
processing the application, including, without limitation, costs of
administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the
applicant, the costs of consultants, notice and publication
requirements, and document preparation expenses. In the event such
costs exceed the application fee, the applicant shall pay the difference
to the City within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of
such costs. Conversely, if such costs are less than the application fee,
the City shall refund the difference to the applicant.
B. Contents; follow-up.
(1) An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall
contain, at a minimum:
(a) A statement as to the proposed franchise and information
relating to the characteristics and location of the proposed
system;
(b) A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the
expertise of the applicant in the cable system field;
(c) Information demonstrating the applicant's legal, technical and
financial ability to construct and operate the proposed system;
(d) A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a
partnership, members, if a limited liability company, or the
percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder
having a five-percent or greater interest, if a corporation;
(e) A list of officers, directors and key employees of the applicant,
together with a description of the background of all such
persons;
(f) The names and addresses of any parent entity or subsidiary of
the applicant or any other business entity owning or
controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or
controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;
(g) A proposed construction and service schedule;
(h) Any other reasonable information that the City may request.
(2) The City shall be allowed the opportunity to ask relevant follow-up
questions and obtain further information from whatever source. A
refusal by an applicant to cooperate or provide requested
information is sufficient grounds for the City to deny an application.
C. Consideration of initial franchise.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise and after
obtaining any additional information the City in its sole discretion
deems appropriate from any source, a public hearing shall be
§ 70-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-6
1:303
§ 70-7. Pole or conduit agreements.
No franchise shall relieve a franchisee of any of its obligations in obtaining
pole or conduit agreements from any department of the City, from any utility
company, or from others maintaining facilities in the rights-of-way.
§ 70-8. Other authorizations.
A franchisee shall comply with and obtain, at its own expense, all permits,
licenses and other authorizations required by federal, state and local laws,
rules, regulations and applicable resolutions and ordinances which are now
existing or hereafter lawfully adopted.
§ 70-9. Rules and regulations of City.
In addition to the inherent powers of the City to regulate and control any
franchise it issues, the authority granted to it by the Cable Act, and those
powers expressly reserved by the City, or agreed to and provided for in a
franchise, the right and power is reserved by the City to promulgate such
scheduled to allow public comment. At the public hearing, the City
Council shall receive public comment regarding the following:
(a) Public benefit: whether the public will benefit from granting a
franchise to the applicant;
(b) Qualifications: whether the applicant appears to have
adequate legal, financial and technical qualifications and
capabilities to build, operate and maintain a cable system in
the City;
(c) No conflicting interests: whether the applicant has any
conflicting interests, either financial or commercial, that will
be contrary to the interests of the City;
(d) Compliance with franchise and local laws: whether the
applicant will comply with all of the terms and conditions
placed upon a franchisee by the franchise, this chapter,
customer service standards and other applicable local laws and
regulations;
(e) Compliance with other requirements: whether the applicant
will comply with all relevant federal and state laws and
regulations pertaining to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the cable system.
D. Within 60 days after the close of the hearing, the City Council shall
decide whether to grant a franchise and on what conditions. The City
Council's decision shall be based upon the application, any additional
information submitted by the applicant or obtained by the City from any
source, and public comments. The City Council may grant one or more
franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise.
§ 70-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 70-9
1:304
additional rules and regulations as it may find necessary in the exercise
of its lawful powers and in furtherance of the terms and conditions of a
franchise and this chapter, and as permitted by applicable state and federal
law.
§ 70-10. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all cable operators and cable
systems to the greatest extent permissible under applicable law.
Chapter 73
CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitation — See Ch. 200. Theaters — See Ch. 227.
§ 73-1. License fees for exhibitions and performances. [Amended
11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-47]
The proprietor or exhibitor of every menagerie, circus, carnival, parade
or exhibition of feats of horsemanship shall, before giving or holding any
exhibition or performance within the corporate limits of the City, first
apply to the City Clerk for a license therefor, for which such proprietor or
exhibitor shall pay $125 for each week or portion thereof an exhibition or
performance is held within the corporate limits of the City.
§ 73-2. (Reserved)31
§ 73-3. License required. [Amended 11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-47]
It shall be unlawful for any proprietor or exhibitor of any menagerie, circus,
carnival, parade or exhibition of feats of horsemanship not having a license
to exhibit within the corporate limits of the City or to have or hold a parade
or display of any kind whatsoever upon the streets or highways of the
City without first obtaining a license therefor, as provided in the preceding
section.
§ 73-4. (Reserved)32
31.Editor's Note: Former § 73-2, Sideshow fee, was repealed 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-47.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 73-4, License fees for parades and displays, was repealed
11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-47.
§ 70-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-5
1:305
§ 73-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any person or persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
Chapter 76
CIVIL EMERGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew for minors — See Ch. 79. Peace and good order — See Ch. 173.
§ 76-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIVIL EMERGENCY — A riot and disorderly picketing or demonstrating or
unlawful assembly, characterized by the use of actual force or violence or
any threat to use force, if accompanied by immediate power to execute the
same by two or more persons acting together without authority of law, or
any natural disaster or man-made calamity, including flood, conflagration,
cyclone, earthquake, tornado, explosion or complete electrical blackout
within the corporate limits of Hagerstown, resulting in the death or injury of
persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary
measures must be taken to protect the public safety and welfare.
CURFEW — The prohibition against any person or persons walking,
running, loitering, standing, remaining or motoring upon any alley, street,
highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of
the City of Hagerstown, except persons officially designated to duty with
reference to said civil emergency.
§ 76-2. Proclamation.
When, in the judgment of the Mayor or, in his absence, the judgment of the
majority of the Council, a civil emergency as defined herein is deemed to
exist, he or they shall forthwith proclaim, in writing, the existence of the
same.
§ 76-3. General curfew.
After the proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor or a majority
of the Council, he or they may order a general curfew applicable to such
geographical areas of the City or to the City as a whole as he or they may
deem advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he
or they may deem necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
§ 73-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 76-4
1:306
§ 76-4. Orders authorized.
After a proclamation of a civil emergency as aforesaid, the Mayor or a
majority of the Council, as the case may be, may also in the interest of public
safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders:
§ 76-5. Notice of proclamation and orders.
Should the Mayor or the majority of the Council deem it necessary to
invoke any or all of the provisions of §§ 76-1 through 76-4, inclusive, he
or they shall give notice of the same by means of a written proclamation
publicly posted in City Hall and issued to the news media for immediate
dissemination to the public.
§ 76-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any persons violating the provisions of this chapter or an executive order
issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense against the City of
Hagerstown and shall be punishable by a fine as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
A. Order the closing of all retail liquor stores.
B. Order the closing of all beer taverns.
C. Order the closing of all private clubs or such portions thereof within
which the consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted.
D. Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer.
E. Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or any liquid products, flammable or combustible, in any
container other than the gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor
vehicle.
F. Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid
products, flammable or combustible.
G. Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever
and provide for their safekeeping.
H. Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving
away of firearms and/or ammunition.
I. Order the temporary closing of any and all streets, alleys and other
public ways in the City of Hagerstown.
J. Issue such other orders as are deemed necessary for the protection of
life and property.
§ 76-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-6
1:307
Chapter 79
CURFEW FOR JUVENILES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil emergency — See Ch. 76.
Loitering — See Ch. 142.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 173.
§ 79-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, Maryland, with administrative offices at 1
East Franklin Street, City Hall, Hagerstown, Maryland 21740.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen circumstance or combination of
circumstances that requires immediate action. This term includes but is
not limited to a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury, loss of life or
extensive property damage.
JUVENILE — For the purposes of this chapter, a juvenile is any unmarried,
unemancipated person under 17 years of age.[Amended 10-28-2014 by
Ord. No. O-14-21]
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as a natural step
or adoptive parent, a legal guardian, a person over the age of 18 who stands
in loco parentis or a person to whom legal custody has been given by court
order.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks,
alleys, common areas of schools, shopping centers, parking lots,
playgrounds, transportation facilities, theaters, restaurants, shops, bowling
alleys, taverns, cafes, arcades and similar areas that are open to the use of
the public.
§ 79-2. Curfew for juveniles. [Amended 10-28-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-21]
It shall be unlawful, unless otherwise provided herein, for any juvenile to be
or remain in or upon a public place within the City of Hagerstown during
the following periods:
A. 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday
until 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and
B. 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday until 5:00 a.m. the following day.
§ 76-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 79-3
1:308
§ 79-3. Exceptions and defenses.
The following shall constitute valid exceptions and defenses to the operation
of this chapter:
§ 79-4. Parent responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian having legal custody of a
juvenile to knowingly permit the juvenile to remain in any public place in
violation of § 79-2 hereof. The term "knowingly" includes actual knowledge
and knowledge that a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's care and custody.
§ 79-5. Violations and penalties.
A. When a juvenile is accompanied by the juvenile's parent.
B. When a juvenile is attending or returning home by a direct route
without any unnecessary detour or stop from a City event, a school
activity or an activity of a religious or civic organization, or of a place of
public entertainment, such as a movie, play or sporting event.
C. When the juvenile is engaged in a legal employment activity or is
returning from or going to his or her place of employment by a direct
route.
D. When a juvenile, with consent of his or her parent, is engaged in
interstate travel through the City, or beginning or ending in the City.
E. When a juvenile is on the property where the juvenile resides, or on the
sidewalk abutting the juvenile's residence.
F. When a juvenile is exercising his or her First Amendment rights
protected by the United States Constitution, including the rights of
freedom of speech, assembly and the exercise of religion, after
providing the Chief of Police with advance written notice of the time,
place and manner of the exercise of such rights, signed by the juvenile
and his or her parent.
G. In case of an emergency.
A. Any juvenile who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter may
be charged with having committed a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500, and be prosecuted in accordance with Maryland
Law. [Amended 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-24]
B. Any individual who violates § 79-4 hereof shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction and shall be subject to a fine in the following prepayable
amount: [Amended 10-28-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-21]
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense: fine of $100.
§ 79-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-5
1:309
Chapter 82
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 10.
(3) Third offense: fine of $250.
(4) Fourth or subsequent offense: fine of $500.
§ 79-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 79-5
1:310
ARTICLE I
Human Relations Commission
§ 82-1. Establishment; membership; officers; vacancies.
§ 82-2. Compensation; legal counsel; conflicts of interest.
§ 82-3. Powers and duties.
A. There is hereby created a Commission on Human Relations, to consist
of five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
of the City Council.
B. The Mayor shall designate the Chairman of said Commission.
C. In case of any vacancy, the Mayor shall appoint a successor for the
unexpired term with the consent of the Council.
D. Of the initial members of the Human Relations Commission, two shall
be appointed for terms to expire two years after the effective date of
this chapter and three for three years from the effective date of this
chapter. No member of the Commission shall be allowed to serve for a
period of more than six years consecutively.
E. The Commission shall consist of both men and women who are broadly
representative of racial, religious and ethnic groups of the City. All
members of the Commission shall be residents of the City of
Hagerstown.
A. The members of the Commission shall not receive any compensation for
their services but shall be paid their reasonable expenses while
engaged in the discharge of their official duties, subject to the approval
of the Mayor and Council.
B. The City Attorney shall act as general counsel and legal advisor to the
Commission and shall represent the Commission at all hearings and
judicial proceedings in which the Commission is a party.
C. In the event that any City officer, employee, agency, administrative
board or department is a party to any proceedings or investigation in
this matter and it is determined either by a vote of a majority of the
Commission or the City Attorney that there would be a conflict of
interest in such case, then the Commission may engage within its
discretion other counsel from Washington County, Maryland, to act on
behalf of the Commission.
A. The Commission shall have the authority and power to make such
surveys and studies concerning human relations, conditions and
problems as it may determine and to promote in every way possible the
betterment of human relations. The Commission shall have and is
hereby granted the authority to resolve and prohibit discriminatory
practices by any person or group of persons of whatsoever nature or
§ 82-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:311
kind, whether specifically enumerated in this chapter or not, by virtue
of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, age or
physical or mental handicap.
B. In making such studies and surveys as set forth in Subsection A of this
section, the Commission shall be authorized by the Mayor and Council
to expend any funds which may be provided for in the budget of the City
or otherwise made available.
C. On the basis of such studies or surveys, the Commission shall
recommend to the Mayor and Council such additional legislation or
changes in existing legislation as may be deemed desirable.
D. It shall be the duty of the Commission to submit an annual report to the
Mayor and Council on or before January 1 of each year of the work of
the Commission.
E. The Commission may conduct investigations and hearings in
accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter, enforce the
provisions set forth in this chapter and enforce the provisions of the
same as set forth.
§ 82-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 82-3
1:312
ARTICLE II
Discrimination in Public Accommodations
§ 82-4. Prohibitions.
It is unlawful for an owner or an operator of a place of public
accommodation or an agent or employee of the owner or operator, because
of the race, creed, color, national origin, marital status, sex, age (other
than as prohibited by law) or physical or mental handicap of any person, to
refuse, withhold from or deny to such person any of the accommodations,
advantages, facilities and privileges of such place of public accommodation.
Nothing in this section shall be construed or interpreted to prohibit the
proprietor of an establishment or the employees thereof from the right to
deny service to any person for failure to perform the usual and regular
requirements, standards and regulations for the establishment so long as
the denial is not based upon discrimination on the grounds of race, creed,
color, national origin, marital status, sex, age (other than as prohibited by
law) or physical or mental handicap of any person.
§ 82-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION —
§ 82-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a private club, religious
organization or other establishment not in fact open to the public, except
to the extent that the facilities of such establishments are made available
Any inn, motel or other establishment which provides lodging to
transient guests, other than an establishment located within a building
which contains not more than five rooms for rent or hire and which
is in actuality occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as his
residence.
A.
Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunch counter, soda fountain or
other facility principally engaged in selling food or alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premises, including but not limited to any such
facility located on the premises of any retail establishment, or any
gasoline station.
B.
Any motion-picture house, theater, concert hall, sports arena, stadium
or other place of exhibition or entertainment.
C.
Any establishment which is physically located within the premises of
any establishment otherwise covered by this subsection or within the
premises of which is physically located any such covered establishment
and which holds itself out as serving patrons of such covered
establishment.
D.
§ 82-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-6
1:313
to the customers or patrons of an establishment within the scope of this
section.
§ 82-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 82-6
1:314
ARTICLE III
Discrimination in Housing
§ 82-7. Declaration of policy; administration and enforcement.
§ 82-8. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES — An act that is unlawful under
this article.
DWELLING — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied
as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more
families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion
thereof.
FAMILY — Includes a single individual.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries or any other legal entity.
PHYSICAL OR MENTAL HANDICAP — Any physical disability, infirmity,
malformation or disfigurement which is caused by bodily injury, birth defect
or illness, including epilepsy, and which shall include but not be limited to
any degree of paralysis, amputation, lack of physical coordination, blindness
or visual impairment, deafness or hearing impairment, muteness or speech
impediment or physical reliance on a Seeing Eye dog, wheelchair or other
remedial appliance or device and any mental impairment or deficiency as
but not limited to retardation or such other which may have necessitated
remedial or special education and related services.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS — Any specification limiting the transfer, rental
or lease of any dwelling because of race, color, religion, marital status, sex
or national origin.
TO RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let or otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Hagerstown,
Maryland, to eliminate discrimination in housing and to provide for fair
housing practices throughout the City to all its citizens regardless of
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, age or physical
or mental handicap and to that end to prohibit discriminatory practices
with respect to residential houses by any person or group of persons in
order that the peace, health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of
all the inhabitants of the City may be protected and ensured.
B. This article shall be administered and enforced by the Commission.
§ 82-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-9
1:315
§ 82-9. Prohibitions.
A. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice because of race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, age or physical or
mental handicap:
(1) For any person having the right to sell, rent, lease, control,
construct or manage any dwelling constructed or to be constructed
or any agent or employee of such person:
(a) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make
unavailable or deny a dwelling.
(b) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith.
(c) To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or
published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect
to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference,
limitation or discrimination or an intention to make any such
preference, limitation or discrimination.
(d) To represent to any person for reasons of discrimination that
any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when
such dwelling is in fact so available.
(e) To deny any person access or membership or participation in
any multiple-listing service, real estate broker's organization
or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate
against him in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership or participation.
(f) To include in any transfer, sale, rental or lease of housing any
restrictive covenant that discriminates; or for any person to
honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any
discriminatory covenant pertaining to housing.
[1] Nothing in the provisions of this subsection shall be
construed to bar any person from refusing to sell, rent or
advertise any dwelling which is planned exclusively for or
occupied exclusively by individuals of one sex to any
individual of the opposite sex on the basis of sex.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, a
person may sell, rent or advertise any dwelling to aged or
elderly persons only, if the dwelling is planned exclusively
for or occupied exclusively by a specified age group.
[2] With respect to sex discrimination, nothing herein shall be
construed to apply to the rental of rooms within any
§ 82-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 82-9
1:316
dwelling in which the owner maintains his or her principal
residence or to the rental of any apartment in a dwelling
containing not more than five units and in which the owner
maintains his or her principal residence.
(2) For any person, whether or not acting for monetary gain, knowingly
to induce or attempt to induce another person to transfer an
interest in real property by representations regarding the existing
or potential proximity of real property owned, used or occupied by
persons of any particular race, color, religion, marital status, sex or
national origin or to represent that such existing or potential
proximity will or may result in:
(a) The lowering of property values.
(b) A change in the racial, religious or ethnic character of the
block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
(c) An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area.
(d) A decline in quality of the schools serving the area.
(3) For any person, firm, corporation or association to solicit or
attempt to solicit the listing of dwellings for sale or lease by doorto-
door, in-person or telephone solicitation or by the distribution of
circulars if one of the purposes is to change the racial composition
of the neighborhood.
B. It shall not be mandatory for any owner, manager or person responsible
for the care, operation and maintenance of housing, realty or premises
to be required to make special provisions for persons making
application for housing, other than those now required by the
applicable federal, state, county or City ordinances, rules or
regulations.
§ 82-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-9
1:317

ARTICLE IV
Discrimination in Financing
§ 82-10. Prohibitions.
§ 82-11. Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association
or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association
or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which
it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of
A. It shall be unlawful for any bank, savings-and-loan institution, credit
union, insurance company or other person regularly engaged in the
business of making mortgages or other loans for the purchase,
construction, improvement or repair or maintenance of dwellings to
deny such a loan to a person applying therefor or discriminate against
him or her in the fixing of the down payment, interest rate, duration or
other terms or conditions of such a loan because of the race, color,
religious creed, marital status, sex, national origin, age or physical or
mental handicap of such person or of the prospective occupants,
lessees or tenants of the dwellings in relation to which the application
for a loan is made.
B. It shall be unlawful for the Municipal Treasurer, finance agent,
government official or any other person whose responsibility it is to
account for public funds to knowingly invest or manage public funds, to
deposit or cause to be deposited any public funds in any lending
institution provided for herein which is found by the Commission to be
committing discriminatory practices and where such findings were
upheld by a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the court's judicial
enforcement of any order to restrain a practice of such lending
institution or for said institution to cease or desist in a discriminatory
practice, the Commission shall notify all persons in charge of public
funds to the name of any such lending institution found to be practicing
discrimination in the course of providing its customary commercial
services. Upon receiving such notification, the appropriate fiscal officer
of the City or agency thereof which has funds deposited in any lending
institution which is practicing discrimination, as set forth herein, shall
take immediate steps to have said funds withdrawn and redeposited in
another lending institution. If, for reasons of sound economic
management, this action will result in a financial loss to the City or any
of its agencies, the action may be deferred for a period of not longer
than one year. If the Commission notifies the City or an agency thereof
that the lending institution in question has corrected its discriminatory
practices, any prohibition set forth in this section shall not be
applicable. Any notification by the Commission shall comply with the
enforcement provisions of this chapter, and the same shall be binding
upon the City officers receiving such notice.
§ 82-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-11
1:319
the same religion or from giving preferences to such persons, unless the
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or
national origin, nor shall anything in this article apply to a private
membership club which is a bona fide club and which is exempt from
taxation under § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
§ 82-11 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 82-11
1:320
ARTICLE V
Discrimination in Employment
§ 82-12. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Hagerstown, in the
exercise of its police power for the protection of the public safety, public
health and general welfare, for the maintenance of business and good
government and for the promotion of the City's trade, commerce and
manufacturing, to assure all persons equal opportunity in receiving
employment and in all labor management-union relations regardless of
race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status
or physical or mental handicap unrelated in nature and extent so as to
reasonably preclude the performance of the employment and, to that end,
to prohibit discrimination in employment by any person, group, labor
organization, organization or any employer or his agents.
§ 82-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — An individual employed by an employer, except that
"employee" does not include any person elected to public office or any
person chosen by an officer to be on the officer's personal staff, an
appointee in the policy-making level or an immediate advisor with respect to
the exercise of the constitutional or legal powers of the office. The exception
set forth in the preceding sentence does not include employees subject to
the state or local civil service laws.
EMPLOYER — A person engaged in an industry or business who has 15 or
more employees for each working day in each of 20 or more calendar weeks
in the current or preceding calendar year and any agent of such a person.
Such term does not include the City to the extent as may be provided in
this article, but such term does not include a bona fide private membership
club, other than a labor organization, which is exempt from taxation under
§ 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY — Any person regularly undertaking, with or
without compensation, to procure employees for an employer or to procure
for employees opportunities to work for an employer, and includes an agent
of such a person. Such term shall not include an agency of the United States
or an agency of the State of Maryland or political subdivision thereof, except
that such term shall include the United States Employment Service and the
system of state and local employment services receiving federal assistance.
LABOR ORGANIZATION — A labor organization engaged in an industry and
any agent of such an organization, and includes any organization of any
kind, any agency or employee representation committee, group, association
or plan so engaged in which employees participate and which exists for
the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours or other terms or
§ 82-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-13
1:321
conditions of employment and any conference, general committee, joint or
system board or joint council so engaged which is subordinate to a national
or international labor organization.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, labor unions, partnerships,
associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, jointstock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy or receivers or any other legal entity.
PHYSICAL OR MENTAL HANDICAP — Any physical disability, infirmity,
malformation or disfigurement which is caused by bodily injury, birth defect
or illness, including epilepsy, and which shall include but not be limited to
any degree of paralysis, amputation, lack of physical coordination, blindness
or visual impairment, deafness or hearing impairment, muteness or speech
impediment or physical reliance on a Seeing Eye dog, wheelchair or other
remedial appliance or device and any mental impairment or deficiency as
but not limited to retardation or such other which may have necessitated
remedial or special education and related services.
RELIGION — Includes all aspects of religious observances and practice, as
well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he is unable reasonably
to accommodate to an employee's or prospective employee's religious
observances or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the
employer's business.
§ 82-14. Prohibitions; exceptions.
A. It shall be an unlawful employment practice:
(1) For an employer:
(a) To fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual with
respect to his compensation, terms, conditions or privileges or
employment because of such individual's race, color, religion,
sex, age, national origin, marital status or physical or mental
handicap unrelated in nature and extent so as to reasonably
preclude the performance of the employment.
(b) To limit, segregate or classify his employees or applicants for
employment in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive
any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise
adversely affect his status as an employee because of the
individual's race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin,
marital status or physical or mental handicap unrelated in
nature and extent so as to reasonably preclude the
performance of the employment.
(2) For an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment
or otherwise to discriminate against any individual because of his
race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status or
physical or mental handicap unrelated in nature and extent so as to
reasonably preclude the performance of the employment or to
§ 82-13 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 82-14
1:322
classify or refer for employment any individual on the basis of his
race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status or
physical or mental handicap unrelated in nature and extent so as to
reasonably preclude the performance of the employment.
(3) For a labor organization:
(a) To exclude or to expel from its membership or otherwise to
discriminate against any individual because of his race, color,
religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status or physical or
mental handicap unrelated in nature and extent so as to
reasonably preclude the performance of the employment.
(b) To limit, segregate or classify its membership or to classify or
fail or refuse to refer for employment any individual in any way
which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of
employment opportunities or would limit such employment
opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his status as an
employee or an applicant for employment because of such
individual's race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin,
marital status or physical or mental handicap unrelated in
nature and extent so as to reasonably preclude the
performance of the employment.
(c) To cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate
against an individual in violation of this section.
(4) For any employer, labor organization or joint labor-management
committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or
retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to discriminate
against any individual because of his race, color, religion, sex, age,
national origin, marital status or physical or mental handicap
unrelated in nature or extent so as to reasonably preclude the
performance of the employment in admission to or employment in
any program established to provide apprenticeship or other
training.
(5) For an employer, labor organization or employment agency to print
or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement
relating to employment by the employer or membership in or any
classification or referral for employment by the labor organization,
or relating to any classification or referral for employment by the
agency, indicating any preference, limitation, specification or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, age, national
origin or on the basis of a physical or mental qualification.
However, a notice or advertisement may indicate a preference,
limitation, specification or discrimination based on religion, sex,
age, national origin or physical or mental qualification when
religion, sex, age, national origin or physical or mental qualification
is a bona fide occupational qualification for employment.
§ 82-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-14
1:323
(6) For an employer to discriminate against any of his employees or
applicants for employment, for an employment agency to
discriminate against any individual or for a labor organization to
discriminate against any member thereof or applicant for
membership because he has opposed any practice made an
unlawful employment practice by this article or because he has
made a charge, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in
an investigation, proceeding or hearing under this article.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, it is not an unlawful
employment practice:
(1) For an employer to hire and employ employees, for an employment
agency to classify or refer for employment any individual, for a
labor organization to classify its membership or to classify or refer
employment any individual or for an employer, labor organization
or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or
other training or retraining programs to admit or employ any
individual in any such program on the basis of his religion, national
origin or physical or mental qualification in those instances where
sex, age, religion, national origin or physical or mental qualification
is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to
the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise.
(2) For an employer to establish standards concerning an employee's
dress and grooming if the standards are directly related to the
nature of the employment of the employee.
(3) For a school, college, university or other educational institution or
institution of learning to hire and employ employees of a particular
religion if the school, college, university or other educational
institution or institution of learning is, in whole or in substantial
part, owned, supported, controlled or managed by a particular
religion or by a particular religious corporation, association or
society or if the curriculum of the school, college, university or
other educational institution or institution of learning is directed
toward the propagation of a particular religion.
(4) For an employer, employment agency or labor organization to
observe the terms of a bona fide seniority system or any bona fide
employee benefit plan, such as a retirement pension or insurance
plan, which is not a subterfuge to evade the purposes of this article;
however, no employee benefit plan shall excuse the failure to hire
any individual.
C. Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted to require any
employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint labormanagement
committee subject to this article to grant preferential
treatment to any individual or to any group because of the race, color,
religion, sex, age, national origin or physical or mental handicap of the
individual or group on account of an imbalance which may exist with
§ 82-14 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 82-14
1:324
§ 82-15. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to a religious corporation, association,
educational institution or society with respect to the employment of
individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the
carrying on by such corporation, association, educational institution or
society of its activities.
§ 82-16. Discrimination by City officer or employee.
respect to the total number or percentage of persons of any race,
color, religion, sex, age or national origin or of physically or mentally
handicapped persons employed by any employer, referred or classified
for employment by any employment agency or labor organization,
admitted to membership or classified by any labor agency or labor
organization, or admitted to or employed in any apprenticeship or other
training program, in comparison with the total number or percentage
of persons of such race, color, religion, sex, age or national origin or
of physically or mentally handicapped persons in any community, state,
section or other area or in the available work force in any community,
state, section or other area.
A. No officer or employee of the City or a City agency, department or board
shall discriminate in the hiring or firing or discriminate in any other
manner against any person because of race, creed, color, sex, age,
national origin, marital status or physical or mental handicap unrelated
in nature and extent so as to reasonably preclude the performance of
the employment; provided, however, that no employment practice not
unlawful under other provisions of this article or chapter shall be
deemed as unlawful employment practice by the City.
B. If the Commission has received reliable information from an individual
or individuals and, after a proper investigation by the Commission, it
shall be determined by the Commission that an officer or employee of
the City agency, department or board has engaged in discrimination in
hiring, firing or any other type of activity against any person because of
race, creed, color, sex, age, national origin, marital status or physical or
mental handicap unrelated in nature and extent so as to reasonably
preclude the performance of the employment, and if the Commission is
unsuccessful in resolving the complaint, then the Commission shall
report such act or alleged act to the Mayor, and he shall review the case
and the findings of the Commission. If the Mayor is satisfied that an act
of discrimination has taken place, he shall take such action as he deems
appropriate under the circumstances; provided, however, that any
action taken shall not be in conflict with any Charter provisions of the
City of Hagerstown, provisions of the Code of the City of Hagerstown or
any union contracts or agreements that may be applicable. The
authority of the Commission relating to discrimination in City agencies,
boards or departments is limited to investigation, conciliation,
mediation and reporting to the Mayor as provided in this section.
§ 82-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-16
1:325

ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 82-17. Complaints.
§ 82-18. Commission meetings.
The Commission shall meet at least once a month. In addition, the Chairman
or a majority of the Commission shall have the right at any time to call
special meetings of the Commission upon five days notice to the members
thereof. The Commission shall establish procedures for the conduct of said
meetings.
§ 82-19. Investigation; action on findings.
A. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged discrimination
prohibited by any section of this chapter may make, sign and file with
the Human Relations Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
"Commission," a complaint, in writing, under oath. The complaint shall
state the name and address of the person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation, agency, department or board alleged to have
committed the act of discrimination, together with the particulars
thereof; and the complaint shall also contain such other information as
may be required from time to time by the Commission. A complaint
must be filed within six months from the date of the occurrence alleged
to be a violation of this chapter. A complaint filed with the Federal or a
State Human Relations Commission within six months from the date of
occurrence shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of this
section.
B. Whenever the Commission has received reliable information from any
individual or individuals that any person has been engaged or is
engaged in any discriminatory practice within the scope of this article
and, after a preliminary investigation by the Commission's staff
authorized by the Chairman, it is satisfied that said information
warrants the filing of a complaint, the Commission, on its own motion
and by action of not fewer than four Commissioners, may issue a
complaint in its name in the same manner as if the complaint had been
filed by an individual.
A. After the filing of any complaint, the Chairman shall consider the
complaint and shall refer it to the Commission's staff for prompt
investigation and ascertainment of the facts. The results of the
investigation shall be made as written findings. A copy of the findings
shall be furnished to the complainant and to the person, firm,
association, partnership or corporation, hereinafter referred to as the
"respondent," against whom or which the complaint is made.
B. If the finding is that there is probable cause for believing a
discriminatory act has been or is being committed within the scope of
§ 82-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-19
1:327
§ 82-20. Hearings; subpoena power; review of decisions.
this chapter the Commission shall endeavor to eliminate the
discrimination by conference, conciliation and persuasion.
C. If an agreement is reached for the elimination of the discrimination as a
result of the conference, conciliation and persuasion, the agreement
shall be reduced to writing and signed by the respondent, and an order
shall be entered by the Commission setting forth the terms of the
agreement. The Commission shall not enter an order at this stage of the
proceedings unless it is based upon a written agreement. If no such
agreement can be reached, a finding to that effect shall be made and
reduced to writing, with copies furnished to the complainant and to the
respondent.
A. In case of failure to reach an agreement for the elimination of the acts
of discrimination and upon the entry of findings to that effect, the entire
file, including the complaint and any and all findings made, shall be
certified to. The Chairman shall cause a written notice to be issued and
served in the name of the Commission, together with a copy of the
complaint, requiring the respondent to answer the charges of the
complaint at a public hearing before the Commission at such time and
place as may be set forth in the notice. The Chairman shall thereupon
appoint a hearing tribunal of three persons, who shall be members of
the Commission, to hear such complaint. A transcript of all testimony at
the hearing shall be made. The case in support of the complaint shall be
presented at the hearing by the general counsel of the Commission, and
no Commissioner who previously made or participated in the
investigation or caused the complaint to be filed shall participate in the
hearing as a member of the tribunal or in the review of a decision of a
hearing tribunal pursuant to any provisions of this chapter.
B. The respondent may file a written answer to the complaint and appear
at the hearing in person or otherwise, with or without counsel. The
respondent may submit testimony and shall be fully heard. He may
examine and cross-examine witnesses.
C. The Commission may permit reasonable amendment to be made to any
complaint or answer. Testimony taken at the hearing shall be under
oath and recorded.
D. Subpoena power.
(1) In the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, the Commission shall have the power to administer oaths,
to issue subpoenas and to compel the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of books, papers, records and
documents relevant or necessary for proceedings within the
geographical area under the jurisdiction of the City of Hagerstown.
Any such subpoena shall be served by the Police Department of the
City of Hagerstown upon written request by the Commission.
§ 82-19 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 82-20
1:328
(2) Any person having a hearing before a tribunal or hearing board
under this chapter shall have the right to subpoena witnesses and
the production of books, papers, records and documents relevant
or necessary for the proceedings as hereinabove set forth. Upon
the request of said person, the subpoena shall issue as a matter of
course.
(3) In case of said persons or times being located outside of the
jurisdiction of this Commission, the Commission may apply through
the Circuit Court in any county to obtain said attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of books, papers,
records and documents.
(4) In case of refusal to obey a subpoena for the attendance of a
witness or the production of books, papers, records and
documents, after proper notice has been given and upon a finding
of facts that the attendance and testimony of the witness or the
production of the books, papers, records and documents is relevant
or necessary for the proceedings of the Commission, the
Commission may apply to the Circuit Court for Washington County,
Maryland, for an order requiring the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of books, papers, records and
documents. The same shall be punishable by the court through its
usual powers of equity in addition to the further provisions of
penalty set forth in this chapter hereafter.
E. If upon all the evidence the Commission finds that the respondent has
engaged in any discriminatory act within the scope of any of these
Articles, it shall so state its findings. The Commission thereupon shall
issue and cause to be served upon the respondent an order requiring
the respondent to cease and desist from the discriminatory acts and to
take such affirmative action as will effectuate the purposes of the
particular Article.
F. If upon all the evidence the Commission finds that the respondent has
not engaged in any such alleged discriminatory act within the scope of
the particular Article, it shall state its findings of fact and shall similarly
issue and file an order dismissing the complaint.
G. If a decision of a hearing tribunal is not unanimous, the aggrieved party
may petition within 10 days to the Mayor and Council for a review of the
decision. The Mayor shall select a review board of three persons
consisting of the remaining eligible members of the Commission and
any other person or persons he may designate. This review board shall
limit its review to the entire record of the proceedings before the
hearing tribunal; provided, however, that if deemed necessary, said
review board may order further evidence if it is deemed necessary to
effectuate the purposes of the review. After such review, the
Commission, based on the decision by said board, shall affirm, reverse
or modify the decision of the hearing tribunal.
§ 82-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-21
1:329
§ 82-21. Confidentiality of investigations.
During the investigation of any complaint alleging a violation of this chapter
and until said matters reach the stage of public hearings, the activities of
all members of the Commission, employees or agents thereof in connection
with said investigation shall be conducted in confidence and without
publicity, and the Commission shall hold confidential any information in
relation thereto, including the identity of the complainant and the
respondent, except that:
§ 82-22. Additional prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts in
addition to all prohibited and unlawful acts prohibited by any other federal,
state, county or City statutes, ordinances or regulations:
A. Any information may be released at any time if the release has been
agreed to in writing by both the complainant and the respondent.
B. The identity of the complainant must be disclosed to the respondent at
any time upon request.
A. To knowingly or willfully file a false complaint under this chapter.
B. To willfully or knowingly falsify any documents, records or reports that
have been submitted or made or subpoenaed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
C. To willfully give false testimony before the Commission or any tribunal
or hearing board thereof.
D. To intimidate any witness, complainant, person or respondent in any
proceedings before the Commission or at any stage of the procedures
set forth in this chapter.
E. To claim to be aggrieved under the provisions of this chapter and:
(1) Said person has claimed to be aggrieved under the provisions of
this chapter;
(2) Said person has pursued the complaint under the provisions of this
chapter;
(3) The Commission has found the complaint to be unfounded or has
not pursued it based on its initial investigation or has dismissed it
without further action against the respondent; and
(4) The complaint has been made knowing the same to be false or
malicious.
F. For any person to receive remuneration of any kind whatsoever for
participation in any demonstration within the City of Hagerstown in
reference to any of the acts that are defined as discrimination in any
portion or portions of this chapter.
§ 82-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 82-22
1:330
§ 82-23. Injunction or litigation.
§ 82-24. Appeals.
§ 82-25. Construal and interpretation of provisions.
§ 82-26. Violations and penalties.
G. To coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the
exercise or enjoyment of or on account of such person having exercised
or enjoyed or on account of such person having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or
protected by this chapter.
A. At any time after a complaint has been filed, if the Commission believes
within its absolute discretion that appropriate civil action is necessary
to preserve the status of the parties or to prevent irreparable harm
from the time the complaint is filed until the time of its final disposition,
the Commission may bring action to obtain a temporary injunction in
the Circuit Court for Washington County, Maryland.
B. If any respondent refuses to comply with an order provided for in any
provisions of this chapter, the Commission may, if represented by its
general counsel, institute litigation in the appropriate court of
Washington County, Maryland, to enforce compliance with any
provisions of this article, or in any other appropriate board in any
jurisdiction.
A. Any respondent has a right to take an appeal after exhausting the
remedies set forth herein for the Commission to the Circuit Court for
Washington County, Maryland, in accordance with the provisions of the
Maryland Rules of Practice and Procedure governing appeals from
actions of administrative agencies.
B. The Commission or respondent may appeal to the Court of Special
Appeals of Maryland from any adverse decision of the Circuit Court on
such appeal.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be construed as vesting in all
persons the rights and privileges as set forth herein, and any person
who is aggrieved by any act prohibited by the provisions of this chapter
in any manner may bring an appropriate action in law or in equity in the
Circuit Court for Washington County, Maryland, for any relief either in
law or in equity that may be appropriate, in addition to pursuing the
procedures and seeking the remedies established herein.
B. The remedies and procedures as set forth and provided in this chapter
are in addition to and not in derogation of all federal, state, county and
City statutes, acts, ordinances or regulations that may be applicable to
the practices of the type referred to in this chapter.
§ 82-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-26
1:331
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or
who fails to comply with any of the orders as provided for herein,
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by
a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for not exceeding 60 days in
the county jail, or by both fine and imprisonment, within the discretion
of the court.
B. The application of the above penalty provisions are in addition to and
not in derogation of or limitation of any other applicable enforcement
procedures or remedies as set forth in this chapter.
§ 82-26 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 82-26
1:332
ARTICLE VII
Scope; Word Usage
§ 82-27. Scope.
All provisions of this chapter shall apply to one or more individuals, labor
unions, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives,
mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated
organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers or any other
legal entity of whatsoever nature or kind.
§ 82-28. Word usage.
§ 82-29. Section titles.
The section headings contained herein are for convenience in reference and
are not intended to define or limit the scope of any provision of this chapter.
A. The term "person" includes all of the above, and the term "person" as
used in any enforcement or penalty provisions of this chapter includes
one acting for or on behalf of a firm, association, corporation,
partnership or any of the legal entities set forth above.
B. All references made and all nouns and pronouns used in this chapter
shall be construed in the singular or plural and in such gender as the
sense and circumstances require.
§ 82-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-29
1:333
Chapter 87
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land management — See Ch. 140. Noise — See Ch. 155.
§ 87-1. Adoption of county ordinance.
A. The Board of County Commissioners, as the duly constituted legislative
body for Washington County, Maryland, has enacted a certain ordinance
to provide for the control of animals in Washington County, Maryland.
Said Animal Control Ordinance was passed in accordance with the
provision of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended. Said
ordinance was passed on January 30, 2001, and is incorporated herein
and made a part hereof, as from time to time amended, and as
specifically amended in Subsection B.
B. Said Animal Control Ordinance shall be amended as follows:
(1) Section 28, Animal Waste, Subsection (a), shall read as follows: "It
shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian to allow his or her
animal or any animal under his or her care to urinate or defecate on
the property of another without the property owner's consent,
unless the owner or custodian of the animal immediately thereafter
removes and disposes of any waste in a sanitary manner."
(2) Section 32, Public Nuisance Animals, Subsection (a)(2), shall read
as follows: "When an animal damages, soils, defiles or defecates on
any private property, other than that of the owner, or when an
animal does so on common grounds or jointly owned property, and
the owner or custodian has not immediately remedied the
problem."
(3) Section 35, Vicious and Dangerous Animals, shall be amended to
add new subsections thereto, to be known as Subsections (f) and
(g), to read as follows: [Added 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-12]
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep or
harbor a vicious and dangerous animal, including, but not
limited to dogs, within the corporate limits of the City of
Hagerstown. For purposes of this subsection an animal shall
be considered vicious and dangerous if:
(1) After the effective date of this subsection, the animal is
declared so by the Agency, or by any other agency or
governmental unit having jurisdiction over said animal at
the time of the declaration, and such declaration remains
unchanged after all rights of appeal are exhausted; and
§ 82-29 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 87-1
1:334
§ 87-2. Keeping of farm animals.
It shall be unlawful to keep and maintain within the corporate limits of the
City any animals generally considered to be farm animals, except in areas
now zoned agricultural and in established stockyards and livestock auctions
where such animals are kept for a brief period of time.
§ 87-3. Manure removal.
Every person owning or occupying any lot or premises within the corporate
or sanitary limits of the City and keeping thereon any farm animals
permitted in § 87-2 shall remove all manure, excrement or other filth and
shall at all times keep the same clean and well-limed. The provisions of this
section apply to both owners and occupiers of lots and premises within the
City.
§ 87-4. Animal carcasses.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dead animal to permit the carcass
to lie within the City limits longer than a reasonable time for removing or
burying the same.
§ 87-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, custodian, or keeper of any animal which violates the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 87-6. Dogs in parks. [Added 8-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-29]
(2) The behavior upon which the declaration is founded
consists of an attack or attacks upon a human or a
properly confined, restrained or controlled domestic pet.
(g) Any owner, custodian or keeper of a vicious and dangerous
animal who shall violate the aforegoing Subsection (f) shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to incarceration
not to exceed 90 days and a fine not to succeed $500. Each
day of the violation shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense.
C. The City of Hagerstown hereby adopts the Animal Control Ordinance,
as amended herein, which was adopted by the County Commissioners
for Washington County, Maryland as hereinabove set forth. The City,
through its duly constituted legislative body, does hereby request the
county to enforce the provisions of the same within the corporate limits
of the City of Hagerstown insofar as they are applicable to the City,
except for those provisions hereinafter set forth which are not
contained in the county ordinance.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-6
1:335
Chapter 89
DONATION BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling and refuse collection — See Ch.
117.
Portable storage containers — See Ch. 184.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
A. Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided herein, dogs are prohibited
in all City-owned parks and recreational facilities.
B. Exception. The aforegoing notwithstanding, dogs shall be permitted in
City-owned parks and recreational facilities in certain designated areas
of some parks or facilities, as from time to time determined, established
and designated by the City, subject to compliance with the regulations
contained in this section.
C. Regulations. At any time an individual has a dog in a City-owned park or
recreational facility, the following restrictions shall apply:
(1) Dogs must remain in the designated dog areas at all times.
(2) Dogs must be kept on an unbreakable leash not exceeding six feet
in length at all times.
(3) Dogs must be maintained under the control of an individual
physically capable of maintaining control of the dog and at least 12
years of age. Children under 12 must be supervised by an adult
capable of maintaining control of the dog.
(4) No individual shall be permitted to walk more than two dogs at any
one time.
(5) The custodian of the dog shall not allow the dog to defecate on Cityowned
park or recreational facility property without immediately
thereafter removing and disposing of the waste material in a
sanitary manner.
D. Restrictions. The exception contained in Subsection B above
notwithstanding, no dog shall be permitted on any City-owned park or
recreational facility property, even in designated areas, if said dog has
previously been determined to be dangerous, is currently acting in a
dangerous or aggressive manner or is currently in heat.
E. Penalty. Any dog owner, custodian or other individual who violates any
provision of this section shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 for each violation. If an
individual is convicted of violating any provision of this section, and is
subsequently convicted of another violation hereof, said individual shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 for each violation.
§ 87-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 87-6
1:336
§ 89-1. Donation bins permitted; definition.
Donation bins shall be permitted within the corporate limits of the City so
long as in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. For purposes of
this chapter, "donation bin" shall mean any receptacle or container that is
unsupervised or unattended, and is intended for use as a collection point for
the donation and temporary storage of clothing or other donated materials.
§ 89-2. Registration required. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-05]
All donation bins shall be subject to registration with the Planning and Code
Administration Department (the "Department").
A. Registration of each donation bin shall be submitted on the form
adopted by the Department, shall be updated annually, and shall be
accompanied by:
(1) A drawing depicting the size (height, width, and length) and the
location of the bin;
(2) Written proof of permission to install and maintain a donation bin
from the owner of the property and written consent from the owner
of the property to have any unpaid registration fee and/or
reregistration fee added to the municipal tax bill for the subject
real property;
(3) Up-to-date name and contact information for each of the following:
(a) The person or entity responsible for the maintenance of the
bin;
(b) The owner of the bin, if different from above; and
(c) The company soliciting donations, if different from above; and
(4) An initial registration fee of $200 and an annual reregistration fee
of $100.
B. All donation bins in existence in the City upon the effective date hereof
shall, within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, be registered
with the Department and in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter;
C. The owners of any donation bins in existence in the City upon the
effective date of the 2018 amendment shall provide written consent
from the owner of the property to have any unpaid registration fee or
reregistration fee added to the municipal tax bill for the subject real
property at the time of the next annual renewal.
§ 87-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-2
1:337
§ 89-3. Requirements.
All donation bins shall comply with the following requirements:
D. Registration and reregistration fees shall be due at the time of initial
registration and annually thereafter. Failure to remit payment in full
may result in collection pursuant to Article III, Tax Liens, § 223-11, of
the City Code, or by other civil proceeding.
A. Permitted zones. Donation bins are permitted only in industrial and
commercial zoning districts.
B. Location and design. Donation bins shall be subject to the following
provisions:
(1) Donation bins shall be located on a paved or impervious surface;
(2) Donation bins shall comply with all setback provisions applicable to
the property;
(3) Donation bins shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
(4) Donation bins shall not be located in the public right-of-way, drive
aisles, fire lanes, sidewalks, required parking spaces, landscape
islands or buffer strips, or any location that may cause hazardous
conditions or constitute a threat to public safety;
(5) The total allowable number of donation bins per property shall be
defined by the size of the property on which the bin is located, with
the following limitations:
(a) Property equal to or less than one acre: a maximum of one
donation bin is permitted;
(b) Property greater than one acre and up to five acres: a
maximum of two donation bins are permitted;
(c) Property greater than five acres: a maximum of one donation
bin is permitted per every 2.5 acres.
(6) Donation bins shall be constructed of noncombustible material and
shall have a securely closing lid; and
(7) Donation bins shall be clearly marked with the following:
(a) Up-to-date name and contact information for:
[1] The person or entity responsible for the maintenance of
the bin;
[2] The owner of the bin, if different from above; and
[3] The company soliciting donations, if different from above,
and an indication of tax exempt status; and
§ 89-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 89-3
1:338
§ 89-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who owns, controls, or maintains a donation bin or the
property upon which it is located and who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter and fails to abate such violation after notice has been provided
to the person or entity responsible for maintenance of the bin shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a municipal infraction and subject to a fine
of $500 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for
each day on which the violation exists.
§ 89-5. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter
be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the chapter in its entirety or of any part thereof
other than that portion declared to be invalid.
Chapter 92
ENTERTAINMENT CLUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 46.
Bottle clubs — See Ch. 62.
Curfew for minors — See Ch. 79.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Loitering — See Ch. 142.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 173.
Pool halls and billiard rooms — See Ch. 181.
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CITY — City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
(b) A notice stating that no items or materials shall be left outside
the donation bin.
C. Size restrictions. The maximum size for any donation bin shall not
exceed five feet in width by five feet in depth by seven feet in height.
D. Maintenance. Each donation bin and the property upon which it is
located shall be maintained in a safe and well-maintained condition and
shall be subject to the requirements of the Land Management Code, the
Property Maintenance Code, and the Nuisance Abatement Chapter of
the City Code. Each bin must be regularly emptied of its contents so
that it does not overflow.
§ 89-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-1
1:339
CLUB PREMISES — Any place where an entertainment club is operated
or maintained, including all hallways, bathrooms, parking areas and other
adjacent portions of the premises which are accessible to the public during
operating hours.
ENTERTAINMENT CLUB — [Amended 8-25-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-11]
OVER-TWENTY-ONE CLUB — Any entertainment club which restricts its
admission to persons age 21 years and over.
PERSON — One or more natural persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations, or other entities capable of having an action at law brought
against such entity.
TEEN CLUB — Any entertainment club which restricts its admission to
persons under the age of 21 years of age.
§ 92-2. License required; existing clubs.
§ 92-3. Application for license; fee.
In addition to the application procedures referred to in § 92-4 of this
chapter, an applicant for an entertainment club license shall provide the
following:
Commercial premises which are open to the public, the primary
function of which is to offer patrons an opportunity to engage in social
activities such as dancing, or the enjoyment of live or prerecorded
music, or the enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other
performers. As an incidental function, an entertainment club may sell
and serve food and beverages to its patrons.
A.
The term "entertainment club" does not include the following: premises
which are licensed to serve alcoholic beverages pursuant to state law;
theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats; fullservice
restaurants where the only entertainment is incidental to the
primary function of serving food; outdoor performances; a banquet,
party or celebration conducted for invited guests which is not open to
the general public; events sponsored and operated by a governmental
entity, an educational institution, a nonprofit religious, charitable,
benevolent, fraternal, or social organization, or a homeowner's
association.
B.
A. It is unlawful for any person to own, lease, operate, manage or maintain
an entertainment club in the City without first obtaining an
entertainment club license from the City. For multiuse facilities which
include an entertainment club, a separate and additional license must
be issued for the entertainment club operation.
B. Entertainment clubs currently in existence and actually operating as of
the effective date of this chapter shall be required to comply with the
provisions of this chapter immediately upon the first anniversary of the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 92-1 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 92-3
1:340
§ 92-4. Issuance or denial of license.
After receiving a complete application for an entertainment club license
at the office of the City Clerk, 1 East Franklin Street, Second Floor,
Hagerstown, Maryland, as specified in § 92-3 above, the City shall follow the
following procedures:
A. A written statement identifying the club premises, and setting forth
measures proposed to ensure that adequate traffic control, crowd
protection and security, both inside and outside the premises, will be
maintained, and that the ages of patrons admitted to the entertainment
club will be monitored.
B. A statement electing whether the entertainment club will be operated
either exclusively as a teen club or exclusively as an over-twenty-one
club, and a statement of the proposed schedule of operating hours and
days.
C. Proof of insurance, including liability insurance in the amount of
$1,000,000 and workers' compensation insurance in a commercially
reasonable amount.
D. Proof of issuance of all trader's, business, food service, sales tax, and
any other applicable required state, county or local licenses.
E. Proof of the occupancy limits of the club premises as determined by the
City Fire Marshal.
F. A nonrefundable annual license fee of $500.
A. The City Clerk shall forward copies of the application to appropriate
City officials for their comments regarding compliance with regulations
under their jurisdiction. The City Clerk shall consider all materials and
comments submitted and shall issue or deny the license within 30 days
after the date on which a completed application was filed unless the
applicant agrees to an extension of the time period in writing. A license
shall be issued for a one-year period.
B. An entertainment club license shall be denied by the City Clerk for any
one or more of the following grounds:
(1) If the operation of the business on the premises does not comply
with all applicable City ordinances, Zoning Codes, and state laws;
(2) If the application is incomplete or if it contains any material
misrepresentation; or
(3) If the application does not provide for adequate measures for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare in terms of traffic
control, crowd protection and security, both inside and outside the
premises, and the monitoring of the ages of patrons admitted to the
entertainment club.
§ 92-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-4
1:341
§ 92-5. Operating rules and regulations.
The following operating rules and regulations shall apply to all
entertainment clubs in the City:
C. If the City Clerk denies a license, written notice of the denial stating the
reasons why shall be sent to the applicant.
A. The entertainment club shall be operated in accordance with all
federal, state and local laws.
B. Persons of the following ages shall not be permitted to enter or remain
on the premises of a teen club:
(1) Under the age of 16 years unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
(2) 21 years of age or older except for bona fide employees or
entertainers hired by the licensee to work in the club, or a parent or
guardian of a person under 21 years of age present in the club.
C. No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted to enter or
remain on the premises of an over-twenty-one club unless accompanied
by a parent or legal guardian, except for entertainers or employees
hired by the licensee to work in the club, who shall he at least 18 years
of age.
D. Teen clubs shall be operated only on Friday and Saturday nights, and
shall close at 1:00 a.m.
E. Over-twenty-one clubs may operate any night of the week and shall
close at 1:30 a.m.
F. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ an adequate number
of qualified security personnel who will be present on club premises
during all operating hours to maintain peace and order and to ensure
compliance with all applicable laws of the state and of the City.
G. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to ensure that no alcoholic
beverages or controlled substances are offered for sale or consumed on
the entertainment club premises.
H. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to remove from the club
premises any person who is, or appears to be, under the influence of, or
affected by the use of, alcohol or drugs, or whose conduct poses a
physical danger to the safety of others present.
I. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent loitering, the
creation of public nuisances or disturbances of the peace by patrons of
the entertainment club on club premises or in the immediate vicinity.
"Loitering" shall not include walking between the club building and a
patron's vehicle, nor shall it include the act of waiting in line to gain
admission to the club.
§ 92-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 92-5
1:342
§ 92-6. Access by officers.
Any City police officers or Fire Department personnel, presently on duty,
shall have free access to all entertainment clubs for the purpose of
inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter at
all times that the premises are open to the patrons.
§ 92-7. Checking age of patrons.
§ 92-8. Suspension or revocation of license.
J. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to ensure that no noise
emanates from the club premises in violation of the City Noise
Ordinance (Chapter 155). Noise that is plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet from the premises shall be prohibited.
K. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to ensure that no signs or flyers
advertising the licensee or any event of the licensee are posted on any
utility poles, or in any other way in violation of City ordinances.
Licensee shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any such
signs or flyers which advertise licensee's business.
L. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all litter on or
around the club premises resulting from club operations. The cleanup
shall occur within eight hours after the end of each day's operation and
shall extend to the immediate vicinity of the club.
M. No entertainment club shall be operated within 500 feet of a school or
recognized place of worship.
A. It is the responsibility of the licensee to require picture identification or
a reasonable equivalent showing the age of each person admitted to an
entertainment club. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly,
recklessly, or negligently allow a person to enter or remain on the
premises of an entertainment club in violation of the age restrictions of
this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to misrepresent his or her age for the
purpose of obtaining admission to, or remaining at, an entertainment
club in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
A. Suspension.
(1) A Review Board consisting of the City Administrator, Police Chief
and Planning Department Head may, at any time, suspend an
entertainment club license whenever the licensee, or any manager,
officer, director, agent, or employee of the licensee, has caused,
permitted or knowingly done any of the following:
(a) Failed to keep the building structure or equipment on the
licensed premises in compliance with the applicable health,
building, fire or safety laws, regulations or ordinances in a way
§ 92-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-8
1:343
§ 92-9. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application.
§ 92-10. Declaration of nuisance; injunction.
Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. In addition to
any other relief provided by this chapter, the City Attorney may apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation
of any violation of this chapter. The application for relief may include
seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent
injunction.
which relates to or affects public health or safety on the
entertainment club premises;
(b) Failed to comply with the written statement provided pursuant
to § 92-3 hereof with respect to taking measures to ensure
adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security, and
such failure has caused an immediate public safety concern; or
(c) Failed to comply with the operating rules and regulations of
entertainment clubs specified in § 92-5 of this chapter.
(2) Such suspension shall remain in effect until the conditions causing
the suspension are cured and reasonable measures are taken to
ensure that the same will not recur, as determined by the Review
Board.
B. The Review Board may, at any time, revoke an entertainment club
license on any one or more of the following grounds:
(1) Whenever the City learns that the licensee made a material false
statement or misrepresentation, or failed to disclose any material
information to the City, in connection with any application for
entertainment club license or any license renewal;
(2) Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent or
employee of the licensee fails within a reasonable time to cure a
condition that caused a license suspension; or
(3) Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent or
employee of the licensee knowingly permits conduct on the
licensed premises that violates any federal, state, county or City
criminal statute, law or ordinance.
§ 92-8 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 92-11
1:344
§ 92-11. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the sanctions outlined in §§ 92-8 and 92-10, any person, firm
or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $1,000 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A violation of this chapter shall be considered a municipal infraction.
Chapter 95
EXCESSIVE USE OF CITY SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 39.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 48.
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Property maintenance habitual
offender — See Ch. 65.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 173.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 184.
Nuisance abatement — See Ch. 185.
Rental facilities — See Ch. 197.
§ 95-1. Purpose.
It is the intended purpose of the Mayor and Council of the City of
Hagerstown by the adoption of this chapter to impose on and collect from
the owner of a property the costs incurred for police and law enforcement
services and code administration services which are over and above the
costs of providing normal police protection, law enforcement and code
administration services, if said excess costs are spent to abate a nuisance
which has occurred or is maintained and permitted on the property. The
collection of the costs for such excessive services shall be by assessment
of a fee against the property upon which the nuisance occurs, pursuant
to the authority contained Sections 401 and 402 of the City Charter and
§ 223-11 of the City Code authorizing the abatement of nuisances and the
collection of costs by assessment against a property. Any assessment of a
fee pursuant to this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
of, the enforcement of any other provisions of the City Code or Maryland
law.
§ 95-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER — An independent hearing officer
appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council to review appeals
of the application of this chapter.
§ 92-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-2
1:345
APARTMENT COMPLEX — A single structure that consists of 25 or more
separate units used for residence or domicile purposes. "Apartment
complex" shall also include two or more multiunit residential structures
under common ownership and located on the same premises.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY —
Any property where the occurrence or commission of behavior which
results in the following number of separate HPD qualifying calls
occurred at said property within any twelve-month period:
Type of Property
Minimum Number of
Qualifying Calls
Commercial property 8
Residential property (1 or 2 units) 3, or 2 if at least 1 of which
constitutes a felony under
Maryland law.
Multiunit residential structure
(3-24 units)
4 total, or 3 to any individual unit
within the structure, or 2 to any
individual unit within the
structure if at least 1 of which
constitutes a felony under
Maryland law
Apartment complex (25-49 units) 6 total, or 3 to any individual unit
within the complex, or 2 to any
individual unit within the complex
if at least 1 of which constitutes a
felony under Maryland law
Apartment complex (50-99 units) 8 total, or 3 to any individual unit
within the complex, or 2 to any
individual unit within the complex
if at least 1 of which constitutes a
felony under Maryland law
Apartment complex (100-199
units)
10 total, or 3 to any individual unit
within the complex, or 2 to any
individual unit within the complex
if at least 1 of which constitutes a
felony under Maryland law
Apartment complex (200-399
units)
12 total, or 3 to any individual unit
within the complex, or 2 to any
individual unit within the complex
if at least 1 of which constitutes a
felony under Maryland law
Apartment complex (400 or more
units)
14 total, or 3 to any individual unit
within the complex, or 2 to any
individual unit within the complex
if at least 1 of which constitutes a
felony under Maryland law
A.
§ 95-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 95-2
1:346
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
CODE ADMINISTRATION — The Planning and Code Administration
Division of the Department of Community and Economic Development of the
City.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Property that is maintained, at least in part,
for business or commercial purposes.
DISTURBANCE —
HPD — The Hagerstown Police Department.
MULTIUNIT RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — A structure that is maintained,
at least in part, as a residence or domicile. For purposes of this chapter,
a multiunit residential structure shall not include a property that has less
than three separate units used for residence or domicile purposes, nor shall
it include a property which qualifies as an apartment complex hereunder.
NOTICE — Personal service to any owner, or delivery by first-class mail to
any owner and posting of the subject property. The effective date of such
notice shall be the date upon which the notice is issued by the City.
"Chronic nuisance property" shall also mean any privately owned
property, regardless of type, at which there have been at least 3 Code
Administration notices of violation issued within any twelve-month
period for a violation from among the following qualifying property
maintenance standards:
Chapter 64-8, Section 302.1, Sanitation.
Chapter 64-8, Section 302.4, Weeds.
Chapter 185, Nuisance Abatement (Weeds, Trash and Debris
Abatement Ordinance).
B.
Conduct consisting of any of the following:
Controlled dangerous substance or paraphernalia, possession or sale;
Disorderly conduct;
Disturbing the peace;
Liquor law violation, public consumption or open container of alcohol;
Loitering;
Loud noise complaint;
Prostitution;
Public urination or indecent exposure;
Undesirable, intoxicated or suspicious person; or
Any conduct which constitutes a felony under Maryland law.
A.
"Disturbance" shall not include calls for service for domestic violence
issues.
B.
§ 95-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-2
1:347
PROPERTY — Any privately owned property within the corporate limits of
the City of Hagerstown. Any public or governmental property is specifically
excluded.
QUALIFYING CALL — That a sworn officer of HPD has been dispatched
to, responds to, or otherwise comes upon a situation at a property as a
result of certain conduct of the owner, tenant, occupant, patron, guest, or
other person present with the implied or express permission of the owner,
at or about said property and HPD verifies that said conduct qualifies as a
disturbance as defined herein.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A property that is maintained, at least in part,
as a residence or domicile. For purposes of this chapter, a "residential
property" shall not include a property that has three or more separate units
used for residence or domicile purposes.
§ 95-3. Notice of nuisance.
Whenever a qualifying call occurs and/or when a property qualifies as a
chronic nuisance property pursuant to this chapter, the City shall issue a
written notice to any owner of said property advising the notice recipient of
the following:
A. A description of the property sufficient to reasonably identify the
premises.
B. An itemization of the dates of all HPD qualifying calls and/or Code
Administration notices of violation and a brief description of the related
circumstances giving rise to the qualifying calls and/or notices of
violation.
C. That a qualifying call has occurred and/or the property has been
deemed a chronic nuisance property for the assessment of fees
pursuant to this chapter for excessive use of City services.
D. Properties deemed a chronic nuisance property shall have that
designation for one year from the date of such notice.
E. That a fee in the amount of $100 for the first offense, $250 for a second
offense, and $500 for a third or subsequent offense shall be imposed
against the property for each HPD qualifying call occurring or Code
Administration notice of violation issued for a qualifying property
maintenance standard on, at or in the property while the property is
deemed a chronic nuisance property; and that any such fee assessment
shall be payable by the owner(s) of said property and shall constitute a
lien on the property to be collected as municipal taxes are collected.
F. That any affected owner shall have the right to appeal to the
administrative hearing officer in writing to contest the notice and to
show cause why the property should not be deemed a chronic nuisance
property.
§ 95-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 95-4
1:348
§ 95-4. Chronic nuisance property list.
The City shall maintain and annually publish a list of those properties
currently deemed chronic nuisance properties as a result of HPD qualifying
calls by street address and property owner. The City shall maintain a list of
those properties currently deemed chronic nuisance properties as a result
of Code Administration qualifying notices.
§ 95-5. Violation/Fee assessment.
§ 95-6. Appeals.
Any owner of property directly affected by an action of the City for a
violation of this chapter shall have 30 days from the date upon which notice
is issued to file an appeal, in writing, to the administrative hearing officer,
stating why the action is invalid or incorrect in whole or in part. The appeal
shall be filed on the form provided by the City and must be accompanied by
an appeal fee of $50. Failure to file such an appeal within the time frame
required shall render the determination of the City final. Upon a proper and
timely appeal, the administrative hearing officer shall schedule the matter
for a hearing within 45 days of the filing of said appeal. The appellant
shall be entitled to present evidence to the administrative hearing officer at
such hearing and shall have the burden of proving that the action taken is
invalid or incorrect, in whole or in part. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the administrative hearing officer shall issue a final written decision on the
validity of the action taken, including such order which may allow for a
reduction in the fee assessment for good cause shown. Any aggrieved party
may appeal the decision of the administrative hearing officer to the Circuit
Court for Washington County within 30 days after the date upon which a
final written decision is issued.
A. The City shall issue against a property written notice of a fee
assessment of $100 for a first offense, $250 for a second offense, and
$500 for a third or subsequent offense, for each HPD qualifying call or
Code Administration notice of violation arising out of conduct or a
condition on, at or in the property which occurs while the property is
deemed a chronic nuisance property. Written notice of any such fee
assessment shall be made to any owner of said property. Each HPD
qualifying call or Code Administration notice of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall give rise to a
separate fee assessment. The fee assessment may be collected in the
same manner as municipal taxes are collected pursuant to § 223-11
hereof.
B. In addition to the fee assessments contained herein, the crime-free
housing operator's certification issued to the owner, landlord or
designated agent pursuant to Chapter 197 is subject to denial,
suspension or revocation for a violation of this chapter, pursuant to
§ 197-10.
§ 95-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-6
1:349
Chapter 98
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Gas installations — See Ch. 120.
Gasoline pumps and service stations — See
Ch. 122.
§ 95-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 95-6
1:350
ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention and Life Safety Standards
§ 98-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
§ 98-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-21; 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-22]
A. This code shall be known as the "Fire Prevention Code of the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland," and is established for the purpose of providing
an ordinance to provide the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, with rules
and regulations to improve public safety by promoting the control of
fire hazards; regulating the installation, use and maintenance of certain
equipment; regulating the use of structures, premises and open areas;
providing for the abatement of fire hazards; regulating blasting;
establishing the responsibilities and procedures for code enforcement;
and setting forth the standards for compliance and achievement of
these objectives. [Amended 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-22]
B. This Code adopts in its entirety the Maryland State Fire Prevention
Code, COMAR 29.06.01, by reference, including all editions of NFPA 1,
Uniform Fire Code, and NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, as from time to
time amended. [Ameneded 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-21]
C. One copy of NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code, and NFPA 101, Life Safety
Code, shall be filed and maintained in the office of the City Clerk.
[Amended 5-21-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-14; 9-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-21]
D. (Reserved)33
E. (Reserved)34 [Amended 5-21-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-14]
F. This Code also adopts by reference the Explosive Materials Code of the
National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 495, 2006 Edition, in its
entirety, the same as if set out at length herein, as amended by the state
fire prevention code.35 [Added 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-22]
G. (Reserved)
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this chapter, to permit or
maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof or to
fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation except as
may be permitted by a variance authorized by the Fire Marshal in
writing, and in accordance with accepted practices as outlined in the
33.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which adopted NFPA No. 1, 1992 Edition, as amended
5-21-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-14, was repealed 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-21.
34.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, which adopted BOCA National Fire Prevention Code,
1993 Edition, as amended 5-21-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-14, was repealed 9-27-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-21.
35.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, which provided that codes adopted by reference are
on file in the Clerk's office, was repealed 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-21.
§ 98-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-2
1:351
§ 98-3. Enforcement.
applicable codes. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed
prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner or other person
in control of the premises. Any person, firm, corporation, individual,
limited partnership or legal entity of whatsoever nature or kind who or
which shall violate any of the provisions of the codes hereby adopted
or who or which fails to comply therewith shall, severally for each
and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor (unless referenced as a municipal infraction violation, as
contained in Article V, § 98-10 of this chapter), and shall be punishable
in accordance with the penalty provisions provided for in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, § 1-17, of the Hagerstown City Code.
B. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation nor permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects. Each day shall
be considered a separate offense.
C. The application of the above penalty provisions shall not be held to
prevent the Fire Marshal, his deputies or other legally designated
officials of the Fire Department from taking immediate corrective
action to summarily abate any condition which is in violation of any
provisions of this code, and which represents in the mind of the
enforcement official an immediate fire hazard to life and/or property.
A. The Fire Chief of the Hagerstown Fire Department shall be ultimately
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The
Fire Chief may detail qualified members of the Department as
inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. To assist in the
performance of the responsibilities and duties placed upon the Fire
Chief of the Hagerstown Fire Department, the Fire Marshal's Office of
the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, is hereby created.
B. This Office or Bureau shall operate under the supervision of the Fire
Chief of the Hagerstown Fire Department. Assisting the Fire Chief shall
be the Fire Marshal, who shall be the administrator of the Hagerstown
City Fire Marshal's Office and have responsibility for the overall
activities of the Fire Marshal's Office.
C. The Hagerstown City Fire Marshal's Office shall consist of the Fire
Marshal and such additional members, not to exceed six in number, as
may be appointed by the Fire Chief on the basis of examination and/or
other accepted qualifications methods and procedures as may be
determined. Unless otherwise noted, those individuals shall be
designated as Deputy Fire Marshals. [Amended 10-23-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-22]
D. The Hagerstown City Fire Marshal's Office shall enforce all laws and
ordinances of the City of Hagerstown and State of Maryland pertaining
to:
§ 98-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 98-3
1:352
(1) The prevention of fire;
(2) The storage, sale and use of any explosive, combustible or other
dangerous article, in solid, liquid or gas form;
(3) The installation and maintenance of equipment of all sorts intended
for fire control, detection and extinguishment;
(4) The means and adequacy of exits in case of fire, from buildings and
all other places in which people work, live or congregate from time
to time for any purpose, except buildings used wholly as a dwelling
house containing no more than two families;
(5) The investigation of the origin, cause and circumstances of fire; and
(6) The suppression of arson.
E. Personnel assigned to the Hagerstown City Fire Marshal's Office shall
take the oath of office prescribed for a police officer of the City of
Hagerstown, and shall be issued appropriate credentials and
equipment by the Chief of Police of the City of Hagerstown upon
successful completion of the minimum standards training program
conducted by the Maryland Police Training Commission.
F. If, after conducting a lawful investigation, a Fire Marshal or Deputy
Fire Marshal of the Hagerstown City Fire Marshal's Office has probable
cause to believe that a person(s) has committed or attempted to commit
a crime involving a fire, fire bombing or false alarm or involving the
possession or manufacture of explosive devices or substances,
fireworks or fire bombs as set out at length in the Criminal Law Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the City Fire Marshal or his
deputies may arrest that person or cause him to be arrested and
charged with the crime, in accordance with the appropriate procedures
provided by law. [Amended 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-21;
10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-22]
G. The Fire Marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected all public
properties on a periodic basis, and shall make such orders as may be
necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing
the same and for safeguarding of life and property from fire.
H. The provisions of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Hagerstown,
Maryland, shall apply equally to both public and private property, and it
shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise
specified.
§ 98-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:353

ARTICLE II
Open Burning
§ 98-4. Open burning restricted. [Amended 9-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-21; 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-22]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or to permit any other person
to burn on his property any fires or combustible material within the City
limits of Hagerstown, except as may be provided for by other provisions
of this code not inconsistent herewith.
B. Nothing in this regulation shall prohibit those outdoor fires utilized for
cooking purposes, provided that the fire is located in an approved grill,
barbecue or other approved cooking appliance, and is not being utilized
in a manner violating other applicable fire regulations.
C. Nothing in this regulation shall prohibit the use of approved, selfcontained
patio-style stoves or similar devices, provided the device is
used in accordance with all manufacturer's specifications and
requirements, and is not being utilized in a manner violating other
applicable fire regulations.
D. Approved grills, barbecues or other approved appliances shall be
maintained in good condition and operated as directed in a manner
consistent with the manufacturer's directions.
E. Bonfires at special functions may be permitted, provided that a permit
is first obtained from the City Fire Marshal's Office. Certain restrictions
or conditions may be required by the Fire Marshal before a permit is
issued, and the Fire Marshall may refuse to issue a permit if the
conditions are not met or if the hazards of such a function exceed
reasonable safeguards.
F. Any violations of this section shall be a municipal infraction subject to
the fines listed in Article V, § 98-10.
§ 98-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-4
1:355

ARTICLE III
Permits; Fees
§ 98-5. Blasting permit; fee. [Amended 9-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-21]
§ 98-6. Assembly occupancy permit. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-3]
A. Before any contractor or other corporation, company or individual shall
use explosives within the City limits of Hagerstown, Maryland, said
individual or company shall have on file in the administrative offices of
the Hagerstown Fire Department a current explosive dealer/user
license issued by the Maryland State Fire Marshal's Office and a
current certificate of insurance indicating the total amount of liability
coverage provided. The agent or company representative shall obtain a
permit from the Hagerstown Fire Department at a total cost of $50
prior to using explosives within the City limits. [Amended 7-26-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-15]
B. Failure to comply with the filing and permitting requirements of
Subsection A of this section shall be a municipal infraction and subject
to the fines listed in Article V, § 98-10. [Amended 10-23-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-22]
A. It shall be unlawful to establish, open or operate an assembly
occupancy, either for profit or not for profit, within the City limits of
Hagerstown without first obtaining an assembly occupancy permit from
the Hagerstown City Fire Marshal's Office.
B. Permits shall be issued to all assembly occupancies after a fire
inspection is conducted and it is determined that the structure meets
minimum firesafety standards.
C. An inspection schedule will be developed by the Fire Marshal for all
assembly occupancies. Each assembly occupancy will be scheduled for
renewal of the permit once per year and will be permanently positioned
in either the first, second, third or fourth quarter of the year to aid in
the inspection and renewal process, after the initial issuance of the
permit.
D. Any owner or operator of an assembly occupancy which fails to comply
with the requirements of any of the subsections of this chapter, either
due to a failure to comply with an inspection violation notice or for any
other reason, shall have the assembly occupancy permit revoked and be
guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the penalty provisions of
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, § 1-17, of the Hagerstown City
Code.
§ 98-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-6
1:357
§ 98-7. Code enforcement and fire suppression fees. [Amended
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-49]
E. A fee of $50 per permit shall be charged for the inspection and issuance
of the permit provided for in this section. [Amended 7-26-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-15]
F. Every assembly occupancy shall be provided with a sign designating the
maximum permitted occupant capacity for the establishment, and the
capacity sign and assembly permit shall be prominently posted in a
location approved by the Fire Marshal. Failure to post and maintain the
assembly permit or capacity sign as directed will result in a municipal
infraction and fine as listed in Article IV, § 98-9, of this chapter. [Added
9-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-21]
G. It shall be the responsibility of the on-site person in charge of each
assembly occupancy to restrict the total number of persons permitted
within the occupancy to not more than the established and posted
occupant capacity determined by the Fire Marshal's Office. Exceeding
the posted capacity of the assembly occupancy will result in a municipal
infraction and fine as listed in Article IV, § 98-9, of this chapter. [Added
9-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-21]
A. Fees in general.
(1) A fee shall be charged for the following services performed by the
Hagerstown City Fire Marshal's Office:
(a) Plan review, and use and occupancy inspections;
(b) Fire protection system plan review and inspections;
(c) Technical assistance.
(2) A plan review fee for all plans reviewed by the Fire Marshal's Office
for building permit application approval shall be assessed at 30% of
the cost of the building permit application fee. This fee shall be
incorporated into the building permit application fee and shall be
collected at the time the building permit fee is paid. This fee
includes all inspections associated with the construction of the
project, as well as a final inspection for use and occupancy. It does
not include inspections of any fire protection system components,
or any reinspection or retests, which are covered in other sections
of this chapter. [Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-13]
(3) Payment method.
(a) Fee payments shall be in the form of a check or money order
payable to the City of Hagerstown.
(b) Cash payments are not acceptable.
§ 98-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 98-7
1:358
(4) Retest or reinspection fees shall be assessed whenever follow-up
testing of a fire protection system is necessary, or if additional site
inspections are required for occupancy approval, as noted in
specific sections of this section.
(5) Failure to remit payment. In any case where a customer fails to pay
for the services provided, the following action may be taken:
(a) In the case of plan reviews for new or existing construction, the
Fire Marshal's Office shall not conduct a final inspection or
approve the use and occupancy permit for the project; and no
other inspections, plan reviews, or approvals will be issued for
the property owner for any other projects until the outstanding
payment is received in full.
(b) In the case of plan reviews of fire protection systems, the Fire
Marshal's Office shall not inspect, test, or approve the fire
protection system involved; and no other inspections, plan
reviews, or approvals will be issued for the property owner/fire
protection system contractor until the outstanding payment is
received in full.
(c) In the case of a failure to pay fees associated with technical
assistance rendered, no additional services will be provided to
the owner, developer, contractor, engineer, etc., until the
outstanding payment is received in full.
(d) The penalties as specified in Chapter 98, § 98-2 shall apply to
any person failing to remit payment for services provided by
the Fire Marshal's Office.
B. Fees for plan review and use and occupancy inspections.
(1) When a building permit is required by the City of Hagerstown
Building Inspector's Office for any construction project being built
in either a new location or for renovation of an existing structure,
approved construction plans shall be submitted to the Fire
Marshal's Office for review and approval.
(2) A plan review fee for all plans reviewed by the Fire Marshal's Office
for building permit application approval shall be assessed at 25% of
the cost of the building permit application fee. This fee shall be
incorporated into the building permit application fee and shall be
collected at the time the building permit fee is paid. This fee
includes all inspections associated with the construction of the
project, as well as a final inspection for use and occupancy. It does
not include inspections of any fire protection system components,
or any reinspections or retests, which are covered in other sections
of this chapter. [Amended 2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
(3) When a final inspection is required on a building construction
project, no inspection fee will be required for the initial final
§ 98-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-7
1:359
inspection. If additional follow-up inspections are required due to
the failure of the contractor/owner to have all work completed or
properly performed, a reinspection fee of $150 shall be required
for each and every reinspection required for occupancy approval.
[Amended 2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6; 7-26-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-15]
C. Fire protection system review fees.
(1) Prior to the installation of any of the systems further described in
this section, the system contractor shall submit to the Fire
Marshal's Office complete installation plans, including
manufacturer's literature on the system components, for review
and approval. The failure of the system contractor to submit plans
and obtain the required approvals will result in the disapproval of
the installed system, and will still require the contractor to submit
the necessary plans and pay all fees in order for the system to
receive final testing and approval.
(2) The following fee schedule shall be used to calculate the fee to be
paid for plan review and inspection services for fire protection
system installations: [Amended 2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6;
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-15]
(a) Fire alarm and detection systems: $100 per fire alarm panel,
plus $1.50 per fire alarm initiating and indicating device.
(b) Sprinkler, water spray, and combined sprinkler and standpipe
systems: $1.50 per sprinkler head or $100 per system,
whichever is greater, or $100 per dwelling unit for one- and
two-family dwellings.
(c) Standpipe and hose systems: $50 per 100 linear feet or portion
of it or $100 per system, whichever is greater.
(d) Fire pump: $0.25 per gallon per minute (gpm) of rated pump
capacity or $100 per pump, whichever is greater, although this
fee does not apply to limited service pumps utilized for
residential sprinkler systems as permitted for NFPA 13D
systems.
(e) Gaseous and chemical extinguishing systems: $1 per pound of
gaseous or dry chemical extinguishing agent, although this fee
does not apply to a reserve supply of extinguishing agent: $100
per 30,000 cubic feet of volume of the portion of protected
space; $100 per wet chemical extinguishing system; or $100
per system, whichever is greater.
(f) Foam systems: $100 per nozzle or local applicator device plus
$1.50 per sprinkler head for a combined sprinkler and foam
system or $100 per system, whichever is greater.
§ 98-7 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 98-7
1:360
(g) Smoke control system: $100 per 50,000 cubic feet of volume or
the portion of the protected or controlled space, up to a
maximum of $1,500 per system, or $100 per system, whichever
is greater.
(h) Underground fire or combination water main and private fire
hydrant: $50 per 100 linear feet of piping or $100 per system,
whichever is greater; plus $50 per hydrant.
(3) The fees paid include the following services for each specified
system:
(a) Fire alarm and detection systems: plan review and inspection
of a complete system of wiring, controls, alarm and detection
equipment and related appurtenances, and one final
acceptance test of the installed system.
(b) Sprinkler, water spray, and combined sprinkler and standpipe
systems: plan review and inspection of shop drawings,
hydraulic calculations, piping, control valves, connections and
other related equipment and appurtenances, one underground
flush per system, one hydrostatic test per system, and one final
acceptance test per floor or system.
(c) Standpipe and hose systems: plan review and inspection of a
complete system of shop drawings, control valves, piping,
connections and other related equipment and appurtenances,
one flush test per system, one hydrostatic test per system, and
one final acceptance test of the installed system.
(d) Fire pump: plan review and inspection of a complete system of
pumps and all associated valves, piping, controllers, driver and
other related equipment and appurtenances, and one pump
acceptance test.
(e) Gaseous or chemical extinguishing systems: plan review and
inspection of a complete system of piping, controls, and
equipment and other appurtenances, and one performance or
acceptance test of the installed system.
(f) Foam system: plan review and inspection of a complete system
of piping, controls, nozzles, and equipment and related
appurtenances, and one flush test per system, one hydrostatic
test per system, and one final acceptance test of the installed
system.
(g) Smoke control system: plan review and inspection of system
components, one performance or acceptance test of the
installed system.
(4) Final acceptance testing shall be witnessed by a representative of
the Fire Marshal's Office.
§ 98-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-7
1:361
(5) A fee of $150 per system zone or floor shall be charged to retest or
reinspect if the test outlined in Subsection C(3) of this section
reveals that the system being tested does not meet applicable
standards. [Amended 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-15]
(6) A "services provided" form shall be completed by the Fire
Marshal's Office detailing the inspection location, billing
information, date of service, type(s) of system(s) reviewed, and the
total cost for the services. The customer shall then receive an
invoice for the services rendered, which shall be due and payable
within 30 days.
D. Technical assistance fees.
(1) Upon request, the Fire Marshal's Office shall provide technical
code assistance to developers, architects, contractors, property
owners, etc. This assistance may be in the form of a preliminary
review of construction/site plans and fire protection system plans,
or an on-site consultation/site inspection to discuss fire code
requirements, alternative protection options, or interpretations of
the fire code and their application to a specific project or property.
(2) Technical assistance fees shall be charged at $45 per hour,
prorated to the nearest 1/2 hour. This fee shall not apply to any
consultation after the issuance of a building permit.
(3) When requested, a reasonable time to prepare written reports or
research subsequent code-related issues shall be included when
computing the fee for technical assistance.
(4) The fee shall be charged to the person officially requesting
assistance. A "services provided" form shall be completed by the
Fire Marshal's Office detailing billing information, date of service,
type of technical assistance provided, and the time involved to
complete the service. The customer shall then be invoiced for
services rendered, with the fee due and payable within 30 days.
E. Fire suppression fees. [Added 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-20]
(1) The City of Hagerstown Fire Department may charge a fee to the
owner and/or occupant of the property for the lesser of the actual
costs to the City, as determined by the Department, of the
suppression or the limit of the available insurance coverage for
each actual fire suppression activity in which personnel and/or
vehicles of the City of Hagerstown Fire Department are utilized.
(2) This fee shall be collected when so provided in the property
owner's or occupant's fire or other insurance policy for the real
property where the fire suppression takes place.
F. Business license inspection fee. An inspection fee of $50 shall be
charged for the Fire Department to perform an inspection for a
§ 98-7 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 98-7
1:362
§ 98-8. Fireworks; permit to sell legal ground based sparkling
devices (GBSD); unlawful fireworks. [Added 9-27-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-2136; amended 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-22]
business to obtain a license or permit from any entity. [Added
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-15]
G. Motor vehicle collision response fee. The following fees may be charged
for the Fire Department to respond to a motor vehicle collision: $150
per hour for the engine company and/or ladder company vehicle; $100
per hour for the utility vehicle; $50 per hour for the shift commander,
officer and/or other personnel of the Fire Department. [Added
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-15]
H. False alarm fee. A fee of $250 may be charged to the property owner for
the Fire Department responding to a false fire alarm which is defined as
a verbal, mechanical, or other request for assistance of the Fire
Department not in response to an actual fire. [Added 7-26-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-15]
A. Any vendor selling or desiring to sell within the City of Hagerstown,
ground-based sparkling devices (GBSD) as permitted in COMAR
29.06.07, and as further defined in Maryland Public Safety Article, Title
10, § 10-101(f)(3)(iv), shall comply with all requirements of COMAR
29.06.07 and shall be required to obtain a permit from the City Fire
Marshal. No devices other than those permitted in Title 10 of the
Maryland Public Safety Article, as from time to time amended, shall be
permitted in the City of Hagerstown.
B. Issuance of a permit by the City Fire Marshal shall be conditioned upon
compliance with the requirements of the State Fire Prevention Code
and Chapter 65 of NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code.
C. A permit issued by the City Fire Marshal for the sale of GBSD shall be
valid for a period not to exceed 60 days from the date of issuance.
D. A nonrefundable permit fee in the amount of $250 payable to the City of
Hagerstown shall be remitted to the City Fire Marshal prior to the
scheduling of any site inspections or the issuance of the permit.
E. The permit to sell GBSD may be denied or revoked by the City Fire
Marshal at any time, for failure to comply with any part of COMAR
29.06.07 or Chapter 65 of NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code.
F. Failure to obtain the required permit to sell GBSD shall be punishable
as a municipal infraction and subject to the fines noted in Article V,
§ 98-10, Municipal infractions.
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance renumbered §§ 98-8 and 98-9 as §§ 98-9 and 98-10,
respectively.
§ 98-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-8
1:363
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess fireworks which are listed
as illegal under the Public Safety Article, Title 10, Annotated Code of
Maryland, unless a permit has been obtained from the Maryland State
Fire Marshal's Office.
H. Any person found to be in possession of illegal fireworks as referenced
in this article shall be subject to a municipal infraction citation and fines
as listed in Article V, § 98-10, Municipal infractions.
I. The Fire Marshal shall be authorized to seize, remove, and destroy all
fireworks possessed or sold in violation of this article.
§ 98-8 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 98-8
1:364
ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)
§ 98-9. (Reserved)
§ 98-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-9
1:365

ARTICLE V
Municipal Infractions
[Amended 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-21; amended 10-23-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-2237]
§ 98-10. Municipal infraction fines.
Any person, firm, corporation, individual, company, partnership or legal
entity of whatsoever nature or kind who or which shall violate the following
sections of the State Fire Prevention Code and/or the Fire Prevention Code
of the City of Hagerstown shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and
subject to the following fines for a first offense. All maximum fines shall
double for a second or subsequent offense.
NFPA 101, Life Safety Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
4.5.2 Safeguards $250
7.10.9.1 Inspection Requirements-Exit Signs $250
7.10.9.2 Testing of Exit Signs $250
9.6.1.6 Notifications-Fire Alarm System Out of
Service
$500
9.7.5 Testing & Maintenance-Sprinkler and
Standpipe Systems
$500
9.7.6.1 Notifications-Sprinkler System Out of
Service
$500
9.7.7 On-site Documentation-Fire Protection
Systems
$250
9.7.8 Test & Maintenance Records Required-
Water Based Systems
$250
NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
1.14.1 Requirement to Submit Plans $250
1.14.5 Requirements for Revised Plans $250
4.5.8 Maintenance & Testing-Fire Protection
Equipment (Sections 4.5.8.1 through
4.5.8.4)
$500
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance renumbered former Arts. IV and V (§§ 98-9 and 98-10) as
Arts. V and VI (§§ 98-10 and 98-11), respectively; and added Art. IV (§ 98-9) as reserved.
§ 98-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-10
1:367
NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
10.1.4 Causing Fire Through Negligence $250
10.2.4 On-site Records-Fire Protection
Equipment
$250
10.3.1 Occupancy of Non-approved Structures $500
10.3.3 Occupancy During Construction/
Renovation
$500
10.4 Maintenance & Testing of Fire
Protection Systems (Sections 10.4.1
through 10.4.5)
$500
10.5 Building Evacuation (Sections 10.5.1
and 10.5.2)
$250
10.7.1.1 Notification of Fire Department $250
10.7.1.3 Owner Responsibility-Notification of
Fire Department
$250
10.7.1.4 Posting of Orders Delaying Fire
Department Notification
$500
10.8.1 Tampering/Rendering Inoperative Fire
Protection Equipment
$500
10.8.2 Shutdown of Fire System During Fire
Emergency
$500
10.8.3 Tampering With Locks, Signs, Tags, Etc. $250
10.11.3 Cooking Fire — Constant Attendance
Required
$250
10.11.7 Use of Grills On Apartment Balconies $250
10.12.1.1 Requirement to Post Address $250
10.13.1 Fire Protection of Vacant Structures $250
10.13.2 Maintenance of Fire Systems-Vacant
Structures
$500
10.14.4 Obstruction of Exits With Vegetation $250
10.14.10.1 Removal of Exterior Vegetation $250
10.16 Exterior Combustible Storage
Limitations (Sections 10.16.1 through
10.16.5)
$250
10.19.1 Storage of Combustible Materials $250
10.19.3.1 Ceiling Clearance-Storage — Non-
Sprinklered
$250
§ 98-10 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 98-10
1:368
NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
10.19.3.2 Ceiling Clearance-Storage —
Sprinklered
$250
10.19.3.2.1 Ceiling Clearance-Storage — Special
Hazard
$250
10.19.4 Combustible Storage-Exits — Prohibited $250
10.19.5.1 Combustible Storage — Equipment
Rooms
$250
10.19.7 Fueled Equipment — Storage Prohibited $250
11.1.4 Abandoned Electrical Wiring
Requirements
$250
11.1.5 Extension Cords Utilized as Permanent
Wiring
$250
11.1.5.3.5 Extension Cords Use $250
11.7.4 Maintenance & Testing-Stationary
Generators (Sections 11.7.4.1 through
11.7.4.3)
$500
11.8 Maintenance & Testing-Smoke Control
Systems (Sections 11.8.1 through
11.8.5)
$500
12.3.2.1 Maintenance of Fire-Resistive
Construction
$500
12.4.1 Maintenance of Fire Doors & Window
Assemblies
$500
13.1.3 Obstructions to Hydrants, Connections.
Valves, Etc.
$250
13.1.4 Minimum Clear Space to Fire Protection
Equipment
$250
13.1.5 Documentation-Testing & Maintenance-
Fire Systems
$250
13.1.7 Maintenance of Fire Protections
Systems
$500
13.1.8 Notification When Fire System Out Of
Service
$500
13.1.9 Evacuation or Fire Watch Requirements $250
13.2.3.1 Maintenance of Standpipe Systems $500
13.3.3.1 Maintenance of Sprinkler Systems $500
§ 98-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-10
1:369
NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
13.3.3.3 Maintenance of Ceiling Tiles and Ceiling
Assemblies
$250
13.3.3.4.1 Owner/Occupant to Provide Access to
Fire Systems
$250
13.3.3.4.2.2 Inspection/Maintenance Program to be
Implemented
$250
13.3.3.4.2.3 Inspection Tasks Shall be by Competent
Personnel
$250
13.3.3.4.3 Notifications Prior To Testing $250
13.3.3.4.3.2 Notifications When System Returned To
Normal
$250
13.3.3.4.3.3 Occupant, Managing Firm/Individual-
Testing
$250
13.3.3.4.4 Prompt Correction of Violations
Required
$250
13.3.3.4.4.1 Corrections by Qualified Person $250
13.3.3.4.5 Changes In Occupancy Use In
Structures
$250
13.3.3.4.6 Owner/Occupant Responsibilities-
Change In Use
$250
13.3.3.5.1 Testing & Maintenance Records to AHJ $250
13.3.3.6 Inspection of Wet-Pipe Sprinkler
Systems
$500
13.3.3.7.1 Spare Sprinkler Heads Required $250
13.3.3.9 Alteration of Sprinkler Heads Not
Permitted
$500
13.3.3.11 Dry-Pipe Sprinkler Systems Shall Be
Kept Dry
$500
13.3.3.11.3 Maintenance-Dry-Pipe Sprinkler
Compressors
$500
13.4.8 Testing & Maintenance of Fire Pumps $500
13.5.4 Inspection, Testing & Maintenance-
Private Fire Mains (Sections 13.5.4.1
and 13.5.4.2)
$500
13.6.6.8.3.1 Fire Extinguisher Maintenance Annually $250
13.6.6.8.3.3 Fire Extinguisher Maintenance Tag
Required
$250
§ 98-10 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 98-10
1:370
NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
13.6.6.8.5.7 Fire Extinguisher Hydrostatic Test
Requirements
$250
13.7.1.4.6 Non-Required Detection Systems $250
13.7.1.4.7.6 Manual Fire Alarm Box Accessibility $250
13.7.3.2.1.1 Installation/Alteration to Fire Alarm
Systems
$500
13.7.3.2.6.1 Records Retention-Fire Alarm System
Tests
$250
13.7.3.3.3 Manual Fire Alarm Box Installation $250
13.7.3.3.5 Manual Fire Alarm Box Location &
Accessibility
$250
13.7.3.3.9 Manual Fire Alarm Box — Signage
Required
$250
13.7.4.4.1 Fire Alarm System Maintenance &
Testing
$500
13.8 Other Fire Protection Systems-
Maintenance & Testing
$500
14.4.1 Means of Egress Reliability $250
14.4.2.1 Furnishings & Decorations in Means of
Egress
$250
14.4.3 Impediments to Egress $250
14.5.2.2 Locking Devices on Exit Doors $250
14.5.2.11 Devices on Panic-Hardware Equipped
Doors
$250
14.5.3.3.4 Devices Prohibited on Fire Exit
Hardware
$250
14.5.4.1 Fire Doors to be Self-Closing/
Interference With
$250
14.6.3 Enclosed Usable Space in Exits
Prohibited
$250
14.6.3.1 Unauthorized Use of Exits $250
14.10.1.1 Accessibility of Exits $250
14.10.2.2.1 Visibility of Exits $250
14.12.1.2 Illumination of Means of Egress $250
14.13.2.1 Testing of Emergency Lighting Systems $250
§ 98-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-10
1:371
NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
14.14.5 Illumination of Exit Signs (Sections
14.14.5.1 and 14.14.5.2.1)
$250
16.1.4 Fire Department Access Roads at
Construction Sites
$250
16.2.2.1 Waste Disposal at Construction Sites $250
16.2.3.1.2 Storage Quantities $250
16.2.3.1.3 Construction Storage Site Safety $250
16.2.3.1.4 No Smoking-Construction Site
Flammable Liquid Storage
$250
16.2.3.1.5 Requirements for "No Smoking" signs-
Construction Sites
$250
16.2.3.3.2 No Smoking-Construction Site
Flammable Gas Storage
$250
16.3.2.4.6 Temporary Protective Covering-Fire
Systems
$250
16.4.3.1.1 Water Supply at Construction Sites $500
16.4.3.2.3 Automatic Sprinklers In Service Prior to
Occupancy
$500
16.4.3.2.5 Sprinklers to Remain In Service $500
16.4.4.4 Fire Department Notification When
System Shut Down
$250
16.4.4.5 Exit Maintenance During Construction/
Renovation
$250
16.7.1.5 Tar Kettle Supervision (Sections
16.7.1.5.1 and 16.7.1.5.2)
$250
16.7.1.6 Fire Extinguishers Required-Tar Kettle
(Sections 16.7.1.6.1 through 16.7.1.6.3)
$250
18.2.3.5.1 Marking-Fire Apparatus Access Roads $250
18.2.4 Obstruction & Control of Fire
Department Access Roads (Sections
18.2.4.1.1 through 18.2.4.1.4)
$250
18.2.4.2.5 Tampering With Locks. Signs. Tags. etc. $250
18.3.4 Fire Department Access to Hydrants &
Connections
$250
18.3.5 Maintenance — Private Water Supply
Systems
$250
§ 98-10 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 98-10
1:372
NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
18.3.6 Protection — Private Fire Hydrants $250
19.1.2 Combustible Waste & Refuse
Management
$250
19.2.1.4 Location of Dumpsters (1.5 yd3 or more)
to Structures
$250
20.1.4.5 Special Provisions — Exposition
Facilities (Sections 20.1.4.5.2 through
20.1.4.5.4.13.2)
$250
20.1.4.6 Assembly Occupancies-Crowd Managers
(Sections 20.1.4.6.1 and 20.1.4.6.2)
$250
20.1.4.8 Assembly Occupancies-Employee
Training Requirements (Sections
20.1.4.8.1 thru 20.1.4.8.3)
$250
20.1.4.9.2 Assembly Occupancies-No Smoking
Signs
$250
20.8.2.1 Hotel Emergency Organization-
Training/Drills (Sections 20.8.2.1.1 and
20.8.2.1.2)
$250
20.8.2.3 Drills in Dormitories-Requirements $250
20.8.2.4 Emergency Instructions-Residents &
Guests (Sections 20.8.2.4.1 and
20.8.2.4.2)
$250
20.9.2.1 Emergency Instructions-Apartment
Building Residents
$250
20.9.2.2 Apartments — Prohibited Unvented
Fuel-fired Heaters
$250
20.10.2 Lodging & Rooming Houses —
Prohibited Heaters
$250
20.12.2 Operating Features-Class A or B
Mercantile Occupancies (Sections
20.12.2.1 and 20.12.2.2)
$250
20.13.2 Operating Features-Business
Occupancies (Sections 20.13.2.1 and
20.13.2.2)
$250
25.1.5 Fire Hazards-Grandstands, Bleachers,
Tents. Etc. (Sections 25.1.5.1 through
25.1.5.5)
$250
§ 98-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-10
1:373
NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
25.1.6.3 Fire Extinguishers Required-Tents &
Membrane Structures
$250
25.1.10.1.4 LPG Storage-Tents & Membrane
Structures
$250
25.1.10.1.5 LPG Tank Protection-Tents & Membrane
Structures
$250
25.1.12.1 Generator Location-Tents & Membrane
Structures
$250
25.1.12.3 Generator Fire Extinguisher
Requirement-Tents
$250
25.3.4 Protection-Spaces Under Grandstands $250
63.4.13.7 Cyrogenic Fluids-Physical Protection &
Support (Sections 63.4.13.7.1 and
63.4.13.7.2)
$250
63.4.13.8 Cyrogenic Fluids-Corrosion Protection $250
69.3.6.1.2 LP Gas Containers-Protection Required $250
NFPA 495, Explosive Materials Code
Schedule of Fines
Section Title
Fine-Initial
Offense
10.1.1 Transporting, Storing, Using Explosives $500
10.1.2 Abandoning Explosives $500
11.1.1 Ground Vibration — Exceeding
Permissible Limits
$500
11.3.1 Fly Rock From Blasting $500
Hagerstown City Fire Prevention Code
Schedule of Fines
Article Section Title
Fine: Initial
Offense
II § 98-4,
Subsections A
through D
Open burning $250
III § 98-5 Blasting filing and permit
requirements
$250
§ 98-10 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 98-10
1:374
Hagerstown City Fire Prevention Code
Schedule of Fines
Article Section Title
Fine: Initial
Offense
III § 98-6F Posting capacity and
assembly permit
$250
III § 98-6G Overcrowding of assembly
occupancies
$250
III § 98-8 Fireworks (permit to sell
GBSD)
$500
III § 98-8G Illegal possession of
fireworks
$250
§ 98-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-10
1:375

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Amended 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-21]
§ 98-11. Construal of provisions; repealer; when effective.
A. This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the
City of Hagerstown, Maryland, for the preservation and protection of
the public health, peace, safety and welfare, and all the provisions of
the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, shall be
liberally construed for that purpose.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall take precedence over any
ordinances, codes, regulations or parts thereof conflicting or
inconsistent herewith.
§ 98-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-11
1:377
Chapter 104
(RESERVED)
Chapter 110
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Recycling and refuse collection — Ch. 117.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Sanitation — See Ch. 200.
§ 110-1. General building regulations.
Every building, room, basement, enclosure or premises used or maintained
as a bakery, confectionery, cannery, packinghouse, slaughterhouse,
creamery, cheese factory, shop or warehouse or any public place or
manufacturing establishment used for the preparation, manufacture,
packing, storage, sale or distribution of any food or beverage, as defined by
statute, which is intended for sale and located within the City limits shall be
properly and adequately lighted, drained, plumbed and ventilated and shall
be conducted with strict regard to the influence of such conditions upon
the health of the operatives, employees, clerks or other persons therein
employed and the purity and wholesomeness of the food therein produced,
prepared, manufactured, packed, stored, sold or distributed.
§ 110-2. Sanitary condition of rooms, furniture and vehicles.
The floors, side walls, ceilings, furniture, receptacles, implements and
machinery in every establishment described in § 110-1 of this chapter or
place where food intended for sale is produced, prepared, manufactured,
packed, stored, sold or distributed and all cars, trucks and vehicles used
in the transportation of such food products shall at no time be kept or
permitted to remain in an unclean, unhealthy or unsanitary condition.
§ 110-3. Unsanitary conditions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unclean, unhealthful and unsanitary
conditions shall be deemed to exist when:
A. Food in the process of production, preparation, manufacture, packing,
storing, sale, distribution or transportation is not securely protected
from flies, vermin and other insects, dust, dirt and, as far as may be
necessary, by all reasonable means, from all other foreign or injurious
contaminations.
§ 98-11 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 110-3
1:378
§ 110-4. Sterilization of dishes and implements.
All dishes, glassware, implements and cutlery must be sterilized between
each use, either by the use of heat or a bactericidal solution approved by
the health officer.
§ 110-5. Interior construction.
The sidewalls and ceilings of every bakery, confectionery, creamery, cheese
factory and hotel or restaurant kitchen shall be so constructed that they
can easily be kept clean, and every building, room, basement or enclosure
occupied or used for the preparation, manufacture, packing, storage, sale
or distribution of food shall have an impermeable floor made of cement or
of tile laid in cement, brick, wood or other suitable material, which can be
flushed or washed clean with water.
§ 110-6. Doors and screens.
All factories, buildings and other places containing food shall be provided
with proper doors and screens adequate to prevent contamination of the
products from flies and other insects and vermin.
§ 110-7. Lavatories.
Every building, room, basement, enclosure or premises occupied, used or
maintained for the production, preparation, manufacture, canning, packing,
storage, sale or distribution of food shall have adequate and convenient
toilet rooms or lavatories. The toilet room shall be separate and apart from
the room where the processes of production, preparation, manufacture,
packing, storing, canning, selling and distribution are conducted. The floors
of such toilet rooms shall be of cement, tile, wood, brick or other
nonabsorbent material and shall be washed and scoured at frequent
intervals and maintained in a sanitary condition. Such toilets shall be
furnished with separate ventilating flues and pipes discharging into soil
pipes. Lavatories and washrooms shall be adjacent to toilet rooms and shall
be supplied with soap, running water and towels and shall be maintained in
a sanitary condition.
B. The refuse, dirt or waste products subject to decomposition and
fermentation incident to the manufacture, preparation, packing,
storing, selling, distribution or transportation of such foods are not
removed daily.
C. All trucks, trays, boxes, baskets or other receptacles or the chutes,
platforms, racks, tables, shelves, knives, saws, cleavers or other
utensils or the machinery used in moving, handling, cutting, chopping,
mixing, canning or other processes are not thoroughly cleaned daily.
D. The clothing of operatives, employees, clerks or other persons therein
employed is unclean.
§ 110-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-8
1:379
§ 110-8. Expectorating.
No operative, employee or other person shall expectorate on the food, on
the utensils or on the floors or sidewalls of any building, room, basement or
cellar where the production, preparation, manufacture, packing, storing or
sale of any such food is conducted.
§ 110-9. Personal hygiene.
Operatives, employees, clerks and all other persons who handle the
materials from which food is prepared or the finished product, before
beginning work or after visiting the toilet shall wash their hands thoroughly
with soap and clean water.
§ 110-10. Sleeping areas restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep or to allow or permit any
person to sleep in any workroom of a bakeshop, kitchen, dining room,
confectionery, creamery, cheese factory or any place where food is prepared
for sale, served or sold, unless all foods therein handled are at all times in
hermetically sealed packages.
§ 110-11. Workers with contagious or venereal disease.
It shall be unlawful for any employer to require, suffer or permit any person
who is affected with any contagious or venereal disease to work or for
any person so affected to work in a building, room, basement, enclosure,
premises or vehicle occupied or used for the production, preparation,
manufacture, packing, storage, sale, distribution or transportation of food.
§ 110-12. Foodstuffs sold or displayed for sale outdoors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use more than 2 1/2 feet of the
pavement next to the building line for the purpose of selling, offering,
exposing or displaying for sale foodstuffs of any nature whatsoever. All
foodstuffs of any nature so displayed shall be kept not less than two feet
elevated above the ground or pavement.
§ 110-13. Protection of food products from dust and insects.
A. It shall be unlawful to keep, offer or expose for sale any meat, fish or
dressed fowl unless the same shall be fully protected from flies, insects
or animals coming in contact therewith. All foodstuffs, including fruits
and vegetables kept or offered for sale in any storeroom in the City,
shall be fully and completely protected by screens, netting or otherwise
so that the same shall not come in contact with flies, insects or animals,
excepting such foodstuffs as are kept in flytight containers.
B. All meat, bread or other food products in transportation from place to
place in, through or about the City shall be protected in such manner,
while in transit, as to exclude dust, flies or other insects.
§ 110-8 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 110-14
1:380
§ 110-14. Sale of bass.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, expose for sale or purchase for
sale any freshwater bass, commonly known as "largemouth black bass,"
"smallmouth black bass" or "calico bass," and sometimes called "willow
bass," within the City limits.
§ 110-15. Cleaning and refuse removal.
Every owner, lessee or occupant of any room, building or place of business
used as a market, fruit stand, green grocery or for an occupation which
involves the sale or handling of perishable fruit shall cause such room,
building or place to be thoroughly cleansed and purified, and all offal,
garbage and refuse shall be removed every 24 hours.
§ 110-16. Sale of decayed food.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell within the corporate
or sanitary limits of the City any fish, fruits or vegetables, or anything
intended to be used for human food, in a state of decay or corruption.
§ 110-17. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 113
(RESERVED)
Chapter 117
RECYCLING AND REFUSE COLLECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitation — See Ch. 200. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
§ 117-1. Statement of City intent.
A. Any violation of §§ 110-1 to 110-7 of this chapter shall be a nuisance.
Any person who maintains, allows or permits to exist a nuisance, as
defined in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Any violation of any section of this chapter not enumerated in
Subsection A above shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties. [Added
7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-39]
A. It is the intent of the City to require all residents within the
incorporated areas of the City to have refuse collected and disposed of
in a proper, sanitary and efficient manner; to provide all residents with
§ 110-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-1
1:381
§ 117-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in this section
shall apply unless otherwise specifically stated. The words "shall" or "will"
are mandatory and not discretionary. For the purpose of these
specifications, the following definitions shall apply:
BULK TRASH — Is not collected as "residential refuse" and means any
solid waste that requires additional management due to bulk or weighs
greater than 50 pounds. Such waste shall be collected by a special program
administered by the Department of Public Works (DPW) and shall not
be collected under the City's Residential Refuse and Recycling Collection
Program.
CITY ENGINEER — Refers to the duly appointed City Engineer of the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland, or his authorized representative, acting within the
scope of the particular duties entrusted to them.
COMMINGLED — Refers to the mixing of materials designated for
recycling. The recyclable materials buyer shall sort the recyclables into
homogenous types of recyclable materials for reuse as new products.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Is not eligible for the City recycling and
refuse collection service and means property including, but not limited to,
all hotels, motels, commercial businesses (wholesale/retail), manufacturing,
industrial and institutional enterprises of all types. Commercial properties
shall be all properties other than those listed as residential in this chapter
and the policies of the City of Hagerstown. Commercial property owners
shall contract privately for solid waste collection services.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Waste materials generally
considered to be non-water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including
a sanitary and efficient means of having their refuse collected and
disposed of; to provide means for all residents to recycle reusable
items; to eliminate illegal dumping; to provide effective and efficient
methods of collecting funds for the costs of the recycling and refuse
collection program; and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City.
B. It is hereby declared, found and determined by the City, that the refuse
collection, recycling and yard waste collection services provided by the
City pursuant to this chapter and corresponding collection contracts
including, but not limited to, the accomplishment of the intents stated
herein, shall and do constitute a special benefit to residential properties
within the City which is equal to, or in excess of, the actual costs of
providing such recycling and refuse collection and disposal service and
which such facilities and services specially benefit residential
properties.
C. It is the intent of the City that the collection and hauling of recyclables
and refuse shall be conducted only by those businesses authorized to do
so by the City.
§ 117-1 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 117-2
1:382
but not limited to: steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt materials, pipe,
gypsum wallboard, and lumber, resulting from the construction or
demolition of a structure or from the actual construction of a structure.
CONTRACTOR — Those firms specially authorized by contract by the City
of Hagerstown to provide recycling and refuse collection services within the
City limits.
CUSTOMER — All natural or lawful persons, corporations, partnerships, or
any other legal entity owning residential property within the City, and all
other persons subscribing to residential recycling and refuse program as
provided by the contractor and the terms of this chapter.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Hagerstown Department of Engineering and
Code Administration.
DOWNTOWN DISTRICT — For the purposes of this chapter, those
properties located within Zone F of the City's Trash Collection
Program.[Added 3-22-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-09]
DUMPSTER — A large waste receptacle designed to hold recyclables or
refuse and which is typically emptied by a front-loading garbage collection
truck. Sizes can vary from 1.5 cubic yards' capacity or more. "Dumpster"
shall also include any roll-off trash container or other large container used
for the temporary storage of rubbish, debris or garbage.[Amended
6-18-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-11]
ENCLOSURE — Any structure used to house refuse or recycling
containers.[Added 3-22-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-09]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Wastes that are inherently dangerous to handle or
dispose and not accepted at landfills receiving City residential refuse. These
wastes include toxic chemicals, biohazards, corrosive materials, reactive
chemicals, flammable wastes, explosives, and certain items found in the
home including, but not be limited to: pool chlorine, paint thinner and
pesticides.
HOLIDAYS — Refers to days when no recycling or refuse collection will be
performed including New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. In the event a holiday coincides
with a landfill Sunday closing, there will be a substitute holiday unless
otherwise directed by the City Engineer.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any accumulation of refuse, trash, rubbish, garbage,
abandoned or lost property or hazardous materials placed not in compliance
with the regulations of this chapter.
PUBLIC STREET OR ALLEY — As used herein includes any street, alley or
right-of-way dedicated to public use. The contractor will travel such public
streets or alleys to make collections at all dwelling units placing trash
and/or recyclables at the curbside for collection. This shall include deadend
streets and alleys. The contractor is not expected to enter any private
streets, alleys, or other rights-of-way in carrying out the responsibilities
of the collection contract. Determination of eligibility to receive municipal
trash collection service for residents who live on private streets or courts
§ 117-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-2
1:383
shall be in accordance with City policy. The City has entered into
agreements with certain developments to collect on private streets or
courts.
RECEPTACLE or COLLECTION CONTAINER — Any steel, plastic,
aluminum, or galvanized receptacle or bin manufactured for the purpose of
storing residential recycling or refuse that allows for easy lifting with two
handles and capacity of not more than 35 gallons or weighing more than 50
pounds when filled with refuse or recycling. City-issued bins or totes shall
be used when applicable, and totes are exempt from the maximum capacity
restriction of 35 gallons. All receptacles or containers shall have lids that
tightly fit as designed by the manufacturer.[Amended 3-22-2016 by Ord.
No. O-16-09]
RECYCLING MATERIALS or RECYCLABLES — Any materials collected by
the contractor for the purpose of materials recycling and reuse. Recycling
materials shall include, but not be limited to: newspapers, clear, green and
brown glass containers, aluminum cans and foil, steel cans, No. 1 and No. 2
plastic bottles, cardboard, magazines, phone books and yard waste (defined
below).
REFUSE BAGS — Secured, leakproof plastic bags, manufactured for the
purpose of securing household refuse, of sufficient strength to hold its
contents without tearing or allowing the contents to spill, leak or otherwise
escape from the bag.[Added 3-22-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-09]
REFUSE, SOLID WASTE, GARBAGE, TRASH, HOUSEHOLD REFUSE OR
RUBBISH — May be used interchangeably and refer to residential items
that cannot be recycled. This includes animal, fruit and vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, storage, preparation, cooking and consumption
of food; rags; cartons; rubber; leather; diapers; small appliances (less than
50 pounds in weight); and waste generated from normal residential
household activities.
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING AND REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE —
Service to residential dwelling units consistent with the policies of the City
of Hagerstown.
RESIDENTIAL UNITS OR PROPERTY — A single unit providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent
provision for living, sleeping, eating, cooking or sanitation.
SORT — Refers to the separation of the recyclables into segregated bins
or storage areas, thus separating the recyclables into homogenous types of
recyclable materials.
STORAGE AREA — A confined space or area reserved for storing refuse
and/or recycling receptacles or containers on a property.[Added
3-22-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-09]
TOTES — Refers to thirty-five-, sixty-five- or ninety-five-gallon plastic rollout
carts specifically manufactured as a container for recyclables or refuse.
Totes include connected lid, wheels, and one-piece handle.
§ 117-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 117-2
1:384
YARD WASTE — Solid waste that is an accumulation of lawn grass,
shrubbery cuttings, clippings, leaf rakings, tree branches, bushes or shrubs,
green leaf cuttings, fruits or other vegetative matter generally created as
refuse in the care of lawns and yards that does not exceed three feet in
length and three inches in diameter and 50 pounds in weight. Bundled limbs
and tree trunks from tree trimmings not exceeding three feet in length
and three inches in diameter may be placed at the curbside for residential
pickup.
§ 117-3. Residential Recycling and Refuse Collection Program.
A. The purpose of the Residential Recycling and Refuse Collection
Program is to promote the common interests of the citizens of the City
and to provide for the collection and disposal of recycling and refuse
through the levy of a recycling and refuse service fee as further
provided for herein, and to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens and residents of the City.
B. The Mayor and Council has the authority necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter. The City Council is authorized to the following:
(1) Enter into contracts with any qualified person, firm, or corporation
for the furnishing recycling and refuse collection services within
the boundaries of the City.
(2) Levy and collect, without referendum, recycling and refuse service
fee as required for the collection and disposal of recyclables and
refuse within the City.
(3) Authorize the City Engineer to develop standards and procedures
wherein residential collection is administered, and to develop and
administer contracts with qualified collection contractors.
(4) Establish a recycling and refuse service fee for the collection and
disposal of recyclables and refuse as defined in this chapter. The
recycling and refuse service fee shall cover the costs of refuse
collection and disposal, mixed paper and commingled plastic/
aluminum/glass collection and disposal, yard waste collection and
disposal, dumpster programs, and other related miscellaneous
services and administrative costs. The recycling and refuse service
fee shall be amended by administrative action through adoption of
the annual City budget or by Mayor and Council resolution.
(5) The Mayor and Council shall enter into a contract with any
contractor, provided that such contractor is, in the judgment of the
Mayor and Council, reliable and sufficiently qualified to undertake
and carry out the terms of the contract and to collect, remove and
dispose of all accumulations of recyclables and refuse within the
corporate limits of the City. Such contract shall contain such terms
and conditions as will require the contractor to collect, remove and
dispose of recyclables and refuse at regular stated intervals and in
§ 117-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-3
1:385
§ 117-4. Description of services.
§ 117-5. Service fee payment; property owner responsibility.
[Amended 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-09; 3-22-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-09]
such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or interfere in any
way with the rights or privileges of any person.
A. Residential property within the corporate limits of the City shall be
provided refuse collection services as provided for by this chapter, and
in accordance with the policies of the City. Participation in the recycling
program is voluntary. The City shall provide either directly, or indirectly
through agreements with contractors, the following services:
(1) Refuse collection.
(2) Yard waste recycling collection.
(3) Mixed paper recycling collection.
(4) Commingled glass/plastic/aluminum recycling collection.
(5) Bulk trash collection (DPW program).
(6) Annual dumpster program (DPW program).
B. The City's residential recycling and refuse collection program will not
collect any items specifically restricted or prohibited by the receiving
landfill. Items not collected include, but are not limited to the following:
(1) Hazardous materials, biohazard materials, or items containing
refrigerant.
(2) Items collected under the bulk trash program including but not
limited to: appliances and furniture over 50 pounds, tires,
computer equipment and electronics, mattresses, building or
demolition waste, etc.
(3) Recycling or refuse from nonresidential or out-of-City property.
(4) Containers or items weighing over 50 pounds.
(5) Recycling or refuse from private streets or alleys unless expressly
agreed to by the City.
A. Recycling and refuse service fee. Consistent with City policy, all
property owners of improved residential property within the City shall
subscribe to recycling and refuse collection and disposal service and
shall be subject to the levy of a recycling and refuse service fee as
further set out pursuant to this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of
the property owner of a residential dwelling unit to pay or cause to be
paid to the City the recycling and refuse service fee incurred by each
separate residential unit(s) for the benefits offered or received by such
§ 117-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 117-5
1:386
dwelling unit for refuse collection and recycling collection. Failure to
pay the recycling and refuse service fee shall be considered a violation
of this chapter and may be collected as provided for further herein, or
as otherwise provided for by the laws of the State of Maryland.
B. Receptacles, containers, and bags.
(1) The City of Hagerstown will provide residential properties
throughout the City with recycling containers.
(2) It shall be the duty of the residential property owner(s) and
tenant(s) to provide approved receptacles or containers (as defined
herein) to contain all refuse generated from residences in
accordance with the provisions herein.
(3) All refuse bags shall be stored indoors or in receptacles or
containers.
C. Refuse and recycling storage. It shall further be the duty of the
residential property owner(s) and their tenant(s) to ensure that
receptacles for recycling and refuse are stored in accordance with this
chapter (until the appropriate set out time for collection) and consistent
with the following conditions:
(1) Refuse and recycling stored on the exterior of the property shall be
in an approved receptacle or container.
(2) Owners or residents of properties located in the South Prospect
Street Historic District shall store containers out of public view or
shielded from public view of South Prospect Street, unless an
exception is approved per Mayor and City Council policy on special
circumstances for storage of refuse and recycling containers. When
requested by property owners and residents, the Mayor and City
Council may approve other neighborhoods for similar public view
restrictions on storage of containers and receptacles between
collection dates.
(3) Every occupant of a structure shall not store receptacles or
containers on front yards as defined in Chapter 140, front porches,
or public ways. Exceptions:
(a) In zero setback areas, properties with no side yard;
(b) Receptacles or containers in an approved enclosure;
(c) Mayor and City Council policy on special circumstances for
storage of refuse and recycling containers.
(4) Properties with four or more residential units shall have one
designated storage area for refuse and recycling containers
between collection days in accordance with this chapter.
D. Set-out time; placement of materials for collection; abatement fees.
§ 117-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-5
1:387
§ 117-6. Collection of recycling and refuse service fee.
(1) Set-out time and placement of materials for collection.
(a) No earlier than 4:00 p.m. on the eve of the day on which the
contractor shall collect recycling or refuse on their street in
the City, it shall be the duty of the residential property owners
and their tenants to place their recycling or refuse in the public
way in front of their premises as close as possible to the curb,
or collection point designated by the City Engineer, so as to be
of easy access to the contractor.
(b) In the Downtown District, refuse and recycling must be set out
for collection in receptacles or containers. In all other areas,
refuse bags may be set out for collection consistent with the
provisions of this section.
(c) Placement of these materials shall not block the free passage
(minimum width of 36 inches) of pedestrians on the public
sidewalk.
(d) All such receptacles or containers shall be removed as soon as
possible after the collection and, in no instance, shall they be
permitted to remain curbside after 7:00 p.m. on the day of
collection.
(e) Any persons placing garbage and/or household refuse
containers out for collection prior to 4:00 p.m. on the eve of the
collection, or at any time not consistent with the scheduled
collection date, or the owner of any property upon which such
a violation exists shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and
subject to a fine of $200.
(2) Abatement fee. In addition to the penalty hereinabove enumerated,
the City may abate a condition where garbage and/or household
refuse bags, containers, or receptacles have been placed out for
collection prior to 4:00 p.m. on the eve of, or at any time not
consistent with the scheduled collection date, and may charge a
reasonable abatement fee as from time to time established by the
Council for the removal and disposal thereof. Said abatement fee
shall be billed to the property owner as a separate and distinct
charge from the service fee and, if unpaid for 30 days, shall
constitute a lien against the property.
A. The recycling and refuse service fee shall be imposed against the
owners of all residential units receiving recycling and refuse collection
in the corporate limits of the City that have a certificate of occupancy
approval or an active public water service account established with the
City of Hagerstown unless specifically excluded by written City policy.
B. The City Treasurer shall administer the billing and collection of the
recycling and refuse service fee for residential units. All delinquent bills
§ 117-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 117-6
1:388
§ 117-7. Depositing refuse on public ways or land prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit any trash, junk
or other refuse upon any public street, public right-of-way, or public alley
within the City or upon any land owned by the City.
§ 117-8. Service eligible to City residents only.
The recycling and refuse collection program is available to residential
properties within the corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown. It shall be
unlawful for any person to transport refuse or recycling from a residence
or commercial establishment outside the City into the City for collection by
the City's residential recycling and refuse collection program, bulk trash
program, or dumpster program. It shall be unlawful for any person to set
out commercial refuse or recycling (regardless of the location of origin) for
collection by the City's residential recycling and refuse collection program.
§ 117-9. Dumpster enclosures required.
For all dumpsters in the C-3 Commercial Central Zoning District of the
downtown and all new dumpster or central trash dropoff areas established
in the City, an enclosure is required. The intent of the enclosure is to block
the dumpster from being visible from the public right-of-way or street.
Enclosure shall be installed per the standard provided in the Department's
Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines Manual
for all new installations. Enclosures around existing dumpsters in the C-3
Commercial Central Zone may be of modified design if the intent described
above is met and is approved by the City Engineer.
§ 117-9.1. Dumpsters prohibited. [Added 6-18-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-11]
Except as hereinafter provided, dumpsters are prohibited on residential
properties. This prohibition shall not apply to apartment complexes with
an approved site plan identifying a dumpster location. The aforegoing
notwithstanding, dumpsters shall be permitted on residential properties on
a limited, temporary basis not to exceed 14 days or during any period of
construction at the subject property for so long as a valid construction
permit is in effect. All temporary dumpsters shall comply with the provisions
of the City Fire Code as well as all other applicable codes and regulations
are chargeable against the owners of the residential units and shall
constitute and are hereby imposed as liens against all such residential
properties.
C. The property owner(s) of record where the solid waste and household
refuse is collected is/are responsible for the payment of said recycling
and refuse service fee. Unpaid recycling and refuse service fees shall
constitute a lien on the property and may be collected in the same
manner as municipal taxes.
§ 117-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-9.1
1:389
and shall not be maintained in the public right-of-way absent approval of the
City.
§ 117-10. Registering haulers.
When properties are specifically exempted herein from the City's
Residential Recycling and Refuse Collection Program, the property owners
shall contract privately for solid waste collection services. Those properties
and the private hauler shall be registered with the Department.
§ 117-11. Refusal of service.
Any customer, or any tenant of a customer, who regularly violates the terms
of this chapter, including but not limited to § 117-5B (set out time and
free passage), § 117-5C (receptacles and storage not visible), and § 117-7
(depositing refuse on public ways), may be refused recycling and refuse
service upon ninety-day advance notification by the City Engineer. The City
Engineer may adopt policies to refuse or terminate service to any customer
when the number of units at a particular location would place an undue
burden on the Recycling and Refuse Collection Program.
§ 117-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-18-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-11]
Unless specifically punishable as a misdemeanor, any violation of this
chapter shall be considered a municipal infraction and subject to the
regulations as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III,
Municipal Infractions, of the Code of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland. The
maximum fines in dollars imposed for the violation of the below-referenced
Code sections shall be as follows:
Municipal Infraction Fines:
Code Section Subject Fines
§ 117-4B Improper use of City service $200
§ 117-5B Set out time and placement for
collection
$200
§ 117-5C Receptacles for collection and refuse
storage
$200
§ 117-7 Depositing refuse on public ways/land $200
§ 117-8 Service to City residents only $200
§ 117-9 Dumpster enclosures $100
§ 117-9.1 Dumpsters prohibited $500
§ 117-10 Registering haulers $100
§ 117-9.1 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 117-12
1:390
Chapter 120
GAS INSTALLATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 98.
Gasoline pumps and service stations — See
Ch. 122.
Public utility licenses — See Ch. 189.
§ 120-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GAS FITTING — The erection or construction of a piping system through
which is conveyed gas for power, heating or illuminating purposes,
including the connection therewith of gas fixtures, ranges, stoves, water
heaters and gas engines, and all their attachments and appurtenances, and
the maintenance in a good and safe condition of the system and the making
of the necessary repairs and changes.
§ 120-2. Approval of Plumbing Inspector.
All gas fitting, piping, fixtures and appliances of all kinds shall be under the
direction of the Plumbing Inspector and subject to his approval.
§ 120-3. Permit required; permit application.
§ 120-4. Stopcocks.
There shall be a heavy main fullway cock on every service pipe close to
the inside of the foundation wall, and in case there are two or more meters
supplied from one service pipe, there shall be an additional straightway
cock at the inlet side of each meter.
A. No work or material embraced under gas fitting as provided in this
chapter shall be used or placed in any building without application
having first been made to and a permit obtained from the Plumbing
Inspector.
B. The application must be made by a registered licensed plumber or
registered licensed gas fitter upon blanks specially prepared for that
purpose and shall contain a full description of the work to be done.
C. If required, drawings or blueprints shall accompany the application,
showing the piping in its entirety as to the length of the run, size of the
same, etc.
§ 117-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5
1:391
§ 120-5. Independent gas service required; connections to be made
by gas company.
§ 120-6. Meter location.
Meters placed in cellars shall be set on the wall wherever practical, at
least four feet above the cellar floor. In no case shall the meter be set in
a vestibule or above the door of the same nor in any cellar, hallway or
room closer to any furnace, open grate or range than 10 feet nor within
10 feet of any electric switchboard or other electrical appliance measured
horizontally nor in any closed closet or under stairways nor in any similar
enclosure or coal or ash vault.
§ 120-7. Pipe material and standards.
All gas pipes shall be of the best quality wrought iron or steel and of the
kind classed as standard pipe and shall weigh according to the following
table:
Size of Pipe
(inches) Pounds per Linear Foot
1/4 0.42
3/8 .56
1/2 .85
3/4 1.12
1 1.67
1 1/4 2.24
1 1/2 2.68
2 3.61
2 1/2 5.74
3 7.54
3 1/2 9.00
4 10.66
§ 120-8. Fittings and joints.
All fittings, except stopcocks or valves, shall be of malleable iron. Joints
shall be made with white or red lead, preferably applied to male threads. No
gas fitters' cement shall be used except for fixture joints. All bends or angles
must be made with fittings. The bending of gas pipes will not be permitted.
A. Every building must have an independent gas service of the size
prescribed.
B. The service pipe shall be run and both connections with the meter made
by the gas company.
§ 120-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 120-9
1:392
§ 120-9. Laying of pipe.
§ 120-10. Size of pipe.
A. No pipe shall be laid so as to support any weight, except fixtures, or be
subject to any strain whatsoever. All pipe shall be properly laid and
fastened to prevent becoming trapped and shall be laid, when
practicable, above timbers or beams instead of beneath them. Where
running lines or branches cross beams, they must be laid within three
feet of the ends of the beams, and in no case shall the pipes be let into
the beams more than two inches in depth.
B. No drop or bracket shall be taken from an ell; it must be taken from a
tee fitting, and the pipes must be run not less than four inches longer, or
to a bearing, and be capped and securely fastened on both sides of the
tee so as to prevent movement when the fixture is attached.
C. All pipes must be properly graded and, if practicable, sloped toward the
risers and meter. A bracket outlet shall be run as a riser rather than as a
drop.
D. Any gas pipe laid in a damp or cold place shall be properly dripped or
graded and painted with two coats of red lead and boiled in oil or be
tarred. No gas pipe shall be laid in cement or concrete, unless the pipe
or channel in which it is placed is well-covered with tar.
A. The size of gas pipe shall not be less, nor the length greater, than for the
number of burners stated and enumerated in the following table, except
that if the number of burners is not more than half the maximum, the
length of run may be increased 1/2:
Size of Pipe
(inches)
Maximum Length of
Pipe
(feet)
Maximum Number of
Burners Allowed
3/8 20 2
1/2 30 4
3/4 50 9
1 70 18
1 1/4 100 32
1 1/2 150 50
2 200 103
2 1/2 300 180
3 450 580
B. An outlet for a gas range or small water heater shall be counted as
equivalent to five burners and a gas log or grate as equivalent to three
burners.
§ 120-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-11
1:393
§ 120-11. Location of burners and outlets.
§ 120-12. Tubing and fixture specifications.
All brass tubing shall be at least No. 18 standard gauge. All threads on brass
pipe shall screw in at least 5/16 of an inch. All cast fittings, such as cocks,
swing joints, double centers, nozzles, etc., shall be extra-heavy brass. The
plugs of all cocks must be ground to a true surface for their entire length,
be free from sandholes and have not less than 3/4 of an inch bearing, except
in cases of special design. All stop pins to keys or cocks shall be screwed
into place.
§ 120-13. Gas engines; exhaust pipes.
A. All outlets must be set plumb and securely fastened, each one having at
least one strap, and they shall be left capped until fixtures are
connected. They must not project more than two inches below a
plastered ceiling, centerpiece or wall. No gas outlet shall be placed
within 15 inches of any window or doorway trimming.
B. Outlets for gas stoves, heaters or gas logs must not be less than three
inches above the floor and two inches in the clear from the baseboard.
C. No bracket or burner shall be located under or near any tank containing
flammable oils, the back of any door or within 10 feet of any gas meter.
No swinging or folding gas bracket shall be placed against any stud
partition or woodwork, but a stiff bracket can be used if the length is
not less than six inches, measured from the burner to the plastered
surface or woodwork.
D. No gas hot-water heater, gas range, gas radiator, gas light or other gas
appliance shall be placed in any location where the location of meters is
prohibited, except near furnaces, nor in any garage or other place
where flammable oils are kept, stored or used. No gas log or open-flame
radiator shall be placed in any fireplace which is not provided with a
flue to the outer air and which is not thoroughly fireproofed.
E. Gas brackets placed near window curtains or similar combustible
material shall be protected by proper shields. All gas burners less than
two feet from a plastered ceiling or less than five feet from overhead
woodwork shall be protected by shields of approved material.
F. No independent connection for a hose outlet shall be placed above the
stiff joint of any chandelier or pendant, but such connection shall be
brought down to an accessible point; nor shall any independent hose
connection be placed within six inches of the key of a gas bracket.
A. Gas engines must be connected to separate service pipes from which no
gas for illuminating or heating purposes is used.
B. Exhaust pipes shall be run to the roof when possible and must not come
in contact with woodwork unless the same is properly protected.
§ 120-11 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 120-14
1:394
§ 120-14. Modification of provisions.
When, for any reason, in remodeling old buildings, it is impracticable to
comply strictly with the provisions of this chapter, the Plumbing Inspector
shall have power to modify its provisions so that the spirit and substance
thereof shall be complied with.
§ 120-15. Alterations and extensions.
§ 120-16. Venting.
All gas appliances, including gas ranges and all types of gas water heaters,
shall be connected with a vent to a chimney or flue. In cases where this is
impossible, the vent shall be run to the outside of the building and shall be
installed subject to the approval of the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 120-17. Air test.
Upon the completion of any system of gas piping in any building, premises
or establishment and before the piping is enclosed, covered or concealed,
it shall be promptly reported to the Plumbing Inspector for inspection. The
outlets shall be suitably capped and the system tested with air to a pressure
equal to a column of mercury six inches high in the length of time as will
satisfy the Plumbing Inspector that the work is sound and tight. No piping
shall be covered up nor shall any fixture, gas heater, range or appliance be
connected thereto until the test is approved.
§ 120-18. Certificate of approval.
Gas shall not be turned on in any building, premises or establishment until
the piping and fixtures have been approved by the Plumbing Inspector and
a certificate is issued stating that the town conforms to the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the extension of a gas pipe from a
building located on the front portion of a lot to a stable, workshop or
building of a similar character located on the rear of the lot if there is no
gas main in the rear alley or street and both buildings are located on
the same lot and owned, occupied or used by the same owner.
B. No extension or alteration of any existing system of gas piping in a
building in excess of 15 feet in length, and unless the same is entirely
exposed, shall be made without reporting the work to the office of the
Plumbing Inspector for inspection and approval. Extensions shall
conform in size to the table in § 120-10 of this chapter and shall be
made where the proper size pipe can be maintained, and in no case
shall extensions be made from smaller pipe.
C. Where necessary to cut pipe for extensions or repairs, pipe shall be
again put together with right and left couplings, and in no case shall
unions or running threads be permitted.
§ 120-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-19
1:395
§ 120-19. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
Chapter 122
GASOLINE PUMPS AND SERVICE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 98.
Gas installations — See Ch. 120.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
§ 122-1. License required; fee.
Every person owning, operating, conducting or maintaining any gasoline
pump or filling station situated upon any of the streets, highways,
sidewalks, pavements or alleys in the City shall obtain from the City Clerk a
license and pay a fee therefor of $10 for each and every pump or station so
owned, operated, conducted or maintained. Such license shall be obtained
and such fee paid on or before the first day of February of each and every
year. The City Clerk is duly authorized and directed to issue such license
and to collect such fees and, as they are collected, to turn the money over
to the Tax Collector, who shall credit the same to the general purpose fund,
from which it shall be drawn only as are other moneys of this account.
§ 122-2. Pro rata charges.
Any person installing, owning, operating, conducting or maintaining a pump
or filling station after the first day of February shall obtain the license
therefor when such pump or station is installed and shall pay therefor for
the part of the year so installed the sum of $1 per month or fraction thereof.
§ 122-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
§ 120-19 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 122-3
1:396
Chapter 135
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling and refuse collection — See Ch.
117.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 184.
§ 135-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKYARD — Any yard or parcel of land upon which old metal, glass, rags,
old paper, bones, rubber, parts of dismantled motor vehicles, dismantled
motor vehicles or any other dismantled machinery or equipment is stored,
sold, traded, parked or kept for any purpose whatsoever.
§ 135-2. Permit required; fee. [Amended 10-2-1978]
§ 135-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
Chapter 140
LAND MANAGEMENT CODE
1. The Land Management Code of the City of Hagerstown consists of
eight articles, namely:
Article I – General Provisions
Article II – Authoritative Boards and Review Agencies
Article III – Terminology
Article IV – Zoning
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to open, establish or conduct a
junkyard within the City limits without obtaining a permit to do so from
the Mayor and Council on or before the first day of January of each and
every year.
B. Such permit shall be issued by the Clerk only after the instruction to do
so by the Mayor and Council, and the Clerk shall charge therefor the
sum of $250 per annum.
§ 122-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-3
1:397
Article V– Subdivision and Land Development
Article VI – Flood Management
Article VII – Forest Conservation
Article VIII – Appeals, Violations and Penalties
2. The full text of the Land Management Code is incorporated herein
by reference.
3. Copies of the full text of the Land Management Code are on
file with the City Clerk and the Planning and Code Administration
Division of the City of Hagerstown.
4. Copies are available on-line at www.hagerstown.maryland.org.
Copies may be purchased from the Planning and Code
Administration Division of the City of Hagerstown.
Chapter 142
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew for minors — See Ch. 79.
Loitering around entertainment clubs — See
Ch. 92.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 173.
§ 142-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT — Any person 18 years of age or older.
JUVENILE — Any person under the age of 18.
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or wailing about aimlessly, and
shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACES — Include not only streets, alleys and sidewalks, but those
establishments generally open for the public convenience and use.
§ 142-2. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in a public place in such a
manner as to:
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
§ 135-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 142-2
1:398
§ 142-2.1. Unlawful activity within 50 feet of establishment selling
alcoholic beverages. [Added 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1]
§ 142-3. Enforcement. [Amended 2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3]
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any
of the conditions enumerated in § 142-2 or 142-2.1, any police officer may
order that person or persons to leave that place. Any person who shall
refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty
of a violation of this chapter.
§ 142-4. Violations and penalties.
If any person commits an offense as set forth in this chapter, said offense
shall be considered a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place.
E. Solicit or engage in any lewd, lascivious or illegal act, including
prostitution.
F. (Reserved)38
G. Making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting
nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in
whose hearing they are made.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who are standing or
loitering within 50 feet of a Class A, B, C or D retail establishment
which sells alcoholic beverages to obstruct free passage on or along the
street or sidewalk, or to disobey a request by a police officer to move
on.
B. The fifty-foot distance mentioned in this section is to be measured in
any direction from the center of the main entrance, or any other
entrance used by the public, of the retail establishment.
C. Nothing contained in this section is intended to prevent property
owners, their tenants, or the guests thereof, from sitting on the front
steps or standing on the sidewalk in front of their property, regardless
of whether or not the property is within the fifty-foot distance.
38.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, concerning soliciting money or other valuable
consideration, was repealed 2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3.
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-4
1:399
Chapter 147
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land management — See Ch. 140. Sanitation — See Ch. 200.
§ 147-1. Findings.
Whereas it has been determined by the Mayor and Council for the City
of Hagerstown that there has been an increase in the number of massage
businesses or establishments in the City of Hagerstown and that the
unregulated proliferation of such establishments would be contrary to the
public interest, therefore the Mayor and Council has determined that the
licensing and regulation of such businesses or establishments is required to
properly protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens
of the community.
§ 147-2. Definitions.
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the
construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this
chapter.
EMPLOYEE — Any person, other than a masseur, who renders any service
in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives
compensation from the operator of the business or from patrons.
EROGENOUS AREA — The pubic area, penis, scrotum, vulva, perineum or
anus.
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the external superficial parts or
internal parts of a patron for medical, hygienic, exercise or relaxation
purposes, including but not limited to rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulating with the hands or any instrument or by
the application of air, liquid or vapor baths of any kind whatsoever, alcohol
rub or similar treatment, electric or magnetic treatment, physiotherapy or
manipulation.
MASSEUR — Any person who engages in the practice of massage as herein
defined. The use of the masculine gender shall include in all cases the
feminine gender as well.
PATRON — Any person who receives a massage.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association or legal entity of whatsoever kind or
nature.
§ 142-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 147-2
1:400
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL — Any school or institution of learning which has
for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work
of massage and which is recognized by the American Massage Therapy
Association.
§ 147-3. Required permits.
§ 147-4. Application for massage business permit.
Any person desiring a massage business permit shall file a written
application with the Chief of Police on a form furnished by the City Clerk.
The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the correct
permit fee to the City Clerk, as hereinafter provided, and shall, in addition,
furnish the following:
A. Business permit required. No person shall engage in or carry on the
business of massage unless he or she has a valid massage business
permit issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for
each and every separate office or place of business conducted by such
person.
B. Masseur's permit required. No reason shall practice massage as a
masseur, employee or otherwise unless he or she has a valid and
subsisting masseur's permit issued to him or her by the City pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
C. Existing establishments. Upon application, the Chief of Police shall
issue a temporary massage business permit to any applicant who was,
upon the effective date of this chapter, the owner or operator of such an
establishment in the City of Hagerstown. Such temporary permit shall
remain in effect for a period of 30 days or until the issuance of the
permanent permit, whichever is sooner. If the application for the permit
is denied, said temporary permit shall immediately expire and be of no
further force and effect.
A. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
B. The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is
to be conducted.
C. The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is
to be conducted.
D. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all masseurs
and employees in the business and the name and residence address of
the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of
the business.
E. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of
the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the
§ 147-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-4
1:401
applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business; and if one or more of the stockholders owning more than
10% of the applicant corporation is itself a corporation, the names
and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of said
corporation and of each stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock
of said corporation:
(1) Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
numbers.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size.
(6) The massage or similar business history and experience, including
but not limited to whether or not such person in previously
operating in this or another City or state under license or permit
has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and
the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations
subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, the offense for
which convicted and the circumstances thereof.
(8) A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by
the Police Chief or his authorized representatives.
(9) A diploma, certificate or other written proof of graduation from a
recognized school by the person who shall be directly responsible
for the operation and management of the massage business.
F. Such other information, identification and physical examination of the
person as shall be deemed necessary by the Police Chief to discover the
truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the
application.
G. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information
and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in
the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit.
H. The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will
serve as character references. These references must be persons other
than relatives and business associates.
§ 147-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 147-4
1:402
§ 147-5. Application for masseur's permit.
Any person desiring a masseur's permit shall file a written application with
the Police Chief on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk. The applicant
shall tender with the application the correct permit fee to the City Clerk, as
hereinafter provided, and shall, in addition, furnish the following:
I. Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the
foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct,
said declaration being duly dated and signed in the City.
A. The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is
to be practiced.
B. The following personal information concerning the applicant:
(1) Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
numbers.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size.
(6) The massage or similar business history and experience, including
but not limited to whether or not such person in previously
operating in this or another City or state under license or permit
has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and
the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations
subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions other than minor traffic violations, fully
disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, the offense for which
convicted and the circumstances thereof.
(8) A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by
the Police Chief or his authorized representatives.
(9) A diploma, certificate or other written proof of graduation from a
recognized school where the theory, method, profession or work of
massage is taught.
(10) A statement, in writing, from a licensed physician in the state that
he has examined the applicant and believes the applicant to be free
of all communicable diseases.
C. Such other information, identification and physical examination of the
person as shall be deemed necessary by the Police Chief in order to
§ 147-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-5
1:403
§ 147-6. Investigation and approval of permit.
§ 147-7. Issuance or denial of massage business permit.
The Police Chief shall issue a massage business permit within 45 days of
receipt of the application unless he finds that:
discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore to be set forth in the
application.
D. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information
and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in
the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit.
E. Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the
foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct,
said declaration being duly dated and signed in the City.
A. Upon receiving the application for a massage business or masseur's
permit, the Police Chief shall conduct an investigation into the
applicant's moral character and personal and criminal history. The
Police Chief may, in his discretion, require a personal interview of the
applicant and such further information, identification and physical
examination of the person as shall bear on the investigation.
B. In the case of applications for massage business permits, the Police
Chief shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises
where the massage business is to be carried on for the purpose of
assuring that such premises comply with all the sanitation
requirements as set forth in this chapter and with all other applicable
laws, including but not limited to all federal, state and City building,
fire, safety and health regulations.
C. Before any permit shall issue under this chapter, the Police Chief shall
first sign his approval of the application.
A. The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the City and, in the
case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation.
B. The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the City's
building, zoning and health regulations.
C. The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding more
than 10% of the stock of the corporation or any of the officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners,
including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business, has been convicted of any crime, other than minor traffic
violations, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to
the date of the application.
§ 147-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 147-7
1:404
§ 147-8. Applicability.
This chapter shall be construed to be applicable to all persons as defined
herein, whether profit or nonprofit in nature, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 147-9. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes,
sanatoriums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the
healing arts under the laws of the state or persons working under the
direction of any such persons or in any such establishment, nor shall this
chapter apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their
particular profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or
certificate of registration issued by the state.
§ 147-10. Display of permits.
The massage business permittee shall display his permit, and that of each
and every masseur employed in the establishment, in an open and
conspicuous place on the premises of the massage business.
§ 147-11. Permit fees.
D. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required
by the City in conjunction therewith.
E. The applicant has had a massage business, masseur or other similar
permit or license denied by the City or any other state or local agency
within five years prior to the date of the application.
F. The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and directors, if the
applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business, are not
over the age of 18 years.
G. The manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of
the business has not successfully completed a resident course of study
or learning from a recognized school where the theory, method,
profession or work of massage is taught.
A. The permit fee for a massage business shall be $1,000 per year, due and
payable on the first day of January of each calendar year. In the event
that a permit shall be issued during the period from January 1 up to and
including June 30 of a calendar year, the permit fee for a massage
business shall be $1,000. In the event that a permit is issued at any time
during a calendar year from July 1 up to and including December 31,
the permit fee for that calendar year shall be $500.
§ 147-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-11
1:405
§ 147-12. Term of permit renewals.
§ 147-13. Transferability of permits.
§ 147-14. Sanitation and safety requirements; inspection.
B. The permit fee for masseurs shall be $25 per year, payable upon
application. There shall be no proration of a masseur's permit fee
regardless of when issued. In the event that a masseur's permit is
denied, there shall be no refund of the $25 dollar fee referred to herein.
C. In the event that the application for a permit for a massage business
shall be refused, then the application fee as tendered in accordance
with the applicable provisions of this chapter shall be refundable up to
and including the total sum of $750. $250 shall be retained by the City
to cover investigation and administrative expenses.
D. The permits and fees required herein shall not be in lieu of but shall be
in addition to any licenses, taxes or permits now required by the State
of Maryland, county, City or any administrative agency thereof.
A. The term of a massage business permit and masseur's permit shall be
for a period of one year or any portion thereof to the time of the annual
permit fee being due and payable.
B. The application shall be made by holders of massage business permits
and masseur's permits no later than 45 days prior to the expiration of
said permit. The application shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, and all provisions of this chapter shall apply
to renewals in the same manner as they apply to original applications.
A. No massage business or masseur permits are transferable, separate or
divisible, and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only
on the permittee named therein.
B. No massage business permit shall be applicable to any other location
other than that location set forth in the initial application under the
terms of this chapter.
A. All premises used by permittees hereunder shall be periodically
inspected by the Police Chief or his authorized representatives for
safety of the structure and adequacy of plumbing, ventilation, heating
and illumination. The walls shall be clean and painted with washable,
mold-resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given.
Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All
equipment used in the massage operation shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Towels, linen and items for personal use of
operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels,
cloths and sheets shall not be used for more than one patron. Heavy
white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is
changed for every patron. No massage service or practice shall be
§ 147-11 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 147-14
1:406
§ 147-15. Supervision.
A permittee shall have the premises supervised at all times when open for
business. Any business rendering massage services shall have one person
who qualifies as a masseur on the premises at all times when the
establishment is open. The massage business permittee shall personally
supervise the business and shall not violate or permit others to violate
any applicable provision of this chapter or any other applicable laws. The
violation of any such provision by any agent or employee of the massage
business permittee shall constitute a violation by the permittee and by the
person violating the provisions of this chapter or any other law.
§ 147-16. Refusal of permit; hearing.
§ 147-17. Revocation or suspension of permit; hearing.
carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage
establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other
minimum requirements of federal, state, county or City ordinances or
regulations pertaining or applicable to the maintenance, control and
operation of said premises nor to preclude any authorized inspections
thereof by either the Building Inspector, Health Department or Fire
Department or any other authorized inspections.
C. The premises used by permittees hereunder shall be subject to the right
of entry and examination by the Chief of Police or his duly authorized
agents or representatives or any other persons authorized to inspect
premises of this nature as hereinabove set forth, during business hours.
D. This section shall not restrict or limit the right of entry vested in any
law enforcement agency other than herein set forth.
A. In the event that any applicant is refused a permit under the provisions
of this chapter, the applicant shall have 10 days from the receipt of said
refusal in writing to appeal to the Mayor and Council for a review of
said application.
B. Said permittee shall then be entitled to a hearing on said application,
either before the Mayor and Council or before some duly authorized or
appointed administrative agency of the City designated by said Mayor
and Council.
C. A record of said hearing shall be kept. In the event that said hearing
results in further refusal, the applicant shall have all applicable
remedies as set forth in the Maryland Rules of Practice and Procedure
and the Annotated Code of Maryland for appeals from administrative
agencies.
A. Any massage business or masseur's permit issued under this chapter
shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the Police Chief for
§ 147-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-17
1:407
§ 147-18. Minors on premises prohibited.
No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come
to or remain on the premises of any massage business establishment as
masseur, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on
lawful business.
§ 147-19. Alcoholic beverages on premises prohibited.
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept any alcoholic beverage on the premises
of any massage business.
§ 147-20. Prohibitions.
violation of any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that would
warrant denial of issuance of such permit in the first place. The Chief,
upon such revocation or suspension, shall state his reasons in writing,
specifying the particular grounds for such revocation or suspension.
B. Said permittee shall then be entitled to a hearing on said application,
either before the Mayor and Council or before some duly authorized or
appointed administrative agency of the City or a hearing board
consisting of at least three persons designated by said Mayor and
Council.
C. A record of said hearing shall be kept. In the event that said hearing
results in further refusal, the applicant shall have all applicable
remedies as set forth in the Maryland Rules of Practice and Procedure
and the Annotated Code of Maryland for appeals from administrative
agencies.
A. It shall be unlawful to remain open or to provide services between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place
his or her hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to
fondle in any manner or to massage an erogenous area of any other
person.
C. It shall be unlawful for any employee in a massage establishment to
expose the erogenous area or any portion thereof to any other person. It
shall also be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
expose the erogenous area or any portion thereof to any other person.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other
person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully
opaque covering the erogenous area of his or her body.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a masseur in any place other
than a licensed massage establishment.
§ 147-17 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 147-20
1:408
§ 147-21. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 155
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 48.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 173.
Peddlers and transient merchants — See Ch.
176.
§ 155-1. Declaration of findings and policy.
It is the intent of the Mayor and City Council to ensure its citizens an
environment free from such excessive noise as may jeopardize their health,
welfare, and safety or degrade their quality of life. It is therefore the policy
of the City and the purpose of this chapter to prevent such excessive noise.
§ 155-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIOACOUSTIC BIRD DISPERSAL SYSTEMS — Electronic devices or
recordings utilizing bioacoustics to disperse birds and combat the nuisance
and health hazard caused by uncontrolled roosting in urban environments.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — Any work on the construction site for the
purpose of erection, demolition, alteration or repair of buildings, structures,
or utilities associated with permits issued by the City of Hagerstown, or for
site preparation and infrastructure installation related to such work which
has been permitted by the City of Hagerstown.
F. All other acts set forth herein are in addition to all other acts prohibited
by this chapter and the laws of the State of Maryland.
A. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of $500 or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 60 days in the county jail, or by both fine and imprisonment,
within the discretion of the court.
B. The penalties as set forth herein are in addition to and not in derogation
of any other penalties provided in this chapter or under the applicable
laws of the State of Maryland.
C. The penalties as set forth herein are also in addition to all civil remedies
that may be applicable.
§ 147-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-2
1:409
dBA — The abbreviation for the sound level in decibels determined by the
A-weighting network of a sound-level meter or by calculation from octaveband
or one-third-octave-band data.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual
or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate
attention.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A motor vehicle belonging to a fire department
or fire company, an ambulance, or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal,
state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency, provided such vehicles
are in use as emergency vehicles by one authorized to use such vehicles for
that purpose.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma damage threatened or caused by an
emergency.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — The presence of noise of sufficient loudness,
character, and/or duration which disturbs the peace and is, or may be
predicted with reasonable certainty to be, injurious to health or which
unreasonably interferes with the proper enjoyment of one's place of
residence, work or entertainment.
DAYTIME ON HOLIDAYS — 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; holiday evening begins
the night before and normal evening hours begin at the end of the day on
the holiday.
DAYTIME ON WEEKDAYS — 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; weekday evening
begins on Sunday.
DAYTIME ON WEEKENDS — 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; weekend evening
begins on Friday.
NOISE SOURCE — The location or person generating the noise which is
affecting other persons.
PERSON — An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other entity.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be clearly heard or understood
by a person using his or her own normal hearing faculties at a distance of
100 feet or more from its source or through partitions common to attached
dwelling units or between units within a single building.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is
owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon owned by a
governmental entity and normally accessible to the public, including but not
limited to parks and other public recreational areas.
RECEIVING AREA — The area occupied by persons which is affected by
noise generated in another area or property.
§ 155-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 155-3
1:410
§ 155-3. Specific prohibitions.
§ 155-4. Noise exceeding measurable standards.
§ 155-5. Exemptions.
A. The following are prohibited at any time in the City:
(1) Sounding of horns or other auditory sounding devices on or in any
motor vehicle on any public right-of-way or public property in the
City, except as a warning of danger, as governed by the Maryland
State Transportation Code.
(2) Security alarms which fail to cease emitting an audible sound
within 15 minutes of activation or which activate more than once in
an eight-hour period following the first activation incident.
A. Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, a person must not cause
or permit excessive noise that exceeds the following at distances
specified in the subsections below:
Maximum Allowable Noise Levels (dBA) for Receiving Areas
Daytime Nighttime
Residential area 65 dBA 55 dBA
Commercial area 67 dBA 62 dBA
Industrial area 75 dBA 75 dBA
B. When the noise source is located on private property, the noise is
measured at or outside the property boundary of the noise source or at
any point within any other property affected by the noise.
C. When the noise source is located in a public right-of-way or other public
space, the noise is measured at least 100 feet from the noise source.
D. When the noise source is located within a structure containing more
than one dwelling unit, the noise is measured from common areas
within or outside the structure or from other dwelling units within the
structure, when requested to do so by the owner or tenant in possession
and control thereof. The noise shall be measured at a point at least four
feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source, with the
doors to the receiving area closed and windows in the normal position
for the season.
A. Activities undertaken by municipal, county, state, or federal
governmental agencies or their contractors to promote or protect the
public health, safety or general welfare. This includes noise generated
at public-serving utility plants and facilities.
B. Emergency work permitted by the City of Hagerstown.
C. Radios, sirens, horns, and bells on emergency vehicles.
§ 155-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-5
1:411
§ 155-6. Variances.
D. Lawful discharge of firearms.
E. Bioacoustic bird dispersal systems.
F. Trains and aircraft.
G. The striking of clocks and church bells.
H. Air-conditioning or heat pump equipment used to cool or heat buildings.
I. Activities on or in municipal, county, state, or federal properties and
facilities, including school athletic facilities, municipal stadiums, and
parks, and subject to the rules and regulations for use of those facilities.
J. Noise caused by construction activities during normal daytime hours
and starting at 7:00 a.m. on Saturdays, and, during the summer,
starting at 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays.
K. Noise created by lawn and yard care equipment during daytime hours.
L. Activities which have gained a variance from the City of Hagerstown
under § 155-6 of this chapter.
M. Parades, fireworks displays, festivals, and other special events, subject
to the terms of approval or permits by the City of Hagerstown and
approval of the Mayor and City Council.
N. Noises caused by or from motor vehicles operating on a roadway, when
regulated by state law. This does not include noise caused by stereos,
radios, or other similar devices located within or on motor vehicles.
A. Any person desiring relief from the provisions of this chapter shall
apply for a variance to cause or create noise which would otherwise be
in violation of this chapter, at least 30 days prior to the date for which
the relief is requested. Application shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk's office. The applicant must demonstrate the following in the
application:
(1) The activity, operation or noise source cannot be done in a manner
that would comply with the provisions of this chapter; or
(2) The provisions of the chapter would cause undue hardship for the
applicant or the applicant's client; or
(3) The failure to grant a variance would unreasonably burden the
exercise of the applicant's constitutional right of free speech or
other constitutional right; and
(4) No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
B. In determining whether to grant or deny the application for the
variance, the Mayor and City Council shall consider the hardship to the
§ 155-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 155-6
1:412
§ 155-7. Determination of violation.
Police officers, or other duly appointed and authorized City officials, shall
be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and for
determining if a sound is excessive noise which violates the provision of
this chapter. A sound is in violation of this chapter if it is determined to
be excessive noise that is plainly audible to a person using his or her
own normal hearing faculties across distances and/or at times specified
in this chapter, unless otherwise exempted from the provisions of this
chapter, and reaches or exceeds sound levels outlined in § 155-4. The
equipment and techniques employed in the measurement of noise levels
may be those recommended by the Maryland State Department of the
Environment, which may, but need not, refer to currently accepted
standards or recognized organizations, including, but not limited to, the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM), Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), and the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
§ 155-8. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a municipal
infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of up to $500 for the first offense
and up to $1,000 for additional offenses within a twelve-month period. Each
violation of any section of this chapter shall be considered a separate and
distinct violation, punishable as prescribed herein. Each day the violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 155-9. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the chapter in its entirety or of any part thereof
other than that portion declared to be invalid.
applicant, the community, or other persons of not granting the variance
against the adverse impact on the health and welfare of persons
affected, the adverse effect on the property affected or any other
adverse impact.
C. Any variance granted pursuant to this chapter shall contain all
conditions upon which the variance has been granted, including but not
limited to the effective date, time of day, location and equipment
limitations. Any variance granted pursuant to this section may be
renewed upon application to the City Clerk's office and approval of the
Mayor and City Council upon a showing that the reasons for which the
variance was granted still exist or may be reevaluated periodically by
the City to determine whether the activity under the variance is still
deemed appropriate for an exception from the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 155-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-9
1:413
Chapter 173
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil emergency — See Ch. 76.
Curfew for juveniles — See Ch. 79.
Entertainment clubs — See Ch. 92.
Loitering — See Ch. 142.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 147.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Vendors, peddlers and transient
dealers — See Ch. 176.
§ 173-1. Affrays; riots.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take part in any affray or riot within
the corporate limits of the City.
§ 173-2. Assault and battery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or an assault and
battery on any other person.
§ 173-3. Disorderly houses; houses of ill fame.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, authorize or permit to be kept
any bawdy house, house of ill fame or disorderly house within the City.
§ 173-4. Public dances.
No person shall hold or conduct a public dance within the corporate limits
of the City without first obtaining a permit, in writing, to do so from the
Chief of Police of the City stating the time and place at which such dance
is to be held, and it shall be unlawful to continue and conduct such dance
after the hour set forth in the permit, and the Chief of Police may refuse to
issue such a permit if, in his judgment, the holding of such a dance would
be an annoyance to the neighborhood in which it is being held.
§ 173-5. Public exhibitions at dangerous elevations. [Amended
11-6-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-23]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City
to be in any manner engaged or concerned in any show or public
exhibition by ropes, chains or apparatus suspended at a dangerous
elevation above the ground upon any street, alley or square or above a
stage or floor if within any building.
B. Notwithstanding this provision, upon application or upon its own
initiative, the Mayor and Council of the City of Hagerstown may permit
any individual or individuals to be engaged or concerned in a show or
§ 155-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 173-5
1:414
§ 173-6. (Reserved)39
§ 173-6.1. Open container. [Added 1-29-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1]
§ 173-7. Electric poles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure or tamper with any
of the property, poles, wires, fixtures, lamps, apparatus or appliances
belonging to or connected with the electric light plant or system of the City
or to deface, injure or tamper with any lamp, lamppost or fixture or to tie or
fasten any horse or other animal to any such pole or post.
§ 173-8. Expectoration; violations and penalties.
exhibition by ropes, chains or apparatus suspended at a dangerous
elevation, subject to such restrictions and conditions as the Mayor and
Council may impose.
A. It shall be unlawful to possess in an open container an alcoholic
beverage, as defined in the Annotated Code of Maryland, Article 2B,
§ 1-102(a)(2), as amended from time to time, on any of the streets,
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots or public ways of the City. Any
person who shall violate this section shall be deemed guilty of a
municipal infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $250. Any person issued a citation alleging a
violation of this section may elect to pay a preset fine of $50.
B. Notwithstanding this provision, upon application or upon its own
initiative, the Mayor and Council of the City of Hagerstown may permit
the possession of alcoholic beverages in open containers on the streets,
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots or public ways of the City during
special events, subject to such restrictions and conditions as the Mayor
and Council may impose.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate upon the sidewalks,
street crossings, doorsteps of buildings, windows or cellar doors, upon
the floors of public conveyances or upon the floors or passageways of
public buildings or theaters, market houses, churches, railroad stations
or any other indoor places resorted to by the public within the
corporate limits of the City.
B. Each violation of this section shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation, and shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in the county
jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. [Added 1-30-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-2]
39.Editor’s Note: Former § 173-6, Public drunkenness; disorderly conduct, was repealed
9-30-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-14.
§ 173-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-9
1:415
§ 173-9. Gambling.
It shall be unlawful to gamble at cards, or by any other means, device or
scheme whatsoever, or to engage in crap shooting or pitching cents.
§ 173-10. Defacing of cemeteries.
No person shall deface or mutilate any tombstone or monument or despoil
any evergreen or shrubbery in any graveyard or cemetery in the City.
§ 173-11. Firearms and other weapons. [Amended 4-16-1968]
§ 173-12. Indecent or blasphemous performances.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City
to act, exhibit, show or perform or cause to be acted, exhibited, shown
or performed or be in any manner concerned in the acting, exhibition,
showing or performance of any indecent or blasphemous play, farce, opera,
public exhibition, show, entertainment or performance whatsoever or of any
indecent or blasphemous part of any play, farce, opera, public exhibition,
show, entertainment or performance whatsoever.
§ 173-13. Indecent exposure.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make an indecent exposure of his
person to public view.
§ 173-14. Profanity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to profanely curse or swear or use
indecent language in any public place within the City limits.
§ 173-15. Improper language to women.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use insulting or abusive language to
women in any public place within the City limits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, discharge or shoot a gun,
firearm, air gun, blowgun, spring gun, gas-operated gun, blowpipe,
slingshot, bean shooter or any other contrivance manufactured and
calculated to throw, sling or discharge any shot or other missile within
the City limits, and it shall be unlawful for any person, other than a law
enforcement officer or a duly licensed person, to possess any such
weapon upon the streets, alleys or other public ways of the City except
while transporting such weapon from the place of purchase to his home
or from his home to a point outside the City boundaries and returning.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent or other person standing in loco
parentis is to knowingly permit a minor to do any act in violation of the
provisions of Subsection A.
§ 173-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 173-16
1:416
§ 173-16. Flying of kites.
No person shall fly any kite within the corporate limits of the City.
§ 173-17. Loose or disorderly persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be loose or disorderly within the
corporate limits of the City.
§ 173-18. Laser beams; violations and penalties.40 [Added
10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-48]
It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point, or shine a laser beam
directly or indirectly on any uniformed police officer and/or accompanying
canine, or uniformed fire or emergency personnel or uniformed private
security guard. Any such person convicted thereof shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for up to 30 days, or both.
§ 173-19. Urinating in streets; violations and penalties.
§ 173-20. Public solicitation of patrons.
It shall be unlawful for any person upon the streets, highways or alleys
of the City to solicit or suggest to a person orally or by handbills in,
upon or about any automobile or motor vehicle or any vehicle, while such
automobile, motor vehicle or vehicle is upon the streets, highways or alleys
of the City, to stop at, store in or patronize in any way any garage,
automobile storeroom or building, or place or building used for such
purposes, or to patronize in any way any automobile or motor accessory
equipment or supply shop or store or to patronize in any way hotels, motels,
tourist homes or any other place of accommodation.
§ 173-21. Fortune-telling.
It shall be unlawful for any gypsy or other person to engage in the business
of fortune-teller, card-reader, palmist, clairvoyant, hypnotist, spiritualist,
A. No person shall urinate or commit nuisance in any street, lane or alley
of the City.
B. Each violation of this section shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation, and shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in the county
jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each violation of this section
shall be considered a separate and distinct violation, and shall be
deemed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in the county jail, or both, in the
discretion of the court. [Added 1-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
40.Editor's Note: Former § 173-18, Curfew for minors; parental responsibility, was repealed
9-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-31. See now Ch. 79, Curfew for Minors.
§ 173-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-21
1:417
phrenologist, crystal-gazer, psychoanalyst or any other similar business in
the City without first having filed an application for a license to do so on the
prescribed form with the City Clerk of the City, giving the name and address
of the applicant desiring to so engage in the business as applied for and
the street address where the applicant intends to operate such business,
and without first having been photographed and fingerprinted by the Police
Department of the City; and no license shall be issued until the applicant
has provided the City Clerk with the report and recommendation of the
record of the applicant by the Chief of Police.
§ 173-22. Fixing materials to utility poles.
It shall be unlawful to affix upon any of the poles required and used
for telegraph, telephone, electric light or any other purpose any material
whatsoever, whether the same shall be intended for advertisement or
otherwise.
§ 173-23. Interference with radio or television receptor.
§ 173-24. Emission of sawdust or shavings.
The emission of sawdust, shavings or wood dust from any stack, blower,
vent or contrivance within the corporate limits of the City in such a manner
as will result in the deposit of the same on buildings, streets, lots or
premises other than on the premises, buildings or lots of the owners of such
stacks, blowers, vents or contrivances is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and is hereby prohibited.
§ 173-25. Throwing of missiles; violations and penalties. [Amended
1-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or wantonly to operate or
cause to be operated any machine, device, apparatus or instrument of
any kind whatsoever within the corporate limits of the City between the
hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight, the operation of which shall
cause reasonably preventable electrical interference with radio or
television reception. X-ray pictures, examinations or treatments may be
made at any time if the machine or apparatus used therefor are
properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonable preventable
interference with radio or television reception and are not negligently
operated.
B. This section shall not be held or construed to embrace or cover the
regulation of any transmitting, broadcasting or receiving instrument,
apparatus or device used or useful in interstate commerce or the
operation of which is licensed or authorized by or under the provision of
any act of the Congress of the United States.
A. Any person convicted of throwing any stone, brick or snowball or any
other missile within the corporate limits of the City shall be punished as
provided in Subsection B hereof.
§ 173-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 173-25
1:418
§ 173-26. Soliciting and aggressive soliciting. [Added 9-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-2641]
B. Each violation of this section shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation, and shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in the county
jail, or both, in the discretion of the court.
A. Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
AGGRESSIVE SOLICITING — Soliciting which is accompanied by one
or more of the following:
PLACE OPEN TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC — Sidewalks, streets, alleys,
driveways, parking lots and garages, parks, plazas, buildings, doorways
and entrances to buildings, the grounds enclosing buildings, and/or
adjacent parking areas of any shopping center to which the genera;
public is invited for business purposes.
SOLICITING —
In the course of soliciting, touching another person without that
person's consent;
(1)
Continuously soliciting from a person or following the person after
the person has made a negative response to prior solicitations;
(2)
Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe passage of a
person or a vehicle by any means including unreasonably causing a
person to take evasive action to avoid physical contact;
(3)
Using obscene or abusive language either during the course of
soliciting or immediately following a negative response to prior
solicitation; or
(4)
Acting with the intent of intimidating another person into giving
money or another thing of value.
(5)
Any act by which one person requests an immediate donation of
money or other thing of value from another or others in person,
regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money
or other thing of value. The solicitation may be oral, written, or by
other means of communication.
(1)
For the purposes of Subsection C(3) herein, soliciting shall also
mean any act by which one person distributes or attempts to
distribute any material or item to another or others in person.
(2)
B. Aggressive soliciting in public places prohibited. It is unlawful for any
person to engage in aggressive soliciting in any place open to the
general public.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 173-26, Tramps.
§ 173-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-26
1:419
§ 173-27. Pennsylvania Avenue underpass.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or about the pedestrian
underpass under Pennsylvania Avenue at its intersection with Fairview
Road in the City or to hinder or obstruct in any manner the free passage of
persons passing through the same or to damage or deface in any way the
entrances and walls of such underpass or to deposit therein bottles, cans,
paper or other rubbish.
§ 173-28. Molotov cocktails. [Added 8-25-1970]
Any person who shall transport, use or have in his possession or control
a container of incendiary or explosive material, liquid, solid or mixture,
equipped with a fuse, wick or any other detonating device, of a kind
commonly known as a "Molotov cocktail" shall, upon conviction thereof, be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 173-29. Parks and playgrounds. [Added 3-27-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-7; amended 10-23-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-41; 4-26-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-09]
C. Soliciting in certain ways and places prohibited. It is unlawful for any
person to engage in soliciting:
(1) Within 10 feet of the entrance to a bank, financial institution or
automatic teller machine (ATM);
(2) In any public transportation vehicle or at any bus stop;
(3) From any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle that is in traffic
on a public street, whether in exchange for a service or otherwise;
or
(4) In a public park, garden, playground, or other recreational facility.
[Added 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-22]
D. Other soliciting permitted. Soliciting as defined in Subsection A of this
section is lawful except as otherwise prohibited herein.
E. Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.
A. In order that all citizens may enjoy all parks and playgrounds within the
City, the City of Hagerstown declares that the following activities are
prohibited on the parks and playgrounds of the City of Hagerstown:
(1) The possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages on park
or playground property. This prohibition does not apply to
Municipal Stadium, University Plaza, or Fairgrounds Park, if such
activity is specifically authorized by the Mayor and Council in
§ 173-26 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 173-29
1:420
§ 173-30. Smoking in public places. [Added 7-23-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-19;42 amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-30; 10-23-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-20]
Vaping, electronic cigarettes, the ingestion of vaporized or inhaled aerosol
products which are not otherwise prohibited by law, and/or all tobacco
products are hereby prohibited in the following public places within the
City of Hagerstown: University Plaza and all City of Hagerstown parks.
This prohibition does not apply to the Municipal Golf Course or Municipal
Stadium. Clearly visible signage shall be posted concerning this prohibition.
A violation of this section shall be treated as a municipal infraction and
subject the person violating the same to a fine of $20 each for the first and
second violation and $200 for each subsequent violation.
§ 173-31. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Unless otherwise provided, any person or persons violating any provision of
this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II.
Chapter 176
advance. This prohibition does not apply to the Mansion House or
the Washington County Museum of Fine Arts located in City Park.
(2) Being present on park or playground property other than during
the posted hours of operation, unless specifically authorized by the
City.
(3) The sale of goods or services or the solicitation of donations in
exchange for goods or services unless such activity is: [Added
10-23-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-21]
(a) Approved by the City in advance; and
[1] Pursuant to a lawfully executed lease or concessionaire
agreement;
[2] Part of a City-sponsored event; or
[3] Part of a City-approved event as evidenced by a valid
permit issued by the City of Hagerstown.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed
guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $250. Any person issued a citation alleging a violation of the
foregoing regulations may elect to pay a preset fine of $125.
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 173-30 as
§ 173-31.
§ 173-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-31
1:421
VENDORS, PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and special sales — See Ch. 52.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
§ 176-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — A person or entity engaged in a business for profit who sells,
offers to sell, or offers to purchase merchandise or commodities of any type,
or solicits orders for future services, from house to house or place to place,
whether by the use of a vehicle, wagon, cart, pack, basket, container or
otherwise for up to one year.
TEMPORARY PEDDLER — A person or entity engaged in a business for
profit who sells, offers to sell, or offers to purchase goods, merchandise or
commodities of any types, or solicits orders for future services, from house
to house or place to place, whether by the use of a vehicle, wagon, cart,
pack, basket, container or otherwise for a period not to exceed one day.
TRANSIENT DEALER — Any person or entity engaged in the temporary
business of selling or offering goods, merchandise or commodities of any
type for sale, or who displays samples thereof for the purpose of taking
orders for future delivery, within any hotel, motel, or conference room, or
house or other structure within the City for period of up to one year.
VENDOR — A person or entity engaged in a business for profit who does
not occupy a building or structure, but who uses or occupies a fixed place of
business on private or public property, or on the streets, sidewalks, rightsof-
way or public lands of the City, for the purpose of selling or offering to
sell goods, merchandise or commodities of any type for a period of up to one
year.
§ 176-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to
engage in the business of a vendor, peddler, temporary peddler or transient
dealer without first obtaining a license as provided in this chapter, unless
specifically exempted hereinafter.
§ 176-3. License exemptions.
A. The following types of businesses shall be exempt from the requirement
to obtain a vendor, peddler, temporary peddler or transient dealer
license:
§ 173-31 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 176-3
1:422
§ 176-4. License duration; fee.
Licenses, including any renewal thereof, issued by the City Clerk shall be
issued for the period of time hereinafter delineated. The amount of the
nonrefundable license fee identified hereinafter shall be payable by each
applicant at the time of the application for or renewal of the license.
Type of License Duration of License License Fee
Vendor 1 year $250
Peddler 1 year $250
Temporary peddler 1 day $25
Transient dealer Up to 1 year $1,000 for first month
and $500 per month
thereafter, up to a
maximum of $3,500 per
year
§ 176-5. Registration and license application.
(1) Commercial travelers, selling agents and wholesalers in the normal
course of business.
(2) Bona fide sales of goods for future delivery in interstate commerce.
(3) Deliveries or sales calls made at the request of the owner or
occupant.
(4) Deliveries or sales calls made in connection with delivery routes to
regular customers.
(5) Sales of locally grown produce and farm products by bona fide
producers thereof.
(6) Yard sales, to the extent permitted by Maryland law.
(7) Lemonade stands, snow cone stands, or other similar businesses
conducted at the operator's residence, which do not operate in
excess of 14 days per calendar year.
(8) Exhibitors or participants in an event for which a transient dealer
license has been obtained are exempt from obtaining individual
vendor licenses, so long as there are at least 10 exhibitors or
participants engaged in the transient dealer activity.
B. A nonprofit organization which is exempt from federal taxation
pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, and its
employees, members and volunteers, desiring to conduct sales or
solicitations for charitable, religious or philanthropic purposes shall be
exempt from the payment of any license fee required hereunder.
§ 176-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-5
1:423
A. Every vendor, peddler, temporary peddler and transient dealer shall,
prior to engaging in such activity, apply to the City Clerk and furnish, in
writing, on an application to be furnished by the City Clerk, the
following information, along with the appropriate nonrefundable
license fee:
(1) The applicant's name and address.
(2) The applicant's place of residence.
(3) A personal description of the applicant, including marks of physical
identification. Each applicant shall also submit to a photograph to
be included as part of the license identification card.
(4) The name and address of the person or entity by whom the
applicant is employed or with whom the applicant is associated.
(5) The length of such employment or association.
(6) A description of the business and the nature of the commodities,
articles, items or services the applicant is selling or offering for sale
in the City.
(7) An estimate of the part of the City in which the applicant intends to
pursue his activities as a peddler.
(8) The proposed location of sale if the applicant intends to sell any
commodity, article, item or service from an established spot as a
vendor or transient dealer.
(9) The name and address of three persons who have known the
applicant for at least one year and from whom the applicant
authorizes that inquiry to be made to verify the facts stated by the
applicant.
(10) Proof of having obtained all necessary state and local licenses,
inspections and approvals to carry out the proposed activity.
(11) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime.
(12) Every applicant for a transient dealer's license shall execute and
file with the Clerk a good and sufficient bond in the amount of
$10,000, with the surety thereon a surety qualified to do business
in the State of Maryland, which shall be payable to the City of
Hagerstown to the extent that any fees, taxes, or fines are due or
not paid. Said bond shall also provide that the City of Hagerstown
may file suit in its own name against the licensee and/or the surety
on said bond for any taxes, fees or fines due from the licensee
which are not paid within 30 days of the termination of the sale or
the termination of the license. Said bond shall also provide that any
purchaser at any sale or sales may maintain an action against a
licensee and/or said surety for claims arising from such sale for
§ 176-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 176-5
1:424
§ 176-6. Verification of information.
§ 176-7. Denial or revocation of license; appeal.
defective merchandise or misrepresentation. Said bond shall also
provide that it shall continue in effect for one year after the
termination of the sale and/or license for which the same was
made, and until all actions are concluded and the judgment or
judgments, if any, have been paid and fully satisfied or the amount
of the bond exhausted by such payments. This bond shall be in
addition to all deposits, license fees, permit fees or any other
requirements under any other ordinances of the City. The applicant
may, in lieu of the bond, deposit a sum in cash with the City
equivalent to the full amount that would be due hereunder for the
license based upon the estimated time required.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter to submit false or misleading
information on the application or to misrepresent any fact therein.
A. The City Clerk shall promptly make such verification of the facts stated
by the applicant as the circumstances may require and shall complete
such verification and issue, reissue or deny the license applied for
within 14 days after the filing of the application.
B. It shall be unlawful for an applicant to vend, peddle, or deal within the
City until a license is issued, or until a license is reissued after
expiration of a previous license.
A. The Clerk may refuse to issue or to renew a license, or may revoke any
license issued under this chapter, if the Clerk finds that the applicant
has willfully submitted false or misleading information on the license
application, misrepresented any fact therein, or has been convicted of a
felony or a crime of moral turpitude. The Clerk may revoke or refuse to
renew any license upon a finding that the licensee, while vending,
peddling, or dealing, has engaged in fraud or willful misrepresentation,
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, has committed any
unlawful act or has refused to leave the premises immediately when
requested by the owner or occupant thereof to do so. Any denial,
revocation or failure to renew shall be by written notice to the applicant
or licensee, delivered personally or sent by certified mail to the
licensee's address as listed in the application. The notice shall contain a
statement of the reason for the action taken.
B. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Clerk in the denial,
revocation or failure to renew a license as provided in this chapter shall
have the right of appeal to the review board established in Chapter 92
of the City Code. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Clerk,
within 14 days after receipt of notice of the action complained of, a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The
review board shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal
within 30 days of the filing of the request for appeal, and notice of such
§ 176-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-7
1:425
§ 176-8. Expiration of license; transferability.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall automatically expire at the end
of the license period and must be surrendered to the City Clerk upon the
expiration thereof prior to issuance of any renewal license. Licenses shall
not be transferable.
§ 176-9. Regulations and restrictions.
All licensees hereunder shall comply with the following regulations and
restrictions:
hearing shall be given to the appellant. The decision and order of the
review board on such appeal shall be final and conclusive and shall be
appealable pursuant to Maryland Law for administrative appeals.
A. No licensee shall vend, peddle or deal on a public street, parking space,
alley, sidewalk, parking lot, park or other public place, including the
public square, unless specifically authorized to do so by the Clerk.
B. Vendor and transient dealer sales are limited to the specific location
identified on the license.
C. Peddlers may not sell from the same location in the City for more than
30 minutes nor more frequently than one time per day. Upon the
expiration of 30 minutes, a peddler must move at least 300 feet to a new
location.
D. No vendor or transient dealer may vend or deal within 100 feet of a
store, restaurant or other business, which offers for sale goods or
services which are similar to or compete with those of the licensee,
located in permanent structure in the arts and entertainment district,
as from time to time designated. In all other locations in the City, no
vendor or transient dealer may vend or deal within 300 feet of a store,
restaurant or other business located in a permanent structure which
offers for sale goods or services which are similar to or compete with
those of the licensee. The restrictions contained in this Subsection D
may be waived only with the express written consent of the competing
business(es).
E. No licensee may vend, peddle or deal within 300 feet of a Citysponsored
or City-supported special event, unless expressly permitted
in the license.
F. All licensees must clearly and prominently display the photographic
identification license issued by the Clerk at all times when engaging in
the licensed activity.
G. Unless expressly provided on the license, no vendor or peddler shall
conduct any licensed activity between dusk and 10:00 a.m.
§ 176-7 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 176-10
1:426
§ 176-10. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any person or circumstances is held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect any other provision or applications of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
§ 176-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and, upon conviction thereof, may
be punished by a fine not to exceed $500. The aforegoing notwithstanding,
a municipal infraction citation issued for a violation hereof may be prepaid
by the violator in the prepayable amount of $200 within the time prescribed
by law for payment of a municipal infraction citation. Each day a violation
of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
Chapter 181
POOL HALLS AND BILLIARD ROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew for minors — See Ch. 79.
Entertainment clubs — See Ch. 92.
Loitering — See Ch. 142.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 173.
§ 181-1. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
Every room or place in the City of Hagerstown used or occupied for the
exercise or engaging in games of pool or billiards to which the public has
access and which charges are made for the privilege of engaging therein
shall be conducted at all times in an orderly and decent manner. It shall be
unlawful for the proprietor or person(s) in charge of the same to permit any
disorderly conduct by any person or persons on, in or about the premises
where such games are conducted.
§ 181-2. Hours of operation.
All places as aforesaid used or occupied for the purpose of engaging in the
games of pool or billiards to which the public shall have access and which
charges are made for the privilege of engaging therein shall be kept closed
as a place of business from the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. of each night
in the week and it shall be unlawful for any said place or places to be kept
open during the hours above mentioned.
§ 181-3. (Reserved)43
43.Editor's Note: Former § 181-3, Persons under the age of 17, was repealed 9-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-31. See now Ch. 79, Curfew for Minors.
§ 176-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-4
1:427
§ 181-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $500 and/or imprisonment for not more than 30 days in the
county jail.
Chapter 183
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 183, Nuisance: Unattended Donation Containers,
adopted 1-27-2015 by Ord. No. O-14-24, was repealed 8-25-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-19. For current regulations pertaining to donation
bins, see Ch. 83, Donation Bins.]
Chapter 184
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling and refuse collection — See Ch.
117.
§ 184-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Hagerstown
Portable Storage Container Ordinance."
§ 184-2. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared and ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City
of Hagerstown to be the public policy of the City to preserve, protect
and improve the aesthetic nature of the community and to prevent and
prohibit conditions existing or the use of any premises or building exteriors
or property which shall be detrimental or is detrimental to the property
of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the
value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are
located.
§ 184-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUISANCE — Any condition or use of a premises or property which is
detrimental to the property value of others or which causes or tends to
cause substantial diminution in the value of other properties in the
§ 181-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 184-3
1:428
neighborhood in which said premises or property is located. For the
purposes of this chapter, such a condition includes but is not limited to
maintenance of a portable storage container upon a premises in violation of
this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association or
legal entity of whatsoever kind or nature. "Person" shall include the
owner(s), tenant(s), lessee(s), and/or occupant(s) and/or person(s) in charge
of the real property upon which a nuisance condition exists. A "person" shall
also mean the owner(s), lessee(s), or any individual(s) having control over
the transport, delivery or placement of a portable storage container which
constitutes a nuisance condition pursuant to this chapter.
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER — Any self-supporting container,
usually metal or metal-framed, designed and used predominately for
storage. "Portable storage container" includes any type of prefabricated
container which is or resembles a modified tractor trailer, railroad car, or
intermodal shipping container. "Portable storage container" includes but is
not limited to any container known as a storage box, pod, "C" container or
sea container.
§ 184-4. Prohibitions.
§ 184-5. Exceptions by permit.
The aforegoing notwithstanding, portable storage containers may be
allowed on a limited, temporary basis in commercial or industrial zones
only, after the issuance of a permit from the Community and Economic
Development Department. Said permit(s) may be issued for a maximum
period of six months in any calendar year, so long as the proposed location
of the portable storage container(s) is in compliance with all zoning and
setback requirements for buildings and structures and is either to the
rear of the premises or property or is appropriately screened to satisfy
reasonable aesthetic concerns. In no case shall portable storage containers
be permitted to exceed a height of 12 feet or a width of eight feet, nor shall
the stacking of portable storage containers be permitted.
A. No person or owner leasing, occupying or having charge of any
premises or property shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon as
defined herein, nor shall any person keep or maintain any said premises
in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value of the other
properties in the neighborhood in which said premises are located.
B. No person shall maintain on any such premises or property a portable
storage container except as approved in accordance with this chapter.
No person shall transport, deliver or place a portable storage container
upon any premises or property except as permitted herein.
§ 184-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-6
1:429
§ 184-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates § 184-4 of this chapter, or who shall fail to abate
said violation after proper notice, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty
of a municipal infraction and subject to a fine of $500 for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day on which the
violative condition exists.
Chapter 185
NUISANCE ABATEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of property maintenance
standards — See Ch. 64, Art. III.
Property maintenance habitual
offender — See Ch. 65.
Recycling and refuse collection — See Ch.
117.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 184.
Sanitation — Ch. 200.
§ 185-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Hagerstown
Weeds, Trash and Debris Abatement Ordinance."
§ 185-2. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared and ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City
of Hagerstown to the public policy of the City to preserve, protect, and
improve the aesthetic nature of the community and to prevent and prohibit
conditions existing which shall be detrimental to the property of others
or which cause or tend to cause substantial diminution in the value of
properties in the City.
§ 185-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUISANCE — Any condition or use of premises or property, to include the
public right-of-way, which is detrimental to the property of others or which
causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of property
in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. For purposes of
this section, such a condition includes, but is not limited to, uncontrolled
weeds, grasses or other vegetation commonly referred to as "weeds" on
the premises or right-of-way, uncontrolled vines and overgrown shrubs and
trees on the premises or public right-of-way, the keeping, maintaining or
depositing on, or scattering over the premises or public right-of-way of
§ 184-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 185-3
1:430
trash, debris, rubbish, garbage, weed cutting, or other similar material, and
the scattering of leaves over the public right-of-way.[Amended 5-15-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-06]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association or
other legal entity of whatsoever kind and nature. The person shall include
the owner(s), tenant(s), lessee(s), occupant(s) and/or person(s) in charge of
or using the property.
§ 185-4. Prohibitions.
§ 185-5. Notice to abate; effects of noncompliance.
A. No person owning, occupying, using or having charge of any premises
or property within the City of Hagerstown shall maintain or keep any
nuisance thereon, as defined herein, nor shall any person allow any
weeds to grow unchecked on any such premises, or allow weed
cuttings, trash, debris, rubbish, garbage or other similar material to be
maintained, kept, deposited or scattered over the premises or property.
B. No person shall fail to remove from such premises or property any
weeds, weed cuttings, trash, debris, rubbish, garbage or other similar
material after having the premises posted to do so as provided in this
chapter.
A. In the event that any person allows a nuisance to exist on any premises
or property that consists of uncontrolled weeds, grasses, vegetation or
weed cuttings, said person shall have the following established time
periods from the posting of a notice from a City Code Official or other
duly authorized agent to abate said nuisance:
(1) First violation of any calendar year: seven days.
(2) Second violation of any calendar year: five days.
(3) Third or subsequent violation of any calendar year: one day.
B. In the event that any person allows a nuisance to exist on any premises
or property other than described in Subsection A, said person shall
have five days from the positing of a notice from a City Code Official or
other duly authorized agent at abate said nuisance.
C. In the event that said nuisance is not abated within the time required in
the notice, said person shall be in violation of this section.
D. In the event that said nuisance is not abated within the time required in
the notice, the City shall have the authority at any time thereafter,
within the discretion of City Code Officials or other duly authorized
representatives, to cause the violation to be abated. All costs for any
such abatement plus reasonable administrative fees shall be the
responsibility of the person notified under Subsection A. Said person
shall be provided prompt billing notice of all reasonable charges plus
reasonable administrative fees incurred in connection with the
§ 185-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:431
§ 185-6. Summary abatement.
Upon the determination by the City Administrator, City Engineer or duly
authorized representative thereof that a nuisance as defined by this chapter
exists and that said nuisance poses an immediate threat to the health
and safety of the public, the City Administrator, City Engineer or their
duly authorized representative may order that the violation be summarily
abated. Prior to any summary abatement, the premises shall be posted with
a notice that a violation exists and a demand that said violation be abated
within 24 hours. Failure of the owner, occupant or user of the premises or
property to abate the violation within 24 hours shall result in the violation
being abated by the City, and costs and fees being assessed against the
owner, occupant or user of the premises or property in accordance with
§ 185-5C.
§ 185-7. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the penalties described herein, if any person allows a
nuisance as defined in this chapter to exist, or shall fail to abate any said
nuisance after proper notice, such person shall, upon conviction thereof, be
guilty of municipal infraction and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed
$500 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which said nuisance is permitted to exist.
Chapter 187
NUISANCE AND ABANDONED PROPERTY ABATEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of property maintenance
standards — See Ch. 64, Art. III.
Habitual offender — See Ch. 65.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 184.
§ 187-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — A residential or commercial property that is
not occupied by either the property owner or a legal tenant and is:
abatement. Payment for said fees shall be due in full from said person
within 30 days of the date the billing notice was mailed. Failure to
remit payment in full may result in collection pursuant to Article III, Tax
Liens, § 223-11 of the City Code, or by other civil proceeding.
A. Unsuitable for habitation or reasonable use;
B. In a dilapidated, hazardous, unsafe or dangerous condition; or
§ 185-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 187-1
1:432
DEPARTMENT — The Planning and Code Administration Department, or its
successor.
MORTGAGEE — The holder of a security interest in a nuisance property
or an abandoned property which is recorded among the land records of
Washington County, Maryland.
NUISANCE PROPERTY — A property that is in an unsafe, hazardous or
unsanitary condition that:
OWNER — The record title holder of a nuisance property or an abandoned
property and, if the record title holder is deceased, the record title holder's
personal representative, executors and administrators.
§ 187-2. Powers and duties of Department.
The Department is empowered to implement this chapter and shall be
responsible for:
C. Open to entrance or trespass.
A. Interferes with the use or enjoyment of adjacent land;
B. Injures or interferes with adjacent land; or
Poses a significant danger to or adversely affects the health, safety or
welfare of the surrounding community.
C.
A. Determining where abandoned properties and nuisance properties
exist;
B. Ascertaining the ownership of abandoned properties and nuisance
properties;
C. With the assistance of the City Attorney, instituting court proceedings
against the owners in furtherance of the provisions of this chapter;
D. Subject to the hereinafter set forth parameters, negotiating settlement
agreements with the owners for the purpose of rehabilitating or
demolishing the abandoned properties and nuisance properties,
irrespective of whether such settlement agreements are entered into
while court proceedings are pending or on a prelitigation basis;
E. Proceeding upon such lawsuits that are not settled and seeking court
orders that:
(1) Declare the subject properties to be abandoned properties or
nuisance properties;
(2) Require the owners to repair and rehabilitate them;
(3) Authorize the City of Hagerstown to enter upon the subject
properties and abate the conditions or demolish them; and/or
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:433
§ 187-3. Settlement agreements.
§ 187-4. Notice to owner and mortgagee.
At least 30 days prior to the institution of court proceedings, the
Department shall mail notice to the owner and mortgagee, if applicable,
advising the owner and mortgagee that the property has been identified
as a nuisance property and/or an abandoned property and advising the
owner and mortgagee that court proceedings will be instituted unless the
owner enters into a settlement agreement with the City of Hagerstown or
otherwise repairs and rehabilitates the property or otherwise remediates
the conditions resulting in its designation as a nuisance property and/
or an abandoned property. The said notice shall be sent by first class
United States Mail, postage prepaid, and it shall be mailed to the owner
at the owner's address reflected in the records of the state Department
of Assessments and Taxation and it shall be mailed to the mortgagee at
the mortgagee's address as stated in the recorded instrument creating or
(4) Require the owners of such properties that have been demolished
to pay the costs of the demolition as well as reasonable attorney's
fees, court costs and litigation expenses incurred in seeking the
relief described herein through the entry of money judgments
against the owners.
A. The Department may negotiate settlement agreements with owners for
the purpose of requiring owners to:
(1) Repair and rehabilitate properties over a term of no more than six
months;
(2) Demolish the properties; and/or
(3) Transfer legal title of the same to the City.
B. Unless otherwise authorized by the Mayor and City Council, the
settlement agreements must provide:
(1) That the repair and rehabilitation costs are to be borne entirely by
the owners without contribution from the City of Hagerstown;
(2) Property which is not rehabilitated within six months of the date of
the settlement agreement shall be demolished; and
(3) With respect to properties to be transferred to the City of
Hagerstown, the only costs to be incurred by the City of
Hagerstown in connection with the said transfers shall be the deed
recording fee, a reasonable deed preparation fee and the proration
of real property taxes and utility fees, as applicable.
C. Settlement agreements entered into after commencement of litigation
shall be reduced to the form of a consent decree, to be filed for record
in the Circuit Court for Washington County, Maryland.
§ 187-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 187-4
1:434
perfecting the security interest or at such other address as is reasonably
expected to result in the mortgagee's receipt of the notice described herein.
In the event the owner cannot be identified, the notice may be provided
through publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Washington
County, Maryland, and by posting the property.
§ 187-5. Filing of complaint.
§ 187-6. Lien.
In the event the court enters an order granting the City of Hagerstown
authorization to abate or demolish a nuisance property or an abandoned
property, the costs of abatement or demolishing the property, any money
judgment entered on behalf of the City, and all costs incidental thereto
shall be chargeable against the owner and shall constitute a lien upon such
property, and may be collected pursuant to § 223-11 of the Code.
A. Named defendants. The court proceedings referenced in this chapter
shall be instituted by filing a complaint in the Circuit Court for
Washington County, Maryland. The defendants in such action shall
include the owner, the mortgagees, if any, and the plaintiff in any
proceeding that was timely filed under § 14-833 of the Tax-Property
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland (complaints to foreclose
right of redemption) and for which the time for securing a decree of
foreclosure has not yet expired.
B. The complaint shall be supported by an affidavit stating that:
(1) Notice required under § 187-4 has been provided to the owner and
mortgagee, if applicable;
(2) A settlement agreement has not been entered into; and
(3) The property has not been repaired or rehabilitated and the
circumstances resulting in its designation as a nuisance property
and/or an abandoned property have not been remediated.
C. The complaint shall include a description of the condition of the
property and the facts and circumstances that have resulted in its
designation as a nuisance property and/or abandoned property.
D. The complaint shall include a request for the following:
(1) A determination by the court that the property is a nuisance
property or an abandoned property; and
(2) Authorization to abate the conditions or demolish the property at
the defendant's cost.
§ 187-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-7
1:435
§ 187-7. Construal of provisions.
Because the purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the City of Hagerstown and its occupants, it
shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate that purpose.
§ 187-8. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter
be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the chapter in its entirety or of any part thereof
other than that portion declared to be invalid.
Chapter 189
(RESERVED)
Chapter 194
RAILROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 60.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
§ 194-1. Blocking of streets.
No railroad company, its officers, agents, servants or employees shall permit
or allow any engine, car or train to stand on any track or siding located
within the corporate limits of the City or upon the crossing of any street
of the City, to the interruption of travel or the blocking of any street, alley
or crossing, for a longer period than five minutes, unavoidable accidents
excepted.
§ 194-2. Speed limit of trains.
The speed of locomotive engines, cars or trains shall not exceed the rate of
12 miles per hour through the corporate limits of the City.
§ 194-3. Ringing of locomotive bell.
The bell of each locomotive shall be rung while passing through the City.
§ 194-4. Sounding of whistle or horn at crossings.
The enginemen shall be required to sound the whistle or horn of each
locomotive only when approaching a street or highway crossing within the
§ 187-7 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 194-4
1:436
corporate limits of the City when the opposite or adjoining track is occupied
by another train or draft of cars.
§ 194-5. Track repair permits.
It shall be unlawful for any railway company to lay, take up, repair or relay
any track within the corporate limits of the City where such track shall lie
upon or cross any street, alley or highway, unless a permit therefor shall
first be obtained from the Mayor; and after such permit is granted, every
track shall be laid, repaired or relaid in strict conformity with the grade
established by the City upon the streets, alleys or highways traversed or
crossed thereby.
§ 194-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
Chapter 197
RENTAL FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Adoption of property maintenance
standards — See Ch. 64, Art. III.
Property maintenance habitual
offender — See Ch. 65.
Excessive use of City services — See Ch. 95.
Recycling and refuse collection — See Ch.
117.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Sanitation — Ch. 200.
§ 194-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-6
1:437

ARTICLE I
Provisions Applicable Through June 30, 2019
§ 197-1. Purpose.
§ 197-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED AS A RESIDENTIAL OPERATOR or CERTIFICATION AS A
RESIDENTIAL OPERATOR — The certification of landlord or landlord's
designated agent who has satisfied the requirements of this chapter.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY — As defined in Chapter 95 of the City
Code.
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
CODE ADMINISTRATION — The Planning and Code Administration
Division of the Community and Economic Development Department of the
City.
CRIME-FREE HOUSING SEMINAR — A seminar sponsored by the City
to provide information to landlords and their designated agents regarding
the crime-free requirements of this chapter, the lease provisions required
hereunder, tenant application and criminal background review procedures,
and fair housing laws.
A. The Mayor and Council recognize that clean, well-built, crime-free
housing and neighborhoods are the foundation upon which healthy
communities are built. This chapter promotes and advances the City's
vision and commitment to housing and neighborhoods throughout the
City. The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Hagerstown, to establish
rights and obligations of the landlord and the tenant in the rental of
dwelling units, and to encourage the landlord and tenant to maintain
and improve the quality of rental housing within the community.
B. An additional purpose of this chapter is to assure compliance with all
laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to residential housing
facilities in the City of Hagerstown and to promote and assure safety,
health and habitability in the housing conditions in rental facilities in
the City, to prevent deterioration of rental facilities in the City, to
support property values, and to encourage responsible management
and use of rental facilities through licensing and inspection.
C. It is also the purpose of this chapter to protect, preserve, and promote
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Hagerstown by the
reduction, control and prevention of criminal and nuisance activities in
residential rental housing, through education and the implementation
and enforcement of reasonable lease provisions.
§ 197-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-2
1:439
DESIGNATED AGENT — An individual expressly designated by a landlord
who actively operates or manages the landlord's rental unit(s) for the
landlord.
EXEMPT TENANT — A tenant of a single-unit rental facility who is related
to an owner of said facility as grandparent, parent, sibling, child, or
grandchild, whether naturally, step or in-law.
HPD — The Hagerstown Police Department.
LANDLORD — The owner of a residential rental facility or rental unit(s).
OWNER — Any person, partnership, association, company, corporation or
other entity having a legal or equitable interest in or control of a rental
facility. "Owner" shall also mean any person who, alone, jointly or severally,
shall have the charge, care or control of any premises as executor,
administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. "Owner" shall
also mean any person having any interest in a partnership, association,
company, corporation or other entity which owns or has any ownership
interest or control of a premises. Any person, firm, partnership, association,
company, corporation or other entity whose name appears on the deed or
property tax bill for the premises shall be deemed to be the owner of the
premises.
OWNER-OCCUPIED — When any owner actually resides on a regular
permanent basis and has his/her sole primary residence in or at a premises
which includes a rental unit.
PREMISES — Any single parcel or lot of real property in the City, including
the land and all improvements or structures, upon which a rental facility is
located.
REASONABLE STEPS — In relation to § 197-9, Enforcement of crime-free
provision, "reasonable steps" are measures instituted and/or supported by
the owner to proactively and progressively respond to receipt of a notice of
HPD qualifying calls, as defined in Chapter 95, and/or a chronic nuisance
designation. Such measures may include but not be limited to written
notifications to tenant(s), use of no-trespass letters, legal remedies, and/or
additional training for the owner. Reasonable steps include communication
and cooperation with HPD.
RENTAL FACILITY —
RENTAL UNIT — Any single dwelling unit located in the City which is
rented, leased or let, whether for consideration or not, by the owner of said
A. A structure containing one or more rental units.
As used in this chapter, "rental facility" shall not include:
A rental facility where any portion of the premises is owneroccupied
and said premises contains no more than one rental unit.
(1)
A rental facility which is owned and operated by the Housing
Authority of the City of Hagerstown.
(2)
B.
§ 197-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 197-2
1:440
premises to one or more tenants for occupancy as a residence. As used
in this chapter, a "rental unit" shall include a rooming unit contained in
a rooming house facility. A "rental unit" shall not include a unit actually
being used for traditional hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast, nursing home or
hospital purposes.
ROOMING HOUSE FACILITY — A rental facility which consists of rental
units that are not equipped with individual bathroom and kitchen facilities
but share common bathroom and kitchen facilities within the rental facility.
ROOMING UNIT — A room intended for living and sleeping purposes within
a rooming house facility.
§ 197-3. Rental facility license required.
It shall be unlawful for the owner(s) of any rental facility to enter into a
residential lease with a tenant for a rental unit or permit occupancy of any
rental unit by another unless said rental unit is currently licensed by the
City and said license has not been denied, revoked or suspended.
§ 197-4. Application; license fee.
In addition to the inspection requirements of § 197-6 of this chapter, an
applicant for a rental facility license shall provide the following information
for each rental facility on the appropriate application form provided by Code
Administration:
A. The address of the rental facility.
B. The number of rental units contained in the rental facility.
C. The name, street address and telephone number and e-mail of all
owners of the rental facility.
D. If the owner of the rental facility is not an individual, the applicant shall
provide the owner's name, street address and telephone number and
the resident agent's name and address.
E. The name, street address and telephone number of a designated
contact person for the owner(s).
F. The name and address of the landlord or designated agent who is
certified as a residential operator.
G. Except for a single-unit rental facility occupied by an exempt tenant,
and except for a newly constructed rental facility during the four-year
period immediately following the issuance of the use and occupancy
permit, payment of a nonrefundable annual license fee of:
(1) Seventy-five dollars per rental unit; or
(2) One hundred dollars for each rooming house facility, plus $10 for
each rental unit in said rooming house facility.
§ 197-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-4
1:441
§ 197-5. Tenant turnover.
The applicant shall notify Code Administration when any rental unit of a
licensed rental facility becomes vacant if the applicant intends to offer
the unit for rent and the unit has not been inspected in the preceding 48
months. Code Administration shall notify the applicant of required interior
inspections of all rooming house facilities and rooming units.
§ 197-6. Inspections.
H. Annual written acknowledgment of the landlord or designated agent of
his, her, or its obligations and responsibilities pursuant to this Chapter
197 and Chapter 95 of the City Code. So long as not revoked as
provided herein, and subject to the requirements of § 197-7B hereof,
receipt of the acknowledgment shall establish the certified residential
operator status of the landlord or agent.
I. The applicant shall be required to update the information provided
pursuant to Subsections C, D, E and F of this section if said information
shall change after the issuance of a license.
A. In connection with the application requirements contained in § 197-4 of
this chapter, the rental facility shall be subject to an initial inspection of
the exterior and annually thereafter.
(1) The interior of each rental unit, except for a single-unit rental
facility to be occupied by an exempt tenant, shall be inspected at
tenant turnover prior to being occupied by a new tenant, but never
more frequently than 48 months from the most recent interior
inspection conducted pursuant to this section. Interior rental unit
inspections shall be conducted within three full business days of
receipt by Code Administration of the notice required in § 197-5.
Failure of Code Administration to offer the inspection within three
full business days or to conduct said inspection when scheduled
shall be deemed to be a waiver of the inspection requirement for
said rental unit. Code Administration may accept an interior
inspection performed by the Hagerstown Housing Authority as part
of the tenant-based Section 8 inspection program in lieu of the Cityrequired
interior inspection.
(2) The interior of every rooming unit shall be inspected once every 48
months. A minimum of seven calendar days prior to the scheduled
inspection, the owner is required to give written notice of the
scheduled inspection to all current occupants of the rooming house
facility, and Code Administration is required to post a notice of
scheduled inspections at the rooming house facility.
B. All inspections conducted hereunder shall be conducted by Code
Administration and shall be performed pursuant to the standards of the
property maintenance code then currently adopted by the City. The
applicant shall make the rental facility and/or each rental unit, as the
§ 197-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 197-6
1:442
§ 197-7. Training.
§ 197-8. Written leases; required provisions.
case may be, available for inspection by Code Administration on the
scheduled inspection date. Code Administration shall provide
reasonable advance notice of inspection to the applicant, and the
applicant shall have the right to be present at the inspection.
C. The inspection requirements of this § 197-6 shall not be applicable to a
newly constructed rental facility for the four-year period immediately
following the issuance of the use and occupancy permit for said rental
facility.
A. HPD shall sponsor a voluntary crime-free housing seminar for landlords
or their designated agents. The training seminar is approximately four
hours in length.
B. If an owner, landlord or designated agent has received notice of more
than one HPD qualifying call, or one HPD qualifying call which
constitutes a felony under Maryland law pursuant to Chapter 95 of the
Code, in addition to the application requirements contained in § 197-4
hereof, certified residential operator status and the issuance of the
rental facility license is subject to and contingent upon the successful
completion of the crime-free housing seminar. If HPD is unable to
facilitate the completion of this training requirement, HPD may issue a
conditional certification, subject to the landlord or designated agent
completing the training requirements within 90 days of the issuance
thereof. This training requirement may be satisfied by the completion of
a training seminar offered by a third party, so long as said seminar has
been reviewed and approved by HPD.
C. If a certified designated agent is no longer employed by an owner who
is subject to § 197-7B or otherwise loses certified status, a new
designated agent shall comply with the requirements hereof within 90
days of that event. If HPD is unable to facilitate the completion of this
training requirement within the required time, a conditional
certification may be issued, subject to the designated agent completing
the training requirements within 90 days of issuance of the conditional
certification.
A. Written leases required, Beginning on July 1, 2014, or immediately
upon the termination of a then-current term of tenancy for a particular
unit existing on said date, a landlord or designated agent who offers a
residential rental unit in a rental facility for rent in the City of
Hagerstown may not rent or permit the occupancy of any such unit
without using a written lease or a written lease extension.
B. Compliance with state law. All such written leases shall comply with the
requirements of Maryland Real Property § 8-208, as from time to time
amended.
§ 197-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-8
1:443
§ 197-9. Enforcement of crime-free provision.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for a licensee, landlord or designated
agent to knowingly permit a tenant(s), occupant(s), a tenant's guest(s), or
any person(s) under a tenant's control to violate the crime-free housing
provision of a lease after receiving notice that said location has been
deemed a chronic nuisance property pursuant to Chapter 95 of the City
Code, without taking reasonable steps to enforce said provision.
§ 197-10. Loss of certification as a residential operator.
C. Additional required provisions. In addition to the above-referenced
requirements, the landlord or designated agent shall include the
following in all written leases:
(1) A crime-free housing provision, the purpose of which is to make
criminal activity engaged in, facilitated or permitted by the tenant,
or a member of the household, a guest or other person(s) under
control of the tenant, a violation of the lease. The crime-free lease
provision will be in substantially the following form:
"Tenant, or a member of the household, a guest or other person(s)
under control of the tenant:
a. Shall not knowingly engage in criminal activity or commit
a disturbance as defined in Chapter 95 of the City Code
at, on or near the said premises. "Criminal activity" means
the commission of any of the acts defined in the Maryland
Criminal Law Code Annotated, as from time to time amended.
b. Shall not knowingly engage in any act intended to facilitate
criminal activity and shall not knowingly permit the premises
to be used for or to facilitate criminal activity, regardless of
whether the individual engaging in the activity is a tenant, or
a member of the household, a guest or other person(s) under
control of the tenant.
c. Violation of the above provisions shall be a material breach
of the lease and good cause for immediate termination of
tenancy. Proof of a violation of the lease hereunder shall not
require a criminal conviction but shall be by a preponderance
of the evidence."
(2) A notice that the rental unit may be subject to reasonable
inspections by the landlord; and
(3) An attachment of the text or a fair summary of the text of Chapters
95 and 197 of the City Code.
A. Certification as a residential operator shall remain valid so long as the
certified individual is not in violation of any of the provisions of:
(1) § 197-7, Training; or
§ 197-8 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 197-10
1:444
§ 197-11. Issuance of rental facility license; renewal.
Upon receipt of a completed application form and full payment of the
appropriate fee, Code Administration shall issue a rental facility license for
the subject rental facility within 30 days, unless such license is or has been
denied, suspended or revoked pursuant to § 197-12 hereof, or unless there
is no current valid certification of the landlord or designated agent as a
certified residential operator. Said license shall expire on its anniversary
date and shall be renewable annually, with application for said renewal
being made at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the then-current
license. A license renewal application shall be on the form provided by Code
Administration.
§ 197-12. Denial; revocation or suspension of rental facility license.
§ 197-13. Crime-free designation.
HPD shall offer a more extensive voluntary program whereby residential
rental properties may be afforded certain designations upon satisfaction
of established criteria by the owner, landlord or designated agent, in
recognition of crime prevention steps taken at the property.
(2) § 197-8, Written leases; required provisions; or
(3) § 197-9, Enforcement of crime-free provision.
B. Such a violation shall subject the operator to revocation of the
certification. Recertification shall be required after a revocation hereof.
C. Revocation of the residential operator certification shall be limited to
the chronic nuisance property in question. Revocation shall not apply to
other properties owned or managed by the residential operator which
are in good standing with Chapter 95 and this section of Chapter 197.
A. A rental facility license may be denied, revoked or suspended in whole
or in part at any time by Code Administration for the rental unit(s) in
which a property maintenance code violation exists, if, after receipt of a
notice of violation, the owner fails to eliminate violations of the property
maintenance code identified during any inspection within the time
ordered in the notice. Additionally, a rental facility license may be
denied, revoked or suspended at any time by Code Administration if the
landlord or designated agent is not a valid certified crime-free housing
residential operator. Denial, revocation or suspension of, a rental
facility license shall be in addition to, and not in substitution of the
penalties provided for in § 197-15 of this chapter.
B. Any property owner directly affected by an action of Code
Administration or HPD under the provisions of this chapter may appeal
such action to the administrative hearing officer appointed pursuant to
Chapter 95.
§ 197-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-14
1:445
§ 197-14. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
§ 197-15. Violations and penalties.
Any owner violating the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a
municipal infraction and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.
Any such violation shall be cited as a prepayable fine in the amount of
$500. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation. In addition, the City may avail itself of all civil remedies, including
a petition for injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 197-14 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 197-15
1:446
ARTICLE II
Provisions Applicable Beginning July 1, 2019
§ 197-16. Purpose.
§ 197-17. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED AS A RESIDENTIAL OPERATOR or CERTIFICATION AS A
RESIDENTIAL OPERATOR — The certification of landlord or landlord's
designated agent who has satisfied the requirements of this chapter.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY — As defined in Chapter 95 of the City
Code.
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
CODE ADMINISTRATION — The Code Administration Division of the
Planning and Code Administration Department.
CODE OFFICIAL — Any official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
CRIME-FREE HOUSING SEMINAR — A seminar sponsored by the City
to provide information to landlords and their designated agents regarding
the crime-free requirements of this chapter, the lease provisions required
hereunder, tenant application and criminal background review procedures,
and fair housing laws.
A. The Mayor and Council recognize that clean, well-built, crime-free
housing and neighborhoods are the foundation upon which healthy
communities are built. This chapter promotes and advances the City's
vision and commitment to housing and neighborhoods throughout the
City. The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Hagerstown, to establish
rights and obligations of the landlord and the tenant in the rental of
dwelling units, and to encourage the landlord and tenant to maintain
and improve the quality of rental housing within the community.
B. An additional purpose of this chapter is to assure compliance with all
laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to residential housing
facilities in the City of Hagerstown and to promote and assure safety,
health and habitability in the housing conditions in rental facilities in
the City, to prevent deterioration of rental facilities in the City, to
support property values, and to encourage responsible management
and use of rental facilities through licensing and inspection.
C. It is also the purpose of this chapter to protect, preserve, and promote
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Hagerstown by the
reduction, control and prevention of criminal and nuisance activities in
residential rental housing, through education and the implementation
and enforcement of reasonable lease provisions.
§ 197-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-17
1:447
DEPARTMENT — The Planning and Code Administration Department of the
City of Hagerstown.
DESIGNATED AGENT — An individual expressly designated by a landlord
who actively operates or manages the landlord's rental unit(s) for the
landlord.
DORMITORY — A structure specifically designed and used for long-term
stay by students of a college, university, or other academic or trade school
for the purpose of providing rooms for sleeping purposes.
EXEMPT TENANT — A tenant of a single-unit rental facility who is related
to an owner of said facility as grandparent, parent, sibling, child, or
grandchild, whether naturally, step or in-law.
HPD — The Hagerstown Police Department.
LANDLORD — The owner of a residential rental facility or rental unit(s).
OWNER — Any person, partnership, association, company, corporation or
other entity having a legal or equitable interest in or control of a rental
facility. "Owner" shall also mean any person who, alone, jointly or severally,
shall have the charge, care or control of any premises as executor,
administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. "Owner" shall
also mean any person having any interest in a partnership, association,
company, corporation or other entity which owns or has any ownership
interest or control of a premises. Any person, firm, partnership, association,
company, corporation or other entity whose name appears on the deed or
property tax bill for the premises shall be deemed to be the owner of the
premises.
OWNER-OCCUPIED — When any owner actually resides on a regular
permanent basis and has his/her sole primary residence in or at a premises
which includes a rental unit.
PREMISES — Any single parcel or lot of real property in the City, including
the land and all improvements or structures, upon which a rental facility is
located.
REASONABLE STEPS — In relation to § 197-24, Enforcement of crime-free
provision, "reasonable steps" are measures instituted and/or supported by
the owner to proactively and progressively respond to receipt of a notice of
HPD qualifying calls, as defined in Chapter 95, and/or a chronic nuisance
designation. Such measures may include but not be limited to written
notifications to tenant(s), use of no-trespass letters, legal remedies, and/or
additional training for the owner. Reasonable steps include communication
and cooperation with HPD.
RENTAL FACILITY —
A. A structure containing one or more rental units.
As used in this chapter, "rental facility" shall not include:
A rental facility where any portion of the premises is owneroccupied
and said premises contains no more than one rental unit.
(1)
B.
§ 197-17 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 197-17
1:448
RENTAL UNIT — Any single dwelling unit located in the City which is
rented, leased or let, whether for consideration or not, by the owner of said
premises to one or more tenants for occupancy as a residence. As used
in this chapter, a "rental unit" shall include a rooming unit contained in
a rooming house facility. A "rental unit" shall not include a unit actually
being used for traditional hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast, nursing home or
hospital purposes.
ROOMING HOUSE FACILITY — A rental facility which consists of rental
units that are not equipped with individual bathroom and kitchen facilities
but share common bathroom and kitchen facilities within the rental facility.
ROOMING UNIT — A room intended for living and sleeping purposes within
a rooming house facility.
SAFETY INSPECTION — A limited inspection of occupied units that will
focus on life safety standards defined in a safety inspection standards policy
adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
§ 197-18. Rental facility license required.
It shall be unlawful for the owner(s) of any rental facility to enter into a
residential lease with a tenant for a rental unit or permit occupancy of any
rental unit by another unless said rental unit is currently licensed by the
City and said license has not been denied, revoked or suspended.
§ 197-19. Application; license fee.
In addition to the inspection requirements of § 197-21 of this chapter, an
applicant for a rental facility license shall provide the following information
for each rental facility on the appropriate application form provided by Code
Administration:
A rental facility which is owned and operated by the Housing
Authority of the City of Hagerstown.
(2)
A. The address of the rental facility.
B. The number of rental units contained in the rental facility.
C. The name, street address and telephone number and e-mail of all
owners of the rental facility.
D. If the owner of the rental facility is not an individual, the applicant shall
provide the owner's name, street address and telephone number and
the resident agent's name and address.
E. The name, street address and telephone number of a designated
contact person for the owner(s).
F. The name and address of the landlord or designated agent who is
certified as a residential operator.
§ 197-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-19
1:449
§ 197-20. Tenant turnover.
The applicant shall notify Code Administration when any rental unit of a
licensed rental facility becomes vacant if the applicant intends to offer
G. Except for a single-unit rental facility occupied by an exempt tenant,
except for a newly constructed rental facility and/or except for an
existing rental facility renovated under permit to the Partners in
Economic Progress (PEP) standards during the four-year period
immediately following the issuance of the use and occupancy permit,
payment of a nonrefundable annual license fee of:
(1) Seventy-five dollars per rental unit; or
(2) One hundred dollars for each rooming house facility, or dormitory,
plus $10 for each rental unit in said rooming house facility or
dormitory.
H. Annual written acknowledgment of the landlord or designated agent of
his, her, or its obligations and responsibilities pursuant to this Chapter
197 and Chapter 95 of the City Code. So long as not revoked as
provided herein, and subject to the requirements of § 197-7B hereof,
receipt of the acknowledgment shall establish the certified residential
operator status of the landlord or agent.
I. Transfer of license.
(1) If an applicant for or the holder of a license transfers ownership or
no longer is an agent for the licensed rental facility, the applicant or
licensee must notify Code Administration within 60 days of the
change. Code Administration may reject an application or suspend
or revoke a license if the applicant or licensee does not notify Code
Administration as required by this subsection.
(2) Any person or entity who takes over the operation of a licensed
rental facility may transfer the license for the unexpired portion of
the term for which it was issued by applying to Code
Administration. Applications made within 30 days after taking over
operation are not subject to a transfer fee. Applications made 30 to
60 days after transfer shall require a transfer fee of $25 per license.
Transfer notifications associated with the annual application
renewal between May 1 and June 30 are not subject to a transfer
fee. Nothing in this section affects the validity of any sale, transfer,
or disposition in any interest in real estate.
(3) Failure to notify Code Administration of a transfer within 60 days
requires a new rental application and license fee.
J. Payment for said license shall be due in full from the owner within 90
days from the application mailing. Failure to remit payment in full may
result in collection pursuant to Article III, Tax Liens, § 223-11 of the
City Code, or by other civil proceeding.
§ 197-19 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 197-20
1:450
the unit for rent and the unit has not been inspected in the preceding 48
months. Code Administration shall notify the applicant of required interior
inspections of all rooming house facilities and rooming units.
§ 197-21. Inspections.
A. In connection with the application requirements contained in § 197-4 of
this chapter, the rental facility shall be subject to an initial inspection of
the exterior and annually thereafter.
(1) The interior of each rental unit, except for a single-unit rental
facility to be occupied by an exempt tenant, shall be inspected at
tenant turnover prior to being occupied by a new tenant, but never
more frequently than 48 months from the most recent interior
inspection conducted pursuant to this section. Interior rental unit
inspections shall be conducted within three full business days of
receipt by Code Administration of the notice required in § 197-5.
Failure of Code Administration to offer the inspection within three
full business days or to conduct said inspection when scheduled
shall be deemed to be a waiver of the inspection requirement for
said rental unit. Code Administration may accept an initial interior
inspection performed by the Hagerstown Housing Authority as part
of the tenant-based Section 8 inspection program in lieu of the Cityrequired
interior inspection.
(2) The interior of every rooming unit and dormitory shall be inspected
once every 48 months. A minimum of seven calendar days prior to
the scheduled inspection, the owner is required to give written
notice of the scheduled inspection to all current occupants of the
rooming house facility, and Code Administration is required to post
a notice of scheduled inspections at the rooming house facility.
(3) For rental units which have never been inspected, are currently not
occupied by an exempt tenant since adoption of the program and
have had a tenant turnover, an interior inspection shall be required
upon scheduling by the Department. For occupied units, the
inspection shall be pursuant to the safety inspection standards then
currently adopted by the Mayor and City Council. For unoccupied
units, inspections shall be performed pursuant to the standards of
the property maintenance code then currently adopted by the City.
Code Administration may accept an annual interior inspection
performed by the Hagerstown Housing Authority as part of the
tenant-based Section 8 inspection program in lieu of the Cityrequired
interior inspection.
(4) Newly licensed rental facilities shall have all units inspected within
30 days of application.
B. All inspections conducted hereunder shall be conducted by Code
Administration and shall be performed pursuant to the standards of the
property maintenance code then currently adopted by the City. The
§ 197-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-21
1:451
§ 197-22. Training.
§ 197-23. Written leases; required provisions.
applicant shall make the rental facility and/or each rental unit, as
the case may be, available for inspection by Code Administration on
the scheduled inspection date. Code Administration shall provide
reasonable advance notice of inspection to the applicant, and the
applicant shall have the right to be present at the inspection.
C. The inspection requirements of this § 197-21 shall not be applicable to a
newly constructed rental facility and/or an existing rental facility
renovated under permit to the Partners in Economic Progress (PEP)
standards for the four-year period immediately following the issuance
of the use and occupancy permit for said rental facility.
A. HPD shall sponsor a voluntary crime-free housing seminar for landlords
or their designated agents. The training seminar is approximately four
hours in length.
B. If an owner, landlord or designated agent has received notice of more
than one HPD qualifying call, or one HPD qualifying call which
constitutes a felony under Maryland law pursuant to Chapter 95 of the
Code, in addition to the application requirements contained in § 197-19
hereof, certified residential operator status and the issuance of the
rental facility license is subject to and contingent upon the successful
completion of the crime-free housing seminar. If HPD is unable to
facilitate the completion of this training requirement, HPD may issue a
conditional certification, subject to the landlord or designated agent
completing the training requirements within 90 days of the issuance
thereof. This training requirement may be satisfied by the completion of
a training seminar offered by a third party, so long as said seminar has
been reviewed and approved by HPD.
C. If a certified designated agent is no longer employed by an owner who
is subject to § 197-22B or otherwise loses certified status, a new
designated agent shall comply with the requirements hereof within 90
days of that event. If HPD is unable to facilitate the completion of this
training requirement within the required time, a conditional
certification may be issued, subject to the designated agent completing
the training requirements within 90 days of issuance of the conditional
certification.
A. Written leases required. Beginning on July 1, 2014, or immediately
upon the termination of a then-current term of tenancy for a particular
unit existing on said date, a landlord or designated agent who offers a
residential rental unit in a rental facility for rent in the City of
Hagerstown may not rent or permit the occupancy of any such unit
without using a written lease or a written lease extension.
§ 197-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 197-23
1:452
§ 197-24. Enforcement of crime-free provision.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for a licensee, landlord or designated
agent to knowingly permit a tenant(s), occupant(s), a tenant's guest(s), or
any person(s) under a tenant's control to violate the crime-free housing
provision of a lease after receiving notice that said location has been
deemed a chronic nuisance property pursuant to Chapter 95 of the City
Code, without taking reasonable steps to enforce said provision.
§ 197-25. Loss of certification as a residential operator.
B. Compliance with state law. All such written leases shall comply with the
requirements of Maryland Real Property § 8-208, as from time to time
amended.
C. Additional required provisions. In addition to the above-referenced
requirements, the landlord or designated agent shall include the
following in all written leases:
(1) A crime-free housing provision, the purpose of which is to make
criminal activity engaged in, facilitated or permitted by the tenant,
or a member of the household, a guest or other person(s) under
control of the tenant, a violation of the lease. The crime-free lease
provision will be in substantially the following form:
"Tenant, or a member of the household, a guest or other person(s)
under control of the tenant:
a. Shall not knowingly engage in criminal activity or commit
a disturbance as defined in Chapter 95 of the City Code
at, on or near the said premises. "Criminal activity" means
the commission of any of the acts defined in the Maryland
Criminal Law Code Annotated, as form time to time amended.
b. Shall not knowingly engage in any act intended to facilitate
criminal activity and shall not knowingly permit the premises
to be used for or to facilitate criminal activity, regardless of
whether the individual engaging in the activity is a tenant, or
a member of the household, a guest or other person(s) under
control of the tenant.
c. Violation of the above provisions shall be a material breach
of the lease and good cause for immediate termination of
tenancy. Proof of a violation of the lease hereunder shall not
require a criminal conviction but shall be by a preponderance
of the evidence."
(2) A notice that the rental unit may be subject to reasonable
inspections by the landlord; and
(3) An attachment of the text or a fair summary of the text of Chapters
95 and 197 of the City Code.
§ 197-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-25
1:453
§ 197-26. Issuance of rental facility license; renewal.
Upon receipt of a completed application form and full payment of the
appropriate fee, Code Administration shall issue a rental facility license
for the subject rental facility within 30 days, unless such license is or
has been denied or revoked pursuant to § 197-27 hereof, or unless there
is no current valid certification of the landlord or designated agent as a
certified residential operator. Said license shall expire on its anniversary
date and shall be renewable annually, with application for said renewal
being made at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the then-current
license. A license renewal application shall be on the form provided by Code
Administration.
§ 197-27. Denial; revocation of rental facility license.
A. Certification as a residential operator shall remain valid so long as the
certified individual is not in violation of any of the provisions of:
(1) § 197-22, Training; or
(2) § 197-23, Written leases; required provisions; or
(3) § 197-24, Enforcement of crime-free provision.
B. Such a violation shall subject the operator to revocation of the
certification. Recertification shall be required after a revocation hereof.
C. Revocation of the residential operator certification shall be limited to
the chronic nuisance property in question. Revocation shall not apply to
other properties owned or managed by the residential operator which
are in good standing with Chapter 95 and this section of Chapter 197.
A. A rental facility license may be denied or revoked in whole or in part at
any time by Code Administration for the rental unit(s) in which points
accumulated pursuant to Table § 197-27B. Additionally, a rental facility
license may be denied or revoked at any time by Code Administration if
the landlord or designated agent is not a valid certified crime-free
housing residential operator. Denial or revocation of a rental facility
license shall be in addition to, and not in substitution of, the penalties
provided for in § 197-30 of this chapter.
B. Points calculated per license during a license year.
§ 197-25 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 197-27
1:454
Table § 197-27B
1 to 3 units 4+ units
Violations
(per unit)
during
license year
(Chapter 197
inspections)
Safety items 1 to 3 0 0
4 to 6 10 10
7 to 9 20 20
10+ 30 30
Unreported tenant
turnovers for required
inspection (calculated over
1 year per structure)
1 0
2 10
3+ 20
Unreported tenant
turnovers for required
inspection (calculated over
1 year per structure)
1 to 2 0
3 to 4 10
5+ 20
Municipal infraction
citations (issued during
license year for structure)
1 to 2 5 5
3+ 10 10
Excessive use (fee issued)
(issued during license year
for structure)
1 5 5
2 10 10
3+ 20 20
Property taxes unpaid for
more than 180 days
10 10
Rental license registration
fees liened
10 10
§ 197-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-27
1:455
§ 197-28. Crime-free designation.
HPD shall offer a more extensive voluntary program whereby residential
rental properties may be afforded certain designations upon satisfaction
of established criteria by the owner, landlord or designated agent, in
recognition of crime prevention steps taken at the property.
§ 197-29. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
§ 197-30. Violations and penalties.
Point Totals 1 to 3 units 4+ units
Property in good
standing
0 to 20 0 to 30
Warning letter on
potential revocation of
license
21 to 44 31 to 64
License is revoked 45+ 65+
C. Any property owner directly affected by an action of the Department or
HPD under the provisions of this chapter may appeal such action to the
administrative hearing officer appointed pursuant to Chapter 95.
A. Any owner violating the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a
municipal infraction and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000. Any such violation shall be cited as a prepayable fine in the
amount of $500. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation. In addition, the City may avail itself of
all civil remedies, including a petition for injunctive relief from a court
of competent jurisdiction.
B. If the Department revokes a rental license under the provisions of
§ 197-27, the subject rental facility shall be vacated within 60 days of
the revocation and remain vacant until such time the violations have
been abated and the rental license has been reinstated. City actions to
ensure vacancy may include disconnection of City utilities to the
affected rental facility.
§ 197-27 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 197-30
1:456
Chapter 200
SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 87.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 110.
Recycling and refuse collection — See Ch.
117.
Junkyards — See Ch. 135.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 147.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 184.
Water — See Ch. 238.
Water pollution control — See Ch. 240.
§ 200-1. Impure or contaminated drinking water.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of any premises within
the corporate or sanitary limits of the City upon which there is located a
well, spring or cistern or other source of drinking water to allow the same
to be used by any person when such drinking water is known or reputed to
be impure, contaminated or in any other manner unfit for use as drinking
water until, after due investigation thereof by the Mayor and Council, the
water shall have been determined to be pure and fit for use.
§ 200-2. License for sale of drinking water.
A. Before any person shall engage in the business of selling or otherwise
disposing of drinking water within the sanitary or corporate limits of
the City, in bottles, jugs, tin cans or other receptacles, he shall apply to
the Mayor and Council for a license to do so.
B. The application for a license provided for in Subsection A above shall
contain the location of the spring or other source from which such
water is to be taken, sold or disposed of and the location of the premises
where such business is to be conducted.
C. The Mayor and Council shall cause an examination to be made of the
water to be sold or disposed of, and if, after such examination, it shall
be determined that such water is free from contamination and the
premises where the bottling is to be done is in a sanitary condition, with
the proper facilities for cleansing and sterilizing all bottles, jugs or
other receptacles to be filled, the City Clerk shall grant a license to the
person making such application upon the payment of a license fee of $2
to the Mayor and Council.
D. Such license shall be issued annually by the City Clerk.
E. The Mayor and Council may revoke such license if, at any time after
examination, the water to be sold by any licensee is found to be polluted
§ 197-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-2
1:457
§ 200-3. Prohibited deposits.
No person shall cast, throw or deposit any carcass or any part thereof,
any garbage, excrement or filth from vaults, privies, cesspools, sinks or any
other source into any enclosed lot, house, building or other place within the
corporate or sanitary limits of the City nor permit or aid in doing the same.
§ 200-4. Drainage of excrement and other offensive matter.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or premises in the
corporate or sanitary limits of the City to suffer any excrement or other
offensive matter to drain or flow from any stable, hogpen or manure pile or
from any other source or from any manufacturing establishment into any
street or watercourse or into any adjacent lot.
§ 200-5. Fertilizers.
It shall be unlawful for any warehouse keeper, merchant, manufacturer
or any other person to store, manufacture, deposit, place or keep within
the corporate limits of the City any guano, phosphate or other fertilizing
composition without obtaining permission of the Mayor and Council.
§ 200-6. Noise and air pollution from businesses and
manufacturing plants.44
No person shall, in the course of any business or in the manufacture of any
article for sale or in any other way, create or produce any unwholesome or
offensive odor or any unusual dust, smoke or noises so as to be a nuisance to
the neighborhood where such business is conducted or such manufacturing
plant is situated.
§ 200-7. Outbuildings, stables and slaughterhouses.
Any owner or occupant of any lot or premises adjacent to any of the streets,
lanes or alleys of the City and within the corporate or sanitary limits of the
City and having thereon any hogpen, pigsty, stable or other outbuilding for
the custody of domestic animals or any privy, sink, slaughterhouse or other
outbuilding, who shall keep or suffer the same or any part thereof or any
lot or yard or manure heap attached or adjacent thereto to become foul or
filthy so that the odor therefrom may become offensive to persons in the
neighborhood or to persons passing along any of the public streets or alleys
of the City, shall, upon information made before the trial magistrate of the
City, be proceeded against for keeping and maintaining a nuisance.
or the premises where the business of bottling or filling of jugs, tin
cans or other receptacles is carried on is found to be in an unsanitary
condition.
44.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 140, Land Management, § 140-40F, Industrial performance
standards.
§ 200-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 200-8
1:458
§ 200-8. Removal of night soil; license required.
§ 200-9. Removal of manure or other offensive material.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any cart or wagon employed
in removing any dirt or offensive manure or filth of any description along or
over any of the streets of the City to suffer or permit any such manure or
filth of any description to be scattered upon or fall upon any of the streets
of the City.
§ 200-10. Means of disposal.
No person shall throw out of any window, door or other outlet of any hotel,
public building or dwelling house into any public street or adjoining lot any
chamber lye, water, slush, dirt or other loose material.
§ 200-11. Placement of refuse substances in streets and
watercourses.
A. No person shall drive, use or employ any cart, wagon or other vehicle
for removing night soil without procuring therefor a license for each
cart, wagon or vehicle so employed and receiving a certificate of such
license from the City Clerk.
B. Every person desirous of engaging in the removal of night soil shall
enter into an agreement, in writing, with the City to furnish, at his own
expense, places on which night soil may be deposited outside of the
sanitary limits of the City and not less than 150 yards from any and all
public roads or turnpikes leading to or from the City.
C. Any person engaged in the removal of night soil by odorless process
who shall refuse an application of any citizen to remove any quantity of
night soil shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. No person shall cast or place any ashes, truck, dirt, store sweepings or
any refuse substance of any trade, occupation or business or of any sort
or kind whatsoever into or upon any of the streets, public alleys or
watercourses of the City.
B. In case of any ashes, dirt, store sweepings or refuse substance of any
trade, occupation or business or of any kind whatsoever shall be found
in or upon any street or watercourse of the City by any police or other
officer of the City, he shall report the same to the trial magistrate, who
shall issue forthwith a notice to the owner or occupant of the lot or
premises where such ashes, rubbish, store sweepings or refuse
substance may be found, requiring him to remove the same within such
time as may be prescribed in such notice, not exceeding three days, and
in case such owner or occupant shall fail to remove the same within the
time prescribed in such notice, the trial magistrate, upon being notified
of such failure to remove, is hereby authorized and directed to issue an
order to any police officer of the City to cause the same to be removed
§ 200-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-11
1:459
§ 200-12. Keeping of offensive matter on premises.
If any owner or occupant of any lot or premises adjacent to any of the
streets of the City and within the corporate or sanitary limits of the City
shall, whether in the prosecution of any trade or business or otherwise,
keep or use or shall suffer or permit to remain on his lot or premises any foul
or filthy matter or any sink or stagnant water or any other thing whatsoever
so that the same may become offensive to persons in the neighborhood or
to persons passing along any of the public streets or alleys of the City or
which may produce annoyance and discomfort or injury to persons in the
neighborhood or to persons passing along any of the public streets of the
City, such owner or occupant of any such lot or premises may be proceeded
against for keeping and maintaining a nuisance.
§ 200-13. Abatement of nuisances.
Upon information being made before the trial magistrate of the City of
any such nuisances as described in this chapter, the trial magistrate shall
forthwith issue a summons, directed against either the owner or occupant
of any such lot or premises upon which the nuisance so complained of
may be, to answer a charge of keeping or maintaining a nuisance. Upon
the return of such summons, the trial magistrate shall proceed to inquire
whether the matter or thing complained of is a nuisance within the meaning
of § 200-12. If the trial magistrate shall determine that the matter or thing
complained of is a nuisance within the meaning of § 200-12, he shall issue
a notice, to be served by a police officer and directed against either the
owner or occupant of the lot or premises upon which the matter or thing
found to be a nuisance may be, to abate or remove the same within such
time as the trial magistrate may determine, not to exceed five days. The
trial magistrate shall enter upon his docket his decision in the matter,
including the time allowed for the abatement or removal of the nuisance,
and impose all the costs of the proceeding upon the person against whom
the summons shall have been served. In case such owner or occupant
against whom such notice shall have been served shall not abate or remove
such nuisance within the time named in such notice, and upon affidavit of
that fact being made before the trial magistrate, he shall forthwith issue a
summons directed against such person upon whom such notice shall have
been served to answer a charge of nonperformance of the order. Upon
the return of such summons, the trial magistrate shall proceed to inquire
whether or not such nuisance has been removed or abated, and if the trial
magistrate shall find that the nuisance has not been removed or abated
within the time fixed in the notice, he shall punish the person as provided
in § 200-17 of this chapter. The trial magistrate shall, in addition to the fine,
issue an order to one of the police officers of the City to have the nuisance
removed or abated and collect the costs thereof in the name of the Mayor
and Council from such person.
and collect the costs thereof as a common debt in the name of the
Mayor and Council from either the owner or occupant of the premises
upon whom the notice to remove may have been served.
§ 200-11 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 200-14
1:460
§ 200-14. Privies, cesspools and septic tanks; license.
§ 200-15. Revocation of licenses.
For any refusal or neglect to obey the orders of the Mayor, as provided in
this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Mayor to revoke the license of the
person so refusing or neglecting to obey.
§ 200-16. Authority of Mayor regarding licensing for emptying
privies, vaults and cesspools.
Every person who may obtain a license to empty or remove the contents
of privies, vaults, sinks or cesspools shall be considered as subject to the
orders of the Mayor in all matters relating thereto.
A. No part of the contents of any privy, privy box, vault, sink, septic tank or
cesspool within the City shall be removed therefrom, nor shall the same
be transported through any of the streets or other public places of the
City, except that the same shall be removed and transported by means
of some airtight apparatus, pneumatic or other process so as to prevent
the contents of such privy, privy box, vault, sink, septic tank or cesspool
from being agitated or exposed in the open air during the process of
removal and transportation.45
B. No person shall remove the contents of any privy, privy box, well, vault,
septic tank, cesspool or sink within the limits of the City without having
first obtained a license from the City Clerk.
C. Every person desirous of being licensed to empty or remove the
contents of privies, privy boxes, wells, sinks, vaults, septic tanks and
cesspools shall make application, in writing, to the Mayor, who, on
being satisfied with the character of the applicant and the efficiency of
the apparatus to be used in the removal and transportation of night soil
in an odorless manner and that he is the owner of such odorless
apparatus represented in his application and that he is not in collusion
or combination with others to defraud the City, may order the Clerk to
grant such applicant a license for one year and renew the same from
time to time.
D. For such license so granted, the licensee shall pay annually therefor to
the City Clerk the sum of $2.50 for each and every tank, wagon and
truck.
E. Every person so licensed shall give bond to the Mayor and Council, with
security to be approved by the Mayor and Council, in the penal sum of
$500, conditioned for the faithful performance of all duties imposed
upon him by the provisions of this chapter.
45.Editor's Note: Original § 46-16B, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted
7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-39.
§ 200-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-17
1:461
§ 200-17. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
Chapter 204
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and special sales — See Ch. 52.
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
§ 204-1. Short title.
This chapter shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Sign Ordinance."
§ 204-2. Purpose.
§ 204-3. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter,
have the meanings indicated in this section:
BILLBOARD — A freestanding outdoor advertising structure.
FACE — The surface of any sign upon, against, or through which the
message is displayed or illustrated on said sign.
FREESTANDING — Any structure not permanently affixed or attached to a
building or other permanent improvement.
LOT — Any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision that is
recorded in the land records of Washington County, Maryland.
A. There is a significant relationship between the manner in which signs
are displayed and the public safety and the value and economic stability
of enjoining property. The reasonable display of signs is necessary as a
public service and necessary in order to conduct competitive commerce
and industry.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for signs
within the City of Hagerstown to further traffic safety, to encourage the
effective use of signs as a means of communication, to maintain and
enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract
sources of economic development and growth, to minimize the possible
adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property and to
enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this chapter.
§ 200-17 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 204-3
1:462
OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN — Any sign, billboard or other
structure which is not located on the premises that it identifies or
advertises. Any sign, billboard or other structure which displays multiple
messages and includes at least one message which identifies or advertises
anything off of the premises upon which the said sign is located.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE — Any building or structure which
contains a sign, poster, panel, billboard, painted or electronic bulletin, or
any other structure, device or surface display which advertises a business,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment or event, or displays any
other message conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises
where the outdoor advertising structure is located.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground.
SIGN — Any structure, display or device that is arranged, intended,
designed or used as an advertisement, announcement, identifier,
description, or direction to attract the public's attention.
§ 204-4. Residential restriction.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect and thereafter maintain within
any residential zoning district of the City any billboard or sign, with the
following exceptions:
A. Real estate signs. Real estate signs erected temporarily for the purpose
of advertising the sale or rental of only the premises or a portion of the
premises upon which they are located provided that if any such sign is
erected, it shall be removed as soon as it has served its purpose, that is,
immediately upon the sale or the rental of such premises or portion
thereof, and provided, further, that no such sign shall exceed eight
square feet in area. This exception is not intended to permit the
erection of signs advertising the rental of rooms for temporary lodging
to tourists or other transients, the erection and maintenance of which
signs are hereby expressly prohibited.
B. Professional nameplates. Professional nameplates not exceeding one
square foot in area.
C. Signs and bulletin boards. A sign or bulletin board not exceeding 12
square feet in area, so placed as not to interfere with or obstruct the
view across any intersecting street and erected upon the premises of a
church or charitable institution for the purpose of displaying the name
and activities hereof or the service to be held therein.
D. Governmental signs. Signs of any size or shape erected by or under the
direction of any governmental body or agency in any location for
purpose of promotion, identification, direction, safety or convenience of
the public.
E. Subdivision identification. Permanent subdivision identification signs
which do not exceed 20 square feet in surface area per face, limited to
§ 204-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-4
1:463
§ 204-5. Off-premises advertising sign restrictions.
two faces, not exceeding one per main entrance and set back 15 feet
from the curbline.
F. Development signs. Temporary development signs advertising the sale
or rental or structures which have a maximum surface area of 60
square feet, limited to two faces, maximum height of 15 feet, indirectly
illuminated, and set back 25 feet from the street line.
G. Construction signs. Temporary construction signs limited to one each
for contractors, architects, financing, etc., nonilluminated and set back
15 feet from the street line, and permitted only while construction is in
progress or for such time as may be required by federal requirements
for financing for extending advertising.
H. Historic signs. Memorial tablets or signs and historical markers, flags
and insignias of bona fide civic, charitable, fraternal and welfare or
religious organizations and national flags and flags of political
subdivisions of the United States.
I. Political signs. One or more political campaign signs which, in the
aggregate, do not exceed a total of 32 square feet in area, on any
privately owned lot. Each such sign shall be erected and maintained in
compliance with all applicable election laws.
J. Nonbusiness signs. Nonbusiness signs which are not outdoor
advertising structures as defined by § 204-3 of this chapter may be
erected for a period not to exceed 90 days in any calendar year by or for
the owner or lawful occupant of any lot or structure which said signs, in
aggregate, do not exceed a total of six square feet in area,
nonilluminated. Such signs must be set back at least 10 feet from the
curbline on any lot or fixed to an occupied dwelling, structure or
building, except where such dwelling, structure or building is located
less than 10 feet from the curb and in that event the setback is the
lesser of 10 feet or the distance between the dwelling structure or
building and the curbline.
A. No off-premises advertising sign which was not in existence on the
effective date of this chapter shall be permitted within the City limits of
the City of Hagerstown, unless said sign is in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Any off-premises advertising sign existing
outside of the City limits immediately prior to annexation, which is
subsequently annexed into the City limits, shall be considered to have
existed on the effective date of this chapter.
B. No increase in size or height, or relocation of an existing off-premises
advertising sign shall be permitted after the effective date of this
chapter, unless in compliance with this chapter.
C. No off-premises advertising sign in existence on the effective date of
this chapter, that is illegal or otherwise violative of any law, ordinance
§ 204-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 204-5
1:464
or regulation, shall be deemed lawful merely as a result of its
compliance with this chapter. This chapter is in addition to, and does
not supersede, any existing law, ordinance or regulation that may be
applicable.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other
entity to own, construct or maintain an off-premises advertising sign
within the City limits of the City of Hagerstown without first obtaining a
permit for such off-premises advertising sign and remitting the required
permit fee. A permit is required for each off-premises advertising sign,
regardless of size or type. No permit shall be issued unless the offpremises
advertising sign is in compliance with the standards,
restrictions and requirements of this chapter. This permit requirement
shall not be applicable to any off-premises advertising sign in existence
on the effective date of this chapter, except upon replacement thereof.
E. All permit applications for off-premises advertising signs shall be filed
with the building inspector and shall state the following:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the off-premises advertising
sign and the name and address of the owner of the property on
which the said sign is or will be located.
(2) A statement that the off-premises advertising sign is or will be
constructed in accordance with all applicable state and City
regulations, including the building and electrical codes in effect at
the time of construction.
(3) The approximate location of the off-premises advertising sign and
the approximate location of buildings on the property where the
said sign is or will be located.
(4) The size, height, setback, type and number of faces on each offpremises
advertising sign.
(5) The date of the construction of the off-premises advertising sign
and the company number, state permit number and building permit
number, if any.
F. Any off-premises advertising sign which has not been issued a permit
from the building inspector and the requisite permit fee paid shall be
removed within 60 days of written notification by the building inspector
to the owner of said sign or landowner upon which the off-premises
advertising sign is located.
G. The permit issued for each off-premises advertising sign will be
displayed on the molding, trim or base on the lower right corner of each
off-premises advertising sign in a manner to be readable from the
ground. Each permit shall contain the name of the owner of the said
sign, the current address and phone number of the owner and the
voltage of any electrical apparatus used.
§ 204-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-5
1:465
§ 204-6. Standards for off-premises signs.
The following standards shall apply to all off-premises advertising signs
which are constructed after the effective date of this chapter and to existing
off-premises advertising signs which are replaced entirely or are
reconstructed, repaired or modified such that the cost of such
reconstruction, repair or modification exceeds 50% of the current
replacement cost of said sign.
H. The permit fee for each off-premises advertising sign shall be
established and specified by the Mayor and City Council from time to
time.
A. Not more than one off-premises advertising sign shall be allowed per lot
and no new off-premises advertising sign shall be located within 500
feet of any existing off-premises advertising sign, regardless of the
number of lots in between. This restriction shall not be applicable to
any off-premises advertising sign in existence on the effective date of
this chapter when said sign is being replaced, reconstructed, repaired
or modified.
B. All off-premises advertising signs shall be set back not less than 25 feet
from the right-of-way line of all streets. This setback line restriction
shall not be applicable to any off-premises advertising sign in existence
on the effective date of this chapter when said sign is being replaced,
reconstructed, repaired or modified.
C. No off-premises advertising signs shall be located within 100 feet of a
City residential zoning district, and if illuminated, within 500 feet of a
City residential zoning district. This restriction shall not be applicable
to any off-premises advertising sign in existence on the effective date of
this chapter when said sign is being replaced, reconstructed, repaired
or modified.
D. No off-premises advertising sign face shall exceed a total of 300 square
feet in surface area including trim, nor shall it contain more than one
message per face, except for complementary or joint messages.
E. No more than two faces are permitted per off-premises advertising sign.
All off-premises advertising signs with two faces shall have the two
faces placed back to back.
F. Each off-premises advertising sign shall be framed with trim work,
which shall be no smaller than six inches and no larger than one foot in
width.
G. No off-premises advertising sign face shall exceed a vertical dimension
of 14 feet nor a total horizontal dimension of 25 feet.
H. No off-premises advertising sign shall exceed 30 feet in height.
§ 204-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 204-7
1:466
§ 204-7. Landscaping requirements.
The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all freestanding offpremises
advertising signs which are constructed after the effective date
of this chapter and to existing freestanding off-premises advertising signs
which are replaced entirely or are reconstructed, repaired or modified such
that the cost of such reconstruction, repair or modification exceeds 50% of
the current replacement cost of said sign.
§ 204-8. Maintenance.
All off-premises advertising signs, structures, faces and landscaping shall
be kept in good repair and properly painted and maintained in a skillful
and reasonable manner. All lighting and illumination will be oriented toward
the ground. All new off-premises advertising signs constructed after the
effective date of this chapter shall be in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, building code, electrical code and any applicable City laws,
ordinances or regulations.
§ 204-9. Prohibited signs.
A. A landscape strip of an area equal to or greater than the surface area of
a sign face and at least as long as the sign length shall be located
immediately adjoining the supporting structure on each face side of the
sign.
B. Eight feet in height.
(1) For all signs exceeding eight feet in height, a hedge or other
durable planting with a minimum height being no less than that
which places the top of the durable planting within 12 inches of the
bottom of the sign face, and attaining a height equal to the bottom
of the sign face within four years after planting, is to extend the
entire length of the required landscape strip.
(2) For all signs up to eight feet in height, a perennial ground cover is
to extend the entire length of the required landscape strip.
Common grasses shall not satisfy this requirement.
C. For all signs exceeding 15 feet in height, two flowering trees shall be
placed within the required landscape strip.
D. Single faced structures with the rear viewable from a public right-ofway
or other public property shall have equally spaced evergreen trees
planted in the rear of the structure. The number of trees shall be equal
to two, or the number of supporting members of the structure,
whichever is greater. The reverse side of the sign shall be a one
earthtone color.
E. Existing or alternative landscaping materials may be utilized to meet
the requirements of this subsection provided that they substantially
comply with the standards specified herein.
§ 204-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-9
1:467
§ 204-10. Enforcement; appeals; violations and penalties.
§ 204-11. When effective.
All provisions of this chapter shall be in full force and effect on and after the
effective date of this chapter.
A. Regardless of whether any such sign was in existence on the effective
date of this chapter, the following off-premises advertising signs are
specifically prohibited:
(1) Portable signs with changeable message boards.
(2) Any signs which include lights which flash, blink or turn on or off
intermittently, with the exception of time and temperature displays.
(3) Rooftop signs.
(4) Signs on or attached to stationary equipment such as semitruck
trailers where signing is the apparent principal use of the
equipment on either a temporary or permanent basis.
B. Any such sign existing on the effective date of this chapter shall be
permitted to exist in its present location for a period of five years from
the effective date of this chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector and all appeals shall be taken as if from the City Building
Codes.46 Enforcement actions shall be prosecuted against the owner of
an off-premises advertising sign and/or the owner of the property on
which the off-premises advertising sign is located.
B. Any owner of a sign or landowner upon which a sign is located whose
sign does not display the required permit as provided for in this
chapter, or who otherwise violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a municipal infraction. Pursuant to Article III, Chapter
1, of the City Code, each day the sign exists without a permit or in
violation of this chapter shall be a separate offense.
C. The fine for a violation of this chapter shall be $100 for each initial
violation, and $200 for each day thereafter that the violation continues.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Building Construction.
§ 204-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 204-11
1:468
Chapter 207
SNOW EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 60.
Civil emergencies — See Ch. 76.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
§ 207-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Snow Emergency
Ordinance of the City of Hagerstown."
§ 207-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
DIRECTOR — The Chief of Police and/or Manager, Public Ways and
Recreation, as designated by the Mayor and Council, or, in their absence,
their duly designated and acting representative.[Amended 1-11-1983]
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
STREETS — Any streets which are not marked as snow emergency routes.
SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES — Those streets marked as such in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
SNOW TIRES — Those tires in a good state of repair which are normally
designed by the manufacturer as snow tires or such tires as may be
approved by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of the State of Maryland
as meeting the standards of effectiveness required of normally designated
snow tires or tires which have anti-skid patterns cut into the treaded
surface to form bars, buttons or blocks especially designed to give effective
traction on snow- or ice-covered streets and highways.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
TIRE CHAINS — Any metal chains mounted on drive-wheel tires of motor
vehicles, which cross the tread of each such tire laterally in at least three
different places.
§ 207-3. Parking prohibitions. [Amended 1-11-1983]
A. Whenever the Director finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or
freezing rain or on the basis of a forecast by the United States Weather
Bureau of snow, sleet or freezing rain, that weather conditions will
§ 204-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-3
1:469
§ 207-4. Advancement of quitting-time regulations.
Whenever the Director finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing
rain or on the basis of a forecast by the United States Weather Bureau of
snow, sleet or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it necessary
that motor vehicle traffic be expedited, and whenever he finds additionally
that large numbers of employees within the City are to be dismissed from
duty in advance of their normal quitting time because of weather conditions
and that such dismissal will advance the beginning of heavy quitting-time
traffic, he shall, by making a declaration in a manner prescribed by this
chapter, appropriately advance the effective time of those traffic regulations
which normally go into effect just before quitting time for the working
make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited for chemical
spreading purposes, for snowplowing and for other purposes, the
Director shall put into effect a snow emergency declaration in
accordance with § 207-7. In addition thereto, but not in derogation
thereof, when it is determined by the State of Maryland that a snow
emergency exists in Washington County or the City of Hagerstown,
the snow emergency program and provisions of this chapter shall
automatically become effective. In either event, the snow emergency
plan shall remain in full force and effect and the provisions of this
chapter shall be applicable until the Director determines that said plan
is no longer necessary and so declares.
B. Whenever the Director finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or
freezing rain or on the basis of a forecast by the United States Weather
Bureau of snow, sleet or freezing rain, that weather conditions will
make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that
parking on City streets be prohibited or restricted for snowplowing and
other purposes, the Director shall put into effect a parking prohibition
on parts of or all snow emergency routes as necessary by declaring it in
a manner prescribed in this chapter.
C. Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall remain in effect
until terminated by an announcement of the Director in accordance
with this chapter. While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park
or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any portion of a snow
emergency route to which it applies. However, nothing in this section
shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is
forbidden by any other provision of law.
D. Whenever the Director finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or
freezing rain or on the basis of a forecast by the United States Weather
Bureau of snow, sleet or freezing rain, that the weather conditions will
make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that
parking on City streets be prohibited or restricted for snowplowing and
other purposes, the Director shall put into effect a parking prohibition
on parts of or all secondary streets by this chapter. The prohibition shall
remain in effect until terminated by an announcement of the Director in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 207-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 207-4
1:470
day, such as, for example (and not by way of limitation), those relating to
standing, parking, one-way streets, unbalanced lanes and left turns. The
regulations as so advanced in their operation shall remain in effect until
their normal termination or otherwise, as may be indicated at specific
locations. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit
parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other section of
this chapter.
§ 207-5. Chains or snow tires required.
No person operating a motor vehicle on a snow emergency route on which
there is a covering of snow, sleet or ice shall allow such vehicle to become
stalled wholly or partly because the drive wheels thereof are not equipped
with effective tire chains or snow tires.
§ 207-6. Stalled vehicles.
Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in
violation of this chapter, on any part of a snow emergency route on which
there is a covering of snow, sleet or ice or on which there is parking
prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate
action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway of such snow
emergency route or onto the public space portion of a nearby driveway. No
person shall abandon or leave his vehicle unattended in the roadway of a
snow emergency route, except for the purpose of securing assistance within
a reasonable time.
§ 207-7. Declarations of Director.
§ 207-8. Termination of parking prohibition.
Whenever the Director shall find that some or all of the conditions which
give rise to a parking prohibition in effect pursuant to this chapter no
longer exist, he may declare the prohibition terminated in whole or in
part, in a manner prescribed by this chapter, effective immediately upon
announcement.
A. The Director shall cause each declaration made by him pursuant to this
chapter to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts
from stations with a normal operating range covering the City, and he
may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of
general circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall describe
the action taken by the Director, including the time it became or will
become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. A
parking prohibition or advancement of quitting-time traffic regulations
declared by the Director shall not go into effect until at least two hours
after it has been announced.
B. The Director shall make or cause to be made a record of each time and
date when any declaration is announced to the public in accordance
with this section.
§ 207-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-9
1:471
§ 207-9. Effect on conflicting regulations.
Any provision of this chapter which becomes effective by a declaration of
the Director or upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions shall,
while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting
provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedence
over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of
authorized emergency vehicles or emergency traffic directions by a police
officer, nor shall it take precedence over provisions of the Code of Public
General Laws of the State of Maryland, where applicable.
§ 207-10. Signs.
On each street designated by this chapter as a snow emergency route, the
Director shall post special signs at intervals not exceeding 300 feet with
the wording: "Snow Emergency Route. No Parking During Emergency. Tow
Away Zone." These signs shall be distinctive and uniform in appearance and
shall be plainly readable to persons traveling on the street or highway.
§ 207-11. Removal and impounding of vehicles.
A. Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove or
have removed a vehicle from a street to the nearest garage or other
place of safety, including another place on a street, or to a garage
designated or maintained by the Police Department or otherwise
maintained by this City, when:
(1) The vehicle is parked on a part of a snow emergency route on which
a parking prohibition is in effect.
(2) The vehicle is stalled on a part of a snow emergency route on which
there is a covering of snow, sleet or ice or on which there is a
parking prohibition in effect and the person who was operating
such vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(3) The vehicle is parked in violation of any parking ordinance or
provision of law and is interfering or about to interfere with snow
removal operations.
B. Whenever an officer removes or has removed a vehicle from a street as
authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain
from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the
owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given
notice, in writing, within 24 hours to such owner of the fact of such
removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle
has been removed. In the event that any such vehicle is stored in a
public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of
such garage.
C. No person shall recover any vehicle removed in accordance with this
section except as provided herein. Before the owner or person in charge
§ 207-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 207-11
1:472
§ 207-12. Traffic citations. [Amended 10-6-1975]
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or left in
violation of any provision of this chapter, the officer finding such vehicle
shall take its registration number and any other information displayed on
the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such
vehicle a traffic citation, on a form provided by the Police Department, for
the driver to answer to the charge against him within 14 days during the
hours and at a place specified in the citation.
§ 207-13. Evidence of violation.
In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place or
in a condition in violation of any provision of this chapter, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left in violation
of a provision of this chapter, together with proof that the defendant named
in the complaint was at the time the registered owner of such vehicle, shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who
parked or left the vehicle in violation of this chapter. Said presumption shall
be rebuttable.
§ 207-14. Designation of snow emergency routes. [Amended
10-6-1975]
of such vehicle shall be allowed to recover it from the place where it
has been placed or impounded, he shall present to a member of the
Police Department evidence of his identity and right to possession of
the vehicle, shall sign a receipt for its return, shall pay the cost of
removal and shall pay any cost of storage accrued.
D. It shall be duty of the Police Department to keep a record of each
vehicle removed in accordance with this section. The record shall
include a description of the vehicle, its license number, the date and
time of its removal, where it was removed from, its location, the name
and address of its owner and last operator, if known, its final disposition
and the parking violation, if any.
E. This section shall be supplemental to any other provisions of law
granting members of the Police Department the authority to remove
vehicles.
A. The following streets or portions of streets within the City are hereby
designated as snow emergency routes: [Amended 12-6-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-37]
(1) U.S. Route 40:
(a) Westbound, which includes the Dual Highway from Colonial
Drive to Franklin Street, Franklin Street west to the City limits.
§ 207-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-14
1:473
§ 207-15. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine of $10, in addition to the other costs provided herein.
Chapter 209
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 213.
Water — See Ch. 238.
Water pollution control — See Ch. 240.
§ 209-1. Purpose and authority.
(b) Eastbound, which includes Washington Avenue from the City
limits near I-81, Washington Street from Washington Avenue to
the Dual Highway and the Dual Highway to Colonial Drive.
(2) U.S. Route 11, which includes Virginia Avenue to South Burhans
Boulevard, to North Burhans Boulevard, to Pennsylvania Avenue, to
the City limits.
(3) Virginia Avenue from South Burhans Boulevard to Park Circle.
(4) All of North and South Potomac Streets and Potomac Avenue.
(5) Locust Street, north and south from Locust Point to Fairground
Avenue.
(6) Fairground Avenue from Locust Street to Potomac Avenue.
(7) East and West Wilson Boulevard, from Summit Avenue to Frederick
Street.
(8) East and West Memorial Boulevard, from Park Circle to Eastern
Boulevard.
(9) Frederick Street, from the City line to Eastern Boulevard.
(10) Northern Avenue, from Pennsylvania Avenue to Potomac Avenue.
(11) All of Eastern Boulevard within the City limits.
(12)Wesel Boulevard.
B. In addition, the Mayor and Council reserves the right to designate, by
resolution, other alleys, streets and/or highways as snow emergency
routes, other than those specifically named in Subsection A.
§ 207-14 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 209-1
1:474
§ 209-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATION — The MDE (Maryland Department of the Environment)
Water Management Administration (WMA).
ADVERSE IMPACT — Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands,
including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition,
aesthetics, or usefulness for human or natural uses, which is or may
potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or
property, biological productivity, diversity, or stability or that unreasonably
interferes with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor
recreation.
AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Those methods and
procedures used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop and
livestock production and conservation of related soil and water resources.
Logging and timber removal operations are not to be considered a part of
this definition.
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, or government agency that executes the
necessary forms to apply for a permit or approval to carry out construction
of a project.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The entity responsible for the review and
approval of erosion and sediment control plans.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A structural device or
nonstructural practice designed to temporarily store or treat stormwater
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the
public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum
requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated
with land disturbances. The goal is to minimize soil erosion and prevent
off-site sedimentation by using soil erosion and sediment control
practices designed in accordance with the Code of Maryland
Regulations (COMAR) 26.17.01, the 2011 Maryland Standards and
Specifications ("Standards and Specifications") and the Stormwater
Management Act of 2007 ("Act"). Implementing this chapter will help
reduce the negative impacts of land development on water resources,
maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of streams, and
minimize damage to public and private property.
B. The provisions of this chapter, pursuant to Title 4, Environment Article,
Subtitle 1, Annotated Code of Maryland, are adopted under the
authority of the City Code of the City of Hagerstown and shall apply to
all land grading occurring within the City of Hagerstown. The
application of this chapter and the provisions expressed herein shall be
the minimum erosion and sediment control requirements and shall not
be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state
statute.
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-2
1:475
runoff in order to mitigate flooding, reduce pollution, and provide other
amenities.
CLEAR — To remove the vegetative ground cover while leaving the root mat
intact.
CONCEPT PLAN — The first of three plans submitted under the
comprehensive review and approval process required by the Act and
described in COMAR 26.17.02 and shall include the information necessary
to allow an initial evaluation of a proposed project.
DEPARTMENT — The MDE.
DRAINAGE AREA — That area contributing runoff to a single point
measured in a horizontal plane that is enclosed by a ridge line.
ENVIRONMENTAL SITE DESIGN (ESD) — Using small-scale stormwater
management practices, nonstructural techniques, and better site planning
to mimic natural hydrologic runoff characteristics and minimize the impact
of land development on water resources.
EROSION — The process by which the land surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice, or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL — A system of structural and
vegetative measures that minimizes soil erosion and off-site sedimentation.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — An erosion and sediment
control strategy or plan designed to minimize erosion and prevent off-site
sedimentation.
EXEMPTION — Those land development activities that are not subject to
the erosion and sediment control requirements contained in this chapter.
FINAL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — Along with the final
stormwater management plan, the last of three plans submitted under
the comprehensive review and approval process required by the Act and
described in COMAR 26.17.02. Final erosion and sediment control plans
shall be prepared and approved in accordance with the specific
requirements of the Washington County Soil Conservation District and this
chapter and designed in accordance with the Standards and Specifications.
GRADE — To disturb earth by, including but not limited to, excavating,
filling, stockpiling, grubbing, removing root mat or topsoil, or any
combination thereof.
GRADING UNIT — The maximum contiguous area allowed to be graded at
a given time. For the purposes of this chapter, a grading unit is 20 acres or
less.
HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS — Those soils with a slope greater than 15% or
those soils with a soil erodibility factor, K, greater than 0.35 and with slopes
greater than 5%.
INSPECTION AGENCY — The Administration or, if delegated enforcement
authority, the City of Hagerstown.
§ 209-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 209-2
1:476
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Designing stormwater
management systems so that all reasonable opportunities for using ESD
planning techniques and treatment practices are exhausted and only where
absolutely necessary is a structural BMP implemented.
OWNER/DEVELOPER — A person undertaking or for whose benefit
activities covered by this chapter are carried on. General contractors or
subcontractors, or both, without a proprietary interest in a project are not
included within this definition.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a building or grading permit has been
issued.
PERSON — Includes the federal government, the state, any county,
municipal corporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any
of their units, or an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor,
administrator, fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership,
firm, association, public or private corporation, or any of their affiliates, or
any other entity.
RESPONSIBLE PERSONNEL — Any foreman, superintendent, or project
engineer who is in charge of on-site clearing and grading operations or the
implementation and maintenance of an erosion and sediment control plan.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by
the action of wind, water, ice, gravity, or artificial means.
SITE — Any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or combination of tracts, lots
or parcels of land that are in one ownership, or are contiguous and in
diverse ownership, where development is to be performed as part of a unit,
subdivision, or project.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The second of three plans submitted under
the comprehensive review and approval process required by the Act and
described in COMAR 26.17.02. A site development plan shall include the
information necessary to allow a detailed evaluation of a proposed project.
STABILIZATION — The protection of exposed soils from erosion by the
application of seed and mulch, seed and matting, sod, other vegetative
measures, and/or structural means.
STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS — The "2011 Maryland Standards and
Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control," or any subsequent
revisions.
STORMWATER — Water that originates from a precipitation event.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — Natural areas, ESD practices,
stormwater management measures, and any other structure through which
stormwater flows, infiltrates, or discharges from a site.
VARIANCE — The modification of the minimum erosion and sediment
control requirements for exceptional circumstances such that strict
adherence to the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and
not fulfill the intent of this chapter.
§ 209-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-2
1:477
WATERSHED — The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single
point.
§ 209-3. Scope.
No person shall disturb land without implementing soil erosion and
sediment controls in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
the Standards and Specifications, except as provided within this chapter.
§ 209-4. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
§ 209-5. Variances.
The Washington County Soil Conservation District may only grant a
variance from the requirements of the Standards and Specifications when
strict adherence will result in exceptional hardship and not fulfill the intent
of this chapter. The owner/developer shall submit a written request for a
variance to the Washington County Soil Conservation District. The request
must state the specific variance sought and the reasons for the request.
The Washington County Soil Conservation District shall not grant a variance
unless and until sufficient information is provided describing the unique
circumstances of the site to justify the variance.
§ 209-6. Review and approval of erosion and sediment control
plans.
A. Agricultural land management practices and agricultural BMPs;
B. Clearing or grading activities that disturb less than 5,000 square feet of
land area and disturb less than 100 cubic yards of earth; and
C. Clearing or grading activities that are subject exclusively to state
approval and enforcement under state law and regulations.
A. A person may not grade land without an erosion and sediment control
plan approved by the Washington County Soil Conservation District.
B. The Washington County Soil Conservation District shall review erosion
and sediment control plans to determine compliance with this chapter
and the Standards and Specifications prior to approval. In approving
the plan, the Washington County Soil Conservation District may impose
such conditions that may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, COMAR 26.17.01, the Standards and
Specifications, and the preservation of public health and safety.
C. The review and approval process shall be in accordance with the
comprehensive and integrated plan approval process described in the
Standards and Specifications, the City of Hagerstown's Stormwater
Ordinance,47 and the Act.
§ 209-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 209-6
1:478
§ 209-7. Contents of erosion and sediment control plans.
D. At a minimum, a concept plan must include the mapping of natural
resources and sensitive areas, including highly erodible soils and slopes
greater than 15%, as well as information required under the City of
Hagerstown's Stormwater Ordinance. These areas are to remain
undisturbed, or an explanation must be included with either the
concept or site development plan describing enhanced protection
strategies for these areas during construction.
E. A site development plan submittal must include all concept plan
information and indicate how proposed erosion and sediment control
practices will be integrated with proposed stormwater management
practices. The latter is to be done through a narrative and an overlay
plan showing both ESD and erosion and sediment control practices. An
initial sequence of construction and proposed project phasing to
achieve the grading unit restriction should be submitted at this time.
F. An applicant shall submit a final erosion and sediment control plan to
the Washington County Soil Conservation District for review and
approval. The plan must include all of the information required by the
concept and site development plans as well as any information in
§ 209-7B not already submitted.
G. A final erosion and sediment control plan shall not be considered
approved without the inclusion of the signature and date of signature of
the Washington County Soil Conservation District on the plan.
H. Approved plans remain valid for two years from the date of approval
unless extended or renewed by the Washington County Soil
Conservation District.
I. Grandfathering of approved plans:
(1) Any plans that receive final approval after January 9, 2013, must be
in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the
Standards and Specifications.
(2) A plan that receives final approval by January 9, 2013, may be
reapproved under its existing conditions if grading activities have
begun on the site by January 9, 2015, with the exception of
stabilization requirements.
(3) Stabilization practices on all sites must be in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and the Standards and Specifications
by January 9, 2013, regardless of when an approved erosion and
sediment control plan was approved.
A. An applicant is responsible for submitting erosion and sediment control
plans that meet the requirements of the Washington County Soil
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 213, Stormwater Management.
§ 209-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-7
1:479
Conservation District, this chapter, the City of Hagerstown's
Stormwater Ordinance, the Standards and Specifications, and the Act.
The plans shall include sufficient information to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential
impacts of the proposed grading on water resources, and the
effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed to minimize soil
erosion and off-site sedimentation.
B. At a minimum, applicants shall submit the following information:
(1) A letter of transmittal and/or application.
(2) Name, address, and telephone number of:
(a) The owner of the property where the grading is proposed;
(b) The developer; and
(c) The applicant.
(3) A vicinity map indicating North arrow, scale, site location, and
other information necessary to easily locate the property.
(4) Drainage area map(s) at a minimum scale of one inch equals 200
feet, showing existing, interim, and proposed topography, proposed
improvements, standard symbols for proposed sediment control
features, and pertinent drainage information, including provisions
to protect downstream areas from erosion for a minimum of 200
feet downstream or to the next conveyance system.
(5) The location of natural resources, wetlands, floodplains, highly
erodible soils, slopes 15% and steeper, and any other sensitive
areas.
(6) A general description of the predominant soil types on the site, as
described by the appropriate soil survey information available
through the local soil conservation district or the USDA Natural
Resources Soil Conservation Service.
(7) Proposed stormwater management practices.
(8) Erosion and sediment control plans, including:
(a) The existing topography and improvements as well as
proposed topography and improvements at a scale between
one inch equals 10 feet and one inch equals 50 feet, with twofoot
contours or other approved contour interval. For projects
with more than minor grading, interim contours may also be
required.
(b) Scale, project and sheet title, and North arrow on each plan
sheet.
(c) The limit of disturbance (LOD), including:
§ 209-7 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 209-7
1:480
[1] Limit of grading (grading units, if applicable); and
[2] Initial, interim, and final phases.
(d) The proposed grading and earth disturbance, including:
[1] Total disturbed area;
[2] Volume of cut and fill quantities; and
[3] Volume of borrow and spoil quantities.
(e) Storm drainage features, including:
[1] Existing and proposed bridges, storm drains, culverts,
outfalls, etc.;
[2] Velocities and peak flow rates at outfalls for the two-year
and ten-year frequency storm events; and
[3] Site conditions around points of all surface water
discharge from the site.
(f) Erosion and sediment control practices to minimize on-site
erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation, including:
[1] The salvage and reuse of topsoil;
[2] Phased construction and implementation of grading unit(s)
to minimize disturbances, both in extent and duration;
[3] Location and type of all proposed sediment control
practices;
[4] Design details and data for all erosion and sediment
control practices; and
[5] Specifications for temporary and permanent stabilization
measures, including, at a minimum:
[a] The "Standard Stabilization Note" on the plan, stating:
"Following initial soil disturbance or redisturbance,
permanent or temporary stabilization must be
completed within:
[i] Three calendar days as to the surface of all
perimeter dikes, swales, ditches, perimeter
slopes, and all slopes steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical (3:1); and
[ii] Seven calendar days as to all other disturbed or
graded areas on the project site not under active
grading."
§ 209-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-7
1:481
[b] Details for areas requiring accelerated stabilization;
and
[c] Maintenance requirements as defined in the
Standards and Specifications.
(g) A sequence of construction describing the relationship
between the implementation and maintenance of controls,
including permanent and temporary stabilization, and the
various stages or phases of earth disturbance and
construction. Any changes or revisions to the sequence of
construction must be approved by the Washington County Soil
Conservation District prior to proceeding with construction.
The sequence of construction, at a minimum, must include the
following:
[1] Request for a preconstruction meeting with the
appropriate enforcement authority;
[2] Clearing and grubbing as necessary for the installation of
perimeter controls;
[3] Construction and stabilization of perimeter controls;
[4] Remaining clearing and grubbing within installed
perimeter controls;
[5] Road grading;
[6] Grading for the remainder of the site;
[7] Utility installation and connections to existing structures;
[8] Construction of buildings, roads, and other construction;
[9] Final grading, landscaping, and stabilization;
[10] Installation of stormwater management measures;
[11] Approval of the appropriate enforcement authority prior to
removal of sediment controls; and
[12] Removal of controls and stabilization of areas that are
disturbed by removal of sediment controls.
(h) A statement requiring the owner/developer or representative
to contact the MDE or its agent at the following stages of the
project or in accordance with the approved erosion and
sediment control plan, grading permit, or building permit:
[1] Prior to the start of earth disturbance;
[2] Upon completion of the installation of perimeter erosion
and sediment controls but before proceeding with any
other earth disturbance or grading;
§ 209-7 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 209-7
1:482
§ 209-8. Modifications to erosion and sediment control plans.
§ 209-9. Standard erosion and sediment control plan.
[3] Prior to the start of another phase of construction or
opening of another grading unit; and
[4] Prior to the removal of sediment control practices.
(i) Certification by the owner/developer that any clearing,
grading, construction, or development will be done pursuant to
the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The
certification must also require that the responsible personnel
involved in the construction project have a certificate of
training at an MDE-approved training program for the control
of erosion and sediment prior to beginning the project. The
certificate of training for responsible personnel may be waived
by the Washington County Soil Conservation District on any
project involving four or fewer residential lots. Additionally, the
owner/developer shall allow right of entry for periodic on-site
evaluation by the Washington County Soil Conservation
District, the City of Hagerstown, and/or the MDE.
(j) Certification by a professional engineer, land surveyor,
landscape architect, architect, or forester (for forest harvest
operations only) registered in the state that the plans have
been designed in accordance with erosion and sediment
control laws, regulations, and standards, if required by the
Washington County Soil Conservation District or the
Administration.
(9) Any additional information or data deemed appropriate by the
Washington County Soil Conservation District.
A. The Washington County Soil Conservation District may revise approved
plans as necessary. Modifications may be requested by the owner/
developer, the inspection agency, or the City of Hagerstown in
accordance with COMAR 26.17.01.09(H), Plan Modifications.
B. The Washington County Soil Conservation District may develop a list of
minor modifications that may be approved as field revisions by the
inspection agency. The Administration must approve any list of minor
modifications prior to its implementation.
A. The Washington County Soil Conservation District may adopt a
standard erosion and sediment control plan for activities with minor
earth disturbances, such as single-family residences, small commercial
and other similar building sites, minor maintenance grading, and minor
utility construction.
B. A standard erosion and sediment control plan must meet the
requirements of this chapter and the Standards and Specifications.
§ 209-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-9
1:483
§ 209-10. Permit requirements.
Before a grading or building permit for any site is issued by the City of
Hagerstown, the Washington County Soil Conservation District must review
and approve an erosion and sediment control plan for the site.
§ 209-11. Permit expiration and renewal.
The building or grading permit shall expire two years from the date of
issuance, unless extended or renewed by the City of Hagerstown.
Application for permit renewal shall be made at least two months prior to
the permit expiration date.
§ 209-12. Permit fee.
A permit fee schedule may be established by the City of Hagerstown for
the administration and management of the erosion and sediment control
program. Capital improvement projects, refuse disposal areas, sanitary
landfills, and public works projects may be exempt from this permit fee.
§ 209-13. Permit suspension and revocation.
The City of Hagerstown may suspend or revoke any grading or building
permits after providing written notification to the permittee based on any of
the following reasons:
§ 209-14. Permit conditions.
In issuing a grading or building permit, the City of Hagerstown may impose
such conditions that may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter or the preservation of the public health and
safety.
§ 209-15. Performance bond.
When deemed necessary by the City of Hagerstown, the owner/developer
shall furnish a surety or cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other
means of security acceptable to the City of Hagerstown. The bond amount
C. The MDE shall review and approve a standard plan prior to its adoption.
A. Any violation(s) of the terms or conditions of the approved erosion and
sediment control plan or permits;
B. Noncompliance with violation notice(s) or stop-work order(s);
C. Changes in site characteristics upon which plan approval and permit
issuance were based; or
D. Any violation(s) of this chapter or any rules and regulations adopted
under it.
§ 209-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 209-15
1:484
should be equal to at least the cost of the installation, maintenance, and
removal of the erosion and sediment controls shown on the approved plan.
§ 209-16. Inspection.
The Administration is responsible for the inspection and enforcement of
all land disturbing activities, including those sites requiring an erosion
and sediment control plan as specified by this chapter. This enforcement
authority may be delegated to the City of Hagerstown through a request by
the City of Hagerstown or required as a condition of a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NDPES) municipal separate storm sewer
system permit. This section applies to the Administration or the City of
Hagerstown, if delegated enforcement authority.
§ 209-17. Inspection frequency and reports.
§ 209-18. Right of entry.
It shall be a condition of every grading or building permit that the
inspection agency has the right to enter property periodically to inspect for
compliance with the approved plan and this chapter.
A. The owner/developer shall maintain a copy of the approved erosion and
sediment control plan on site.
B. Every active site having a designed erosion and sediment control plan
should be inspected for compliance with the plan on average once every
two weeks.
C. A written report shall be prepared by the inspection agency after every
inspection. The report shall describe:
(1) The date and location of the site inspection;
(2) Whether the approved plan has been properly implemented and
maintained;
(3) Practice deficiencies or erosion and sediment control plan
deficiencies;
(4) If a violation exists, the type of enforcement action taken; and
(5) If applicable, a description of any modifications to the plan.
D. The inspection agency shall notify the on-site personnel or the owner/
developer in writing when violations are observed, describing:
(1) The nature of the violation;
(2) The required corrective action; and
(3) The time period in which to have the violation corrected.
§ 209-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-19
1:485
§ 209-19. Complaints.
The inspection agency shall accept and investigate complaints regarding
erosion and sediment control concerns from any interested parties and:
§ 209-20. Enforcement.
§ 209-21. Severability.
If any portion, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portion of this chapter, it being the intent of the City of
Hagerstown that this chapter shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of
any portion, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase, hereof.
§ 209-22. Violations and penalties.
A. Conduct an initial investigation within three working days from receipt
of the complaint;
B. Notify the complainant of the initial investigation and findings within
seven days from receipt of the complaint; and
C. Take appropriate action when violations are discovered during the
course of the complaint investigation.
A. The inspection agency shall, through the authority of this chapter and
COMAR 26.17.01, use enforcement action when erosion and sediment
control violations occur.
B. Enforcement actions may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Issuance of a corrective action order;
(2) Issuance of a stop-work order, the extent of which is determined by
the inspection agency;
(3) Issuance of a penalty or fine as allowed; and
(4) Referral for legal action.
C. The City of Hagerstown may deny the issuance of any permits to an
applicant when it determines that the applicant is not in compliance
with the provisions of a building or grading permit or approved erosion
and sediment control plan.
D. The inspection agency shall stop work on a site where land disturbance
is occurring without an approved erosion and sediment control plan.
Measures shall be required to be implemented to prevent off-site
sedimentation.
§ 209-19 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 209-22
1:486
§ 209-23. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 30 days from the date it becomes enacted.
Chapter 213
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Sediment control — See Ch. 209.
Water — See Ch. 238.
Water pollution control — See Ch. 240.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction,
is subject to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both, for each violation, with costs imposed in
the discretion of the court. Each day upon which the violation occurs
constitutes a separate offense.
B. Any agency whose approval is required under this chapter or any
interested person may seek an injunction against any person who
violates or threatens to violate any provision of this chapter.
C. In addition to any other sanction under this chapter, a person who fails
to install or to maintain erosion and sediment controls in accordance
with an approved plan shall be liable to the City of Hagerstown or the
state in a civil action for damages in an amount equal to double the cost
of installing or maintaining the controls.
D. Any governing authority that recovers damages in accordance with this
subsection shall deposit them in a special fund, to be used solely for:
(1) Correcting to the extent possible the failure to implement or
maintain erosion and sediment controls; and
(2) Administration of the sediment control program.
§ 209-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-23
1:487

ARTICLE I
Purpose and Authority
§ 213-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public
health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements
and procedures that control the adverse impacts associated with increased
stormwater runoff. The goal is to manage stormwater by using
environmental site design (ESD) to the maximum extent practicable (MEP)
to maintain after development as nearly as possible, the predevelopment
runoff characteristics, and to reduce stream channel erosion, pollution,
siltation and sedimentation, and local flooding, and use appropriate
structural best management practices (BMPs) only when necessary. This
will restore, enhance, and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of streams, minimize damage to public and private property, and
reduce the impacts of land development.
§ 213-2. Statutory authority; enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter, pursuant to the Environment Article, Title
4, Subtitle 2, Annotated Code of Maryland, 2009 replacement volume, are
adopted under the authority of the Code of the City of Hagerstown and
shall apply to all development occurring within the incorporated area of
the City. The application of this chapter and provisions expressed herein
shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not
be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state
statute. The City Engineer shall be responsible for the coordination and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. This chapter applies to all
new and redevelopment projects that have not received final approval for
erosion and sediment control and stormwater management plans by May 4,
2010.
§ 213-3. Documents incorporated by reference.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following documents are incorporated
by reference:
§ 213-4. Grandfathering.
A. The 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, Volumes I and II
(Maryland Department of the Environment, April 2000), and all
subsequent revisions, is incorporated by reference by the City and shall
serve as the official guide for stormwater management principles,
methods, and practices.
B. USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service Maryland Conservation
Practice Standard Pond Code 378 (January 2000).
A. In this section, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
§ 213-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-4
1:489
ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVER — A decision by the City Engineer pursuant
to this chapter to allow the construction of a development to be
governed by the stormwater management ordinance in effect as of May
4, 2009, in the local jurisdiction where the project will be located.
"Administrative waiver" is distinct from a waiver granted pursuant to
§ 213-8 of this chapter.
APPROVAL — A documented action by the City Engineer following
a review to determine and acknowledge the sufficiency of submitted
material to meet the requirements of a specified stage in a local
development review process. "Approval" does not mean an
acknowledgement by the City Engineer that submitted material has
been received for review.
FINAL PROJECT APPROVAL — Approval of the final stormwater
management plan and erosion and sediment control plan required to
construct a project's stormwater management facilities. "Final project
approval" also includes securing bonding or financing for final
development plans if either is required as a prerequisite for approval.
PRELIMINARY PROJECT APPROVAL — An approval as part of the City's
preliminary development or planning review process that includes, at a
minimum:
(1) The number of planned dwelling units or lots;
(2) The proposed project density;
(3) The proposed size and location of all land uses for the project;
A plan that identifies:
(a) The proposed drainage patterns;
(b) The location of all points of discharge from the site; and
The type, location, and size of all stormwater management
measures based on site-specific stormwater management
requirement computations; and
(c)
(4)
Any other information required by the City Engineer including, but
not limited to:
The proposed alignment, location, and construction type and
standard for all roads, access ways, and areas of vehicular
traffic;
(a)
A demonstration that the methods by which the development
will be supplied with water and wastewater service are
adequate; and
(b)
The size, type, and general location of all proposed wastewater
and water system infrastructure.
(c)
(5)
§ 213-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-4
1:490
B. The City Engineer may grant an administrative waiver to a development
that received a preliminary project approval prior to May 4, 2010.
Administrative waivers expire according to Subsection C of this section
and may be extended according to Subsection D of this section.
C. Expiration of administrative waivers.
(1) Except as provided for in Subsection D of this section, an
administrative waiver shall expire on:
(a) May 4, 2013, if the development does not receive final project
approval prior to that date; or
(b) May 4, 2017, if the development receives final project approval
prior to May 4, 2013.
(2) All construction authorized pursuant to an administrative waiver
must be completed by May 4, 2017 or, if the waiver is extended as
Subsection D of this section, by the expiration date of the waiver
extension.
D. Extension of administrative waivers.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection D(2) of this section, an
administrative waiver shall not be extended.
(2) An administrative waiver may only be extended if, by May 4, 2010
the development:
(a) Has received a preliminary project approval; and
(b) Was subject to a development agreement, a tax increment
financing approval, or an annexation agreement.
(3) Administrative waivers extended according to Subsection D(2) of
this section shall expire when the development agreement, the tax
increment financing approval, or the annexation agreement
expires.
§ 213-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-4
1:491

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 213-5. Definitions.
The following definitions are provided for the terms used in this chapter:
ADMINISTRATION — The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE)
Water Management Administration (WMA).
ADVERSE IMPACT — Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands,
including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition,
aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may
potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or
property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including
outdoor recreation.
AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Those methods and
procedures used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop and
livestock production and conservation of related soil and water resources.
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of a project or a permit to carry
out construction of a project.
APPROVING AGENCY — The entity responsible for the review and approval
of stormwater management plans.
AQUIFER — A porous water bearing geologic formation generally restricted
to materials capable of yielding an appreciable supply of water.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A structural device or
nonstructural practice designed to temporarily store or treat stormwater
runoff in order to mitigate flooding, reduce pollution, and provide other
amenities.
CERTIFYING ENGINEER — The professional engineer, surveyor, or
landscape architect who will be responsible for the signing and sealing of
the engineer's stormwater management certification that is required on all
stormwater management plans, and for performing the required inspections
during construction.
CHANNEL PROTECTION STORAGE VOLUME (Cpv) — The volume used to
design structural management practices to control stream channel erosion.
Methods for calculating the channel protection storage volume are specified
in the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual.
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, a Maryland Municipal Corporation.
CITY ENGINEER — The City's duly appointed City Engineer or his or her
duly authorized representative.
CLEARING — The removal of trees and brush from the land but shall not
include the ordinary mowing of grass.
§ 213-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-5
1:493
CONCEPT PLAN — The first of three required plan approvals that include
the information necessary to allow an initial evaluation of a proposed
project.
DESIGN MANUAL — The 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, and
all subsequent revisions, that serves as the official guide for stormwater
management principles, methods, and practices.
DETENTION STRUCTURE — A permanent structure for the temporary
storage of runoff which is designed so as not to create a permanent pool of
water.
DEVELOP LAND — To change the runoff characteristics of a parcel of
land in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional
construction or alteration.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The concentrated release of stormwater to tidal
waters or vegetated tidal wetlands from new development or
redevelopment projects in the critical area.
DISTURBANCE — The physical change of grades or cover of the ground
surface in either a permanent or temporary manner.
DRAINAGE AREA — That area contributing runoff to a single point
measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridge line.
EASEMENT — A grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of
such land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be
included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement.
ENVIRONMENTAL SITE DESIGN (ESD) — Using small-scale stormwater
management practices, nonstructural techniques, and better site planning
to mimic natural hydrologic runoff characteristics and minimize the impact
of land development on water resources. Methods for designing ESD
practices are specified in the Design Manual.
EXEMPTION — Those land development activities that are not subject to
the stormwater management requirements contained in this chapter.
EXTENDED DETENTION — A stormwater design feature that provides
gradual release of a volume of water in order to increase settling of
pollutants and protect downstream channels from frequent storm events.
Methods for designing extended detention BMPs are specified in the Design
Manual.
EXTREME FLOOD VOLUME (Qf) — The storage volume required to control
those infrequent but large storm events in which overbank flows reach or
exceed the boundaries of the one-hundred-year floodplain.
FINAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The last of three required
plan approvals that includes the information necessary to allow all
approvals and permits to be issued by the approving agency.
FLOW ATTENUATION — Prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the
peak discharge.
§ 213-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-5
1:494
GRADING — Any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled,
excavated, scarified, filled, or any combination thereof. This includes the
removal of roots, stumps, and similar material to a nominal depth below the
surface of the ground.
IMPERVIOUS AREA — Any surface that does not allow stormwater to
infiltrate into the ground.
IN-FILL DEVELOPMENT — New development that occurs on vacant,
bypassed and underutilized lands within existing developed areas. The site
on which the in-fill development is occurring shall not be part of an overall
development plan such as that found in industrial/business parks. In-fill
development shall typically be limited to site areas less than three acres in
size.
INFILTRATION — The passage or movement of water into the soil surface.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Designing stormwater
management systems so that all reasonable opportunities for using ESD
planning techniques and treatment practices are exhausted and only where
absolutely necessary, a structural BMP is implemented. The City Engineer
shall be responsible for determining whether or not the MEP standard has
been met.
OFF-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction
of a facility necessary to control stormwater from more than one
development.
ON-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction of
systems necessary to control stormwater within an immediate development.
OVERBANK FLOOD PROTECTION VOLUME (Qp) — The volume controlled
by structural practices to prevent an increase in the frequency of outof-
bank flooding generated by development. Methods for calculating the
overbank flood protection volume are specified in the Design Manual.
OWNER/DEVELOPER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust, or any other legal entity of agent thereof
commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect development or
redevelopment for himself or others.
PERSON — The federal government, the state, any county, municipal
corporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any of their
units, or an individual receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator,
fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership, firm,
association, public or private corporation, or any other entity.
PLANNING TECHNIQUES — A combination of strategies employed early in
project design to reduce the impact from development and to incorporate
natural features into a stormwater management plan.
POLLUTANTS — Those items that are commonly found in urban runoff,
including sediment, nutrients, trace metals, pesticides, herbicides, bacteria,
and hydrocarbons.
§ 213-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-5
1:495
PREDEVELOPMENT — The conditions of the site that exist prior to the
development that is subject to the requirements of this chapter. The City's
1982 aerial photography will be used as a guide in establishing
predevelopment conditions.
RECHARGE VOLUME (Rev) — That portion of the water quality volume
used to maintain groundwater recharge rates at development sites.
Methods for calculating the recharge volume are specified in the Design
Manual.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration, or improvement that
is performed on sites where existing land use is commercial, industrial,
institutional, or multifamily residential and existing site impervious area
exceeds 40%.
RETENTION STRUCTURE — A permanent structure that provides for the
storage of runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
RETROFITTING — The implementation of ESD practices, the construction
of a structural BMP, or the modification of an existing structural BMP in a
previously developed area to improve water quality over current conditions.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by
the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or combination of tracts, lots,
parcels of land that are in one ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse
ownership, where development is to be performed as part of a unit,
subdivision, or project.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The second of three required plan approvals
that includes the information necessary to allow a detailed evaluation of a
proposed project.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Washington County Conservation
District, or its duly authorized representative.
STABILIZATION — The prevention of soil movement by any of various
vegetative and/or structural means.
STORMWATER — Water that originates from a precipitation event.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — Natural areas, ESD practices,
stormwater management measures, and any other structure through which
stormwater flows, infiltrates, or discharges from a site.
STRIPPING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover
including tree removal, clearing, grubbing, and storage or removal of
topsoil.
VARIANCE — The modification of the minimum stormwater management
requirements for specific circumstances such that strict adherence to the
requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent
of this chapter.
WAIVER — The reduction of stormwater management requirements by the
City for a specific development on a case-by-case review basis.
§ 213-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-5
1:496
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv) — The volume needed to capture and
treat 90% of the average annual rainfall events at a development site.
Methods for calculating the water quality volume are specified in the Design
Manual.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash, in
and including any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow
or floodwater.
WATERSHED — The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single
point.
§ 213-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-5
1:497

ARTICLE III
Applicability
§ 213-6. Scope.
No person shall develop any land for residential, commercial, industrial,
or institutional uses without providing stormwater management measures
that control or manage runoff from such developments, except as provided
within this section. Stormwater management measures must be designed
consistent with the Design Manual and constructed according to an
approved plan for new development or the policies stated in § 213-9 of this
chapter for redevelopment.
§ 213-7. Exemptions.
§ 213-8. Waivers; watershed management plans.
A. The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter and the requirements of providing stormwater
management:
(1) Agricultural land management practices;
(2) Additions or modifications to existing single-family detached
residential structures if they comply with Subsection A(3) of this
section;
(3) Any developments that do not disturb over 5,000 square feet of
land area; and
(4) Land development activities that the Administration determines
will be regulated under specific state laws, which provide for
managing stormwater runoff.
B. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City Engineer from requiring
stormwater management controls upon the evaluation of the
cumulative effects of previous exemptions. Conditions evidenced in the
City's 1982 aerial photographs shall be used to evaluate these effects.
A. Except as provided in Subsections B and D of this section, the City
Engineer shall grant stormwater management quantitative control
waivers only to those projects within areas where watershed
management plans have been developed consistent with Subsection G
of this section. Written requests for quantitative stormwater
management waivers shall be submitted that contain sufficient
descriptions, drawings, and any other information that is necessary to
demonstrate that ESD has been implemented to the MEP. A separate
written waiver request shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of this section if there are subsequent additions, extensions,
or modifications to a development receiving a waiver.
§ 213-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-8
1:499
B. Except as provided in Subsection D of this section, if watershed
management plans consistent with Subsection G of this section have
not been developed, stormwater management quantitative control
waivers may be granted to the following projects, provided that it has
been demonstrated that ESD has been implemented to the MEP:
(1) Projects that are in-fill development located in a priority funding
area where the economic feasibility of the project is tied to the
planned density, and where implementation of the 2009 regulatory
requirements would result in a loss of the planned development
density, provided that:
(a) Public water and sewer and stormwater conveyance exist;
(b) The quantitative waiver is applied to the project for the
impervious cover that previously existed on the site only;
(c) ESD to the MEP is used to meet the full water quality
treatment requirements for the entire development; and
(d) ESD to the MEP is used to provide full quantity control for all
new impervious surfaces; or
(2) Projects where the City Engineer determines that unusual
circumstances exist that prevent the reasonable implementation of
quantity control practices.
C. Except as provided in Subsection D of this section, stormwater
management qualitative control waivers apply only to:
(1) In-fill development projects where ESD has been implemented to
the MEP and it has been demonstrated that other BMPs are not
feasible;
(2) Redevelopment projects if the requirements of § 213-9 of this
chapter are satisfied; or
(3) Sites where the City Engineer determines that circumstances exist
that prevent the reasonable implementation of ESD to the MEP.
D. Stormwater management quantitative and qualitative control waivers
may be granted for phased development projects if the stormwater
management facilities were designed to meet the 2000 regulatory
requirements (and the City's stormwater management ordinance). All
reasonable efforts to incorporate ESD in future phases must be
demonstrated.
E. Waivers shall only be granted when it has been demonstrated that ESD
has been implemented to the MEP and must:
(1) Be on a case-by-case basis;
(2) Consider the cumulative effects of the City's waiver policy;
§ 213-8 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-8
1:500
§ 213-9. Redevelopment.
(3) Reasonably ensure the development will not adversely impact
stream quality;
(4) Demonstrate that the waiver will not increase known undesirable
flooding; and
(5) Address in a reasonable manner known downstream drainage
deficiencies.
F. If the City establishes an overall watershed management plan for a
specific watershed, then the City may develop quantitative waiver and
redevelopment provisions that differ from §§ 213-8 and 213-9 of this
chapter.
G. A watershed management plan developed for the purpose of
implementing different stormwater management policies for waivers
and redevelopment shall:
(1) Include detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses to determine
hydrograph timing;
(2) Evaluate both quantity and quality management and opportunities
for ESD implementation;
(3) Include a cumulative impact assessment of current and proposed
watershed development;
(4) Identify existing flooding and receiving stream channel conditions;
(5) Be conducted at a reasonable scale;
(6) Specify where on-site or off-site quantitative and qualitative
stormwater management practices are to be implemented;
(7) Be consistent with the General Performance Standards for
Stormwater Management in Maryland found in the Design Manual;
and
(8) Be approved by the Administration.
A. Stormwater management plans are required by the City for all
redevelopment, unless otherwise specified by watershed management
plans developed according to § 213-8G of this chapter. Stormwater
management measures must be consistent with the Design Manual.
B. All redevelopment designs shall:
(1) Reduce impervious area within the limit of disturbance (LOD) by at
least 50% according to the Design Manual;
(2) Implement ESD to the MEP to provide water quality treatment for
at least 50% of the existing impervious area within the LOD; or
§ 213-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-9
1:501
(3) Use a combination of Subsection B(1) and (2) of this section for at
least 50% of the existing site impervious area.
C. Alternative stormwater management measures may be used to meet the
requirements in Subsection B of this section if the owner/developer
satisfactorily demonstrates to the City Engineer that impervious area
reduction has been maximized and ESD has been implemented to the
MEP. Alternative stormwater management measures include, but are
not limited to:
(1) An on-site structural BMP;
(2) An off-site structural BMP to provide water quality treatment for an
area equal to or greater than 50% of the existing impervious area;
or
(3) A combination of impervious area reduction, ESD implementation,
and an on-site or off-site structural BMP for an area equal to or
greater than 50% of the existing site impervious area within the
LOD.
D. The City may develop separate policies for providing water quality
treatment for redevelopment projects if the requirements of
Subsections A and B of this section cannot be met. These policies may
include, but not be limited to:
(1) A combination of ESD and an on-site or off-site structural BMP;
(2) Retrofitting including existing BMP upgrades, filtering practices,
and off-site ESD implementation;
(3) Participation in projects providing stormwater quality
enhancement at sites designated and approved by the City
Engineer; the scope and specific practices used in these projects
must be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer, and must
comply with all applicable local, state, and federal permit
requirements, regulations, etc.;
(4) Pollution trading with another entity, if a City-specific pollution
trading program is approved by the Administration and adopted by
the City Council;
(5) Payment of a fee-in-lieu into a Stormwater Management Fund, if
such a fund is created by the City Council, that would be dedicated
to providing stormwater management/storm drainage
improvements at locations designated by the City Engineer; the
operation of the fund would be governed by policies approved by
the Administration and adopted by the City Council; or
(6) A partial waiver of the treatment requirements if ESD is not
practicable.
§ 213-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-9
1:502
§ 213-10. Variances.
The City Engineer may grant a written variance from any requirement
of Article IV, Stormwater Management Criteria, if there are exceptional
circumstances applicable to the site such that strict adherence will result
in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter. A written
request for variance shall be provided to the City Engineer and shall state
the specific variances sought and reasons for their granting. The City
Engineer shall not grant a variance unless and until sufficient justification
is provided by the person developing land that the implementation of ESD
to the MEP has been investigated thoroughly.
E. The determination of what alternatives will be available may be made
by the City Engineer at the appropriate point in the development review
process. The City Engineer shall consider the prioritization of
alternatives in Subsection C of this section after it has been determined
that it is not practicable to meet the 2009 regulatory requirements
using ESD. In deciding what alternatives may be required, the City
Engineer may consider factors including, but not limited to:
(1) Whether the project is in an area targeted for development
incentives such as a priority funding area, a designated enterprise
or incentive zone;
(2) Whether the project is necessary to accommodate growth
consistent with comprehensive plans; or
(3) Whether bonding and financing have already been secured based
on an approved development plan.
F. Stormwater management shall be addressed according to the new
development requirements in the Design Manual for any net increase in
impervious area.
§ 213-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-10
1:503

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Criteria
§ 213-11. Minimum control requirements.
A. The minimum control requirements established in this section and the
Design Manual are as follows:
(1) The planning techniques, nonstructural practices, and design
methods specified in the Design Manual be used to implement ESD
to the MEP. The use of ESD planning techniques and treatment
systems must be exhausted before any structural BMP is
implemented. Stormwater management plans for development
projects subject to this chapter shall be designed using ESD sizing
criteria, recharge volume, water quality volume, and channel
protection storage volume criteria according to the Design Manual.
The MEP standard is met when channel stability is maintained,
predevelopment groundwater recharge is replicated without
causing damage or unduly endangering the water quality of the
underlying aquifer, nonpoint source pollution is minimized, and
structural stormwater management practices are used only if
determined to be absolutely necessary.
(2) Control of the two-year and ten-year frequency storm event is
required according to the Design Manual and all subsequent
revisions unless the City Engineer determines that additional
stormwater management is necessary because historical flooding
problems exist downstream.
(3) The extreme flood volume calculated for the one-hundred-year
frequency storm event shall be used as sizing criteria if so directed
by the City Engineer. However, this requirement may be waived if
the owner/developer demonstrates that implementing the extreme
flood volume will actually cause detrimental impacts downstream.
As a minimum, any structural BMPs proposed shall convey the
runoff for the one-hundred-year storm event through the BMP
structure without causing unacceptable damage and/or flooding to
the subject property or surrounding properties. Undeveloped offsite
areas contributing runoff to the point of study, if not under the
direct control of the owner/developer performing the analysis, shall
be treated as being developed in accordance with the zoning
designation for those lands for the one-hundred-year analysis.
(4) The City Engineer may require more than the minimum control
requirements specified in this chapter if hydrologic or topographic
conditions warrant, or if flooding, stream channel erosion, or water
quality problems exist downstream from a proposed project. The
extent of a downstream area that is subject to the requirements
stated herein will vary depending upon the location, and will be
established with the concurrence of the City Engineer.
§ 213-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-11
1:505
§ 213-12. Stormwater management measures.
The ESD planning techniques and practices and structural stormwater
management measures established in this chapter and the Design Manual
shall be used, either alone or in combination in a stormwater management
plan. A developer shall demonstrate that ESD has been implemented to the
MEP before the use of a structural BMP is considered in developing the
stormwater management plan.
B. Alternate minimum control requirements may be adopted subject to
Administration approval. The Administration shall require a
demonstration that alternative requirements will implement ESD to the
MEP and control flood damages, accelerated stream erosion, water
quality, and sedimentation. Comprehensive watershed studies may also
be required.
C. Stormwater management and development plans, where applicable,
shall be consistent with adopted and approved watershed management
plans or flood management plans as approved by the Maryland
Department of the Environment in accordance with the Flood Hazard
Management Act of 1976.48
D. Should, in the opinion of the City Engineer, downstream deficiencies
require stormwater management criteria in excess of the minimums
identified in this chapter, the City Engineer may direct or the owner/
developer may elect to correct the noted deficiencies in order the
obtain relief from the more stringent criteria. However, nothing in this
section shall be considered as waiving the need for a development to
comply with the minimum requirements identified in this chapter.
A. ESD planning techniques and practices.
(1) The following planning techniques shall be applied according to the
Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control
requirements established in § 213-11 of this chapter:
(a) Preserving and protecting natural resources;
(b) Conserving natural drainage patterns;
(c) Minimizing impervious area;
(d) Reducing runoff volume;
(e) Using small-scale ESD practices to maintain 100% of the
annual predevelopment groundwater recharge volume, subject
to the limitations for stormwater management and infiltration
practices in Karst areas as defined in Appendix D.2 of the
Design Manual;
48.Editor's Note: See § 5-809 et seq. of the Environment Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
§ 213-11 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-12
1:506
(f) Using green roofs, permeable pavement, reinforced turf, and
other alternative surfaces, subject to the restrictions listed in
Subsection A(2) below;
(g) Limiting soil disturbance, mass grading, and compaction;
(h) Clustering development; and
(i) Any practices approved by the Administration.
(2) The following ESD treatment practices shall be designed according
to the Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control
requirements established in § 213-11 of this chapter. However, for
any proposed practice that relies upon infiltration to discharge
stormwater from the site, the owner/developer must demonstrate
to the City Engineer's satisfaction that such infiltration can be
accomplished without causing damage to existing or proposed
structures and features, and with minimal degradation to the
aquifer underlying the site.
(a) Disconnection of rooftop runoff;
(b) Disconnection of non-rooftop runoff;
(c) Sheetflow to conservation areas;
(d) Rainwater harvesting;
(e) Submerged gravel wetlands;
(f) Landscape infiltration;
(g) Infiltration berms;
(h) Micro-bioretention;
(i) Rain gardens;
(j) Swales;
(k) Enhanced filters; and
(l) Any practices approved by the Administration.
(3) The use of ESD planning techniques and treatment practices
specified in this section shall not conflict with existing state law or
local ordinances, regulations, or policies. The City shall modify
planning and zoning ordinances and public works codes to
eliminate any impediments to implementing ESD to the MEP
according to the Design Manual.
B. Structural stormwater management measures.
(1) The following structural stormwater management practices shall
be designed according to the Design Manual to satisfy the
§ 213-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-12
1:507
applicable minimum control requirements established in § 213-11
of this chapter:
(a) Stormwater management ponds;
(b) Stormwater management wetlands;
(c) Stormwater management infiltration, subject to the approval
of the City Engineer, and taking into consideration the issues
identified in Subsection B(3) below;
(d) Stormwater management filtering systems incorporating
underdrains, unless the underdrain requirement is waived by
the City Engineer; and
(e) Stormwater management open channel systems.
(2) The performance criteria specified in the Design Manual with
regard to general feasibility, conveyance, pretreatment, treatment
and geometry, environment and landscaping, and maintenance
shall be considered when selecting structural stormwater
management practices.
(3) Structural stormwater management practices shall be selected to
accommodate the unique hydrologic or geologic regions of the
state. When selecting structural BMPs, special attention is directed
to the existence of Karst geology within Washington County, and
the influence these areas have on acceptable means for stormwater
management. Refer to the Design Manual for specific guidelines.
(4) The design engineer and the owner/developer are responsible for
considering safety and access to all proposed facilities. The Design
Manual includes several possible design safety considerations.
Measures to be considered may include fencing, slope benching,
flattened side slopes, access roads, etc. Permanent pools greater
than two feet in depth, or structures with one-hundred-year
ponding depths greater than four feet, shall incorporate
appropriate safety measures, approved by the City Engineer.
C. ESD planning techniques and treatment practices and structural
stormwater management measures used to satisfy the minimum
requirements in § 213-11 of this chapter must be recorded in the land
records of Washington County and remain unaltered by subsequent
property owners. Prior approval from the City Engineer shall be
obtained before any stormwater management practice is altered.
D. Alternative ESD planning techniques and treatment practices and
structural stormwater measures may be used for new development
runoff control if they meet the performance criteria established in the
Design Manual and all subsequent revisions, and are approved by the
City Engineer and the Administration. Practices used for
redevelopment projects shall be approved by the City Engineer.
§ 213-12 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-13
1:508
§ 213-13. Specific design criteria.
The basic design criteria, methodologies, and construction specifications,
subject to the approval of the City Engineer and the Administration, shall
be those of the Design Manual.
§ 213-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-13
1:509

ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management Plans
§ 213-14. Review and approval of stormwater management plans.
§ 213-15. Contents and submission of stormwater management
plans.
A. For any proposed development with a disturbed area greater than
15,000 square feet (i.e., any development that is not covered by a
Standard Erosion and Sediment Control Plan issued by the Washington
County Conservation District), the owner/developer shall submit
phased stormwater management plans to the City for review and
approval. At a minimum, plans shall be submitted for the concept, site
development, and final stormwater management construction phases of
project design. Each plan submittal shall include the minimum content
specified in § 213-15 of this chapter and meet the requirements of the
Design Manual and §§ 213-11 and 213-12 of this chapter.
B. For proposed developments with a disturbed area less than or equal to
15,000 square feet, the City's Zoning Administrator shall have the
discretion to allow the owner/developer to submit a concept plan and a
combined site development/final stormwater management construction
plan. However, both the concept plan and the combined site
development/final stormwater management plan must still meet the
minimum content specified in § 213-15, and meet the requirements of
the Design Manual and §§ 213-11 and 213-12 of this chapter.
C. The City shall perform a comprehensive review of the stormwater
management plans for each phase of site design. Coordinated
comments will be provided for each plan phase that reflect input from
all appropriate agencies, including but not limited to the Soil
Conservation District (SCD) and the departments of Planning,
Engineering, Public Works, Utilities, and the Fire Marshal. All
comments from the City and other appropriate agencies shall be
addressed and approval received at each phase of project design before
subsequent submissions.
A. The owner/developer shall submit a concept plan to the City Planning
Department that provides sufficient information for an initial
assessment of the proposed project and whether stormwater
management can be provided according to § 213-11 of this chapter and
the Design Manual. Plans submitted for concept approval shall include,
but are not limited to:
(1) A map at a scale specified by the City showing site location, existing
natural features, water and other sensitive resources, surface rock
outcroppings, topography, and natural drainage patterns;
§ 213-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-15
1:511
(2) The anticipated location of all proposed impervious areas,
buildings, roadways, parking, sidewalks, utilities, and other site
improvements;
(3) The location of the proposed limit of disturbance, erodible soils,
steep slopes, and areas to be protected during construction;
(4) Preliminary estimates of stormwater management requirements,
the selection and location of ESD practices to be used, and the
location of all points of discharge from the site;
(5) A narrative that supports the concept design and describes how
ESD will be implemented to the MEP; and
(6) Any other information required by the approving agency.
B. Following concept plan approval by the City, the owner/developer shall
submit site development plans that reflect comments received during
the previous review phase. Plans submitted for site development
approval shall be of sufficient detail to allow site development to be
reviewed and include but not be limited to:
(1) All information provided during the concept plan review phase;
(2) Final site layout, exact impervious area locations and acreages,
proposed topography, delineated drainage areas at all points of
discharge from the site, and stormwater volume computations for
ESD practices and quantity control structures;
(3) A proposed erosion and sediment control plan that contains the
construction sequence, any phasing necessary to limit earth
disturbances and impacts to natural resources and an overlay plan
showing the types and locations of ESD and erosion and sediment
control practices to be used;
(4) A narrative that supports the site development design, describes
how ESD will be used to meet the minimum control requirements,
and justifies any proposed structural stormwater management
measure; and
(5) Any other information required by the approving agency.
C. Following site development approval by the City, the owner/developer
shall submit final erosion and sediment control and stormwater
management plans that reflect the comments received during the
previous review phase. Plans submitted for final approval shall be of
sufficient detail to allow all approvals and permits to be issued
according to the following:
(1) Final erosion and sediment control plans shall be submitted
according to COMAR 26.17.01.05; and
§ 213-15 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-15
1:512
(2) Final stormwater management plans shall be submitted for
approval in the form of construction drawings and be accompanied
by a report that includes sufficient information to evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed runoff control design.
D. Reports submitted for final stormwater management plan approval
shall include, but are not limited to:
(1) Geotechnical investigations including soil maps, borings, sitespecific
recommendations, and any additional information
necessary for the final stormwater management design;
(2) Drainage area maps depicting predevelopment and post
development runoff flow path segmentation and land use;
(3) Hydrologic computations of the applicable ESD and unified sizing
criteria according to the Design Manual for all points of discharge
from the site;
(4) Hydraulic and structural computations for all ESD practices and
structural stormwater management measures to be used;
(5) A narrative that supports the final stormwater management design;
(6) The seal and signature of the professional engineer that prepared
the report; and
(7) Any other information required by the City.
E. Construction drawings submitted for final stormwater management
plan approval shall include, but are not limited to:
(1) A vicinity map;
(2) Existing and proposed topography and proposed drainage areas,
including areas necessary to determine downstream analysis for
proposed stormwater management facilities;
(3) Any proposed improvements including location of buildings or
other structures, impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities,
and all grading;
(4) The location of existing and proposed structures and utilities;
(5) Any easements and rights-of-way;
(6) The delineation, if applicable, of the one-hundrred-year floodplain
and any on-site wetlands;
(7) Structural and construction details including representative cross
sections for all components of the proposed drainage system or
systems, and stormwater management facilities;
(8) All necessary construction specifications;
§ 213-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-15
1:513
§ 213-16. Preparation of stormwater management plans.
(9) A sequence of construction;
(10) Data for total site area, disturbed area, new impervious area, and
total impervious area;
(11) A table showing the ESD and unified sizing criteria volumes
required in the Design Manual;
(12) A table of materials to be used for stormwater management facility
planting;
(13) All soil boring logs and locations;
(14) An inspection and maintenance schedule, with specific
maintenance instructions to be followed by the owner of the
facilities;
(15) Certification by the owner/developer that all stormwater
management construction will be done according to this plan;
(16) An as-built certification signature block to be executed by the
certifying engineer after project completion; and
(17) Any other information required by the City.
F. If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all
runoff off of the site, it is the responsibility of the developer to obtain
from adjacent property owners any easements or other necessary
property interests concerning flowage of water. Approval of a
stormwater management plan does not create or affect any right to
direct runoff onto adjacent property without that property owner's
permission.
A. The design of stormwater management plans shall be prepared by any
individual whose qualifications are acceptable to the City Engineer. The
City Engineer may require that the design be prepared by either a
professional engineer, professional land surveyor, or landscape
architect licensed in the state, as necessary to protect the public or the
environment.
B. If a stormwater BMP requires either a dam safety permit from MDE or
small pond approval from the Washington County Conservation District,
the City shall require that the design be prepared by a professional
engineer licensed in the state.
§ 213-15 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-16
1:514
ARTICLE VI
Permits
§ 213-17. Permit requirements.
§ 213-18. Permit fee.
Nonrefundable permit fees will be collected at each phase of stormwater
management plan submittal. Permit fees will provide for the cost of plan
review, administration, and management of the permitting process, and
inspection of all projects subject to this chapter. A permit fee schedule shall
be established by the City based upon the relative complexity of the project
and may be amended from time to time.
§ 213-19. Permit suspension and revocation.
Any grading or building permit issued by the City may be suspended or
revoked after written notice is given to the permittee for any of the
following reasons:
A. A grading or building permit may not be issued for any parcel or lot
unless final erosion and sediment control and stormwater management
plans have been approved by the City as meeting all the requirements
of the Design Manual and this chapter. Where appropriate, a building
permit may not be issued without:
(1) A recorded stormwater management maintenance agreement as
described in § 213-25 of this chapter; and
(2) A performance surety as described in § 213-21 of this chapter.
B. When appropriate, final use and occupancy approval for any structure
covered by a building permit shall not be granted until easements have
been recorded for the stormwater management facility, along with
easements required to provide adequate access for inspection and
maintenance from a public right-of-way.
A. Any violation(s) of the conditions of the stormwater management plan
approval;
B. Changes in site runoff characteristics upon which an approval or waiver
was granted;
C. Construction is not in accordance with the approved plan;
D. Noncompliance with correction notice(s) or stop-work order(s) issued
for the construction of any stormwater management practice; and
E. An immediate danger exists in a downstream area in the opinion of the
City Engineer.
§ 213-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-20
1:515
§ 213-20. Permit conditions.
In granting an approval for any phase of site development, the City may
impose such conditions that may be deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the preservation of
public health and safety.
§ 213-20 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-20
1:516
ARTICLE VII
Performance Surety
§ 213-21. Security required.
The City shall require from the developer a surety or cash bond, irrevocable
letter of credit, or other means of security acceptable to the City prior to
the issuance of any building and/or grading permit for the construction
of a development requiring stormwater management. The amount of the
security shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of
all stormwater management facilities. The bond required in this section
shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete work
specified in the approved stormwater management plan, compliance with
all of the provisions of this chapter, and other applicable laws and
regulations, and any time limitations. The bond shall not be fully released
without a final inspection of the completed work by the City, submission of
"as-built" plans, and certification of completion by the certifying engineer
that all stormwater management facilities comply with the approved plan
and the provisions of this section. A procedure may be used to release
parts of the bond held by the City after various stages of construction have
been completed and accepted by the City. The procedures used for partially
releasing performance bonds must be specified by the City in writing prior
to stormwater management plan approval.
§ 213-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-21
1:517

ARTICLE VIII
Inspections
§ 213-22. Inspection schedule and reports.
§ 213-23. Inspection requirements during construction.
A. The developer shall notify the City Engineer at least 48 hours before
commencing any work in conjunction with site development, the
stormwater management plan, and upon completion of the project.
B. Regular inspections shall be made and documented for each ESD
planning technique and practice at the stages of construction specified
in the Design Manual by the certifying engineer. At a minimum, all ESD
and other nonstructural practices shall be inspected upon completion of
final grading, the establishment of permanent stabilization, and before
issuance of use and occupancy approval.
C. Written inspection reports shall include:
(1) The date and location of the inspection;
(2) Whether construction was in compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan;
(3) Any variations from the approved construction specifications; and
(4) Any violations that exist.
D. The owner/developer and on-site personnel shall be notified in writing
when violations are observed. Written notification shall describe the
nature of the violation and the required corrective action.
E. No work shall proceed on the next phase of development until the
certifying engineer inspects and approves the work previously
completed, and furnishes the City Engineer and the owner/developer
with, at a minimum, the inspection reports required in Subsections B
and C as soon as possible after completion of each required inspection.
A. At a minimum, regular inspections shall be made and documented by
the certifying engineer at the following specified stages of construction:
(1) For ponds:
(a) Upon completion of excavation to sub-foundation and when
required, installation of structural supports or reinforcement
for structures, including but not limited to:
[1] Core trenches for structural embankments;
[2] Inlet and outlet structures, anti-seep collars or
diaphragms, and watertight connectors on pipes; and
[3] Trenches for enclosed storm drainage facilities;
§ 213-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-23
1:519
(b) During placement of structural fill, concrete, and installation of
piping and catch basins;
(c) During backfill of foundations and trenches;
(d) During embankment construction; and
(e) Upon completion of final grading and establishment of
permanent stabilization.
(2) Wetlands: at the stages specified for pond construction in
Subsection A(1) of this section, during and after wetland reservoir
area planting, and during the second growing season to verify a
vegetation survival rate of at least 50%.
(3) For infiltration trenches:
(a) During excavation to subgrade;
(b) During placement and backfill of under drain systems and
observation wells;
(c) During placement of geotextiles and all filter media;
(d) During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such
as diversion structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets, outlets,
and flow distribution structures; and
(e) Upon completion of final grading and establishment of
permanent stabilization.
(4) For infiltration basins: at the stages specified for pond construction
in Subsection A(1) of this section and during placement and backfill
of under drain systems.
(5) For filtering systems:
(a) During excavation to subgrade;
(b) During placement and backfill of under drain systems;
(c) During placement of geotextiles and all filter media;
(d) During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such
as flow diversion structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets,
outlets, orifices, and flow distribution structures; and
(e) Upon completion of final grading and establishment of
permanent stabilization.
(6) For open channel systems:
(a) During excavation to subgrade;
(b) During placement and backfill of under drain systems for dry
swales;
§ 213-23 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-23
1:520
(c) During installation of diaphragms, check dams, or weirs; and
(d) Upon completion of final grading and establishment of
permanent stabilization.
B. The City may, for enforcement purposes, use any one or a combination
of the following actions:
(1) A notice of violation shall be issued specifying the need for
corrective action if stormwater management plan noncompliance is
identified;
(2) A stop-work order shall be issued for the site by the City if a
violation persists;
(3) Bonds or securities shall be withheld or the case may be referred
for legal action if reasonable efforts to correct the violation have
not been undertaken; or
(4) In addition to any other sanctions, a civil action or criminal
prosecution may be brought against any person in violation of the
Stormwater Management Subtitle, the Design Manual, or this
chapter.
C. Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any time,
depending on the severity of the violation.
D. Once construction is complete, as-built plan certification shall be
submitted by either a professional engineer or professional land
surveyor licensed in the State of Maryland to ensure that ESD planning
techniques, treatment practices, and structural stormwater
management measures and conveyance systems comply with the
specifications contained in the approved plans. At a minimum, as-built
certification shall include a set of drawings comparing the approved
stormwater management plan with what was constructed. The City may
require additional information in accordance with established policies.
E. The City shall submit notice of construction completion to the
Administration on a form supplied by the Administration for each
structural stormwater management practice within 45 days of
construction completion. The type, number, total drainage area, and
total impervious area treated by all ESD techniques and practices shall
be reported to the Administration on a site-by-site basis. If BMPs
requiring SCD approval are constructed, notice of construction
completion shall also be submitted to the appropriate SCD.
§ 213-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-23
1:521

ARTICLE IX
Maintenance
§ 213-24. Maintenance inspection.
A. The City shall ensure that preventative maintenance programs are in
place for all ESD treatment systems and structural stormwater
management measures. Inspection shall occur during the first year of
operation and at least once every three years thereafter. In addition, a
maintenance agreement between the owner and the City shall be
executed for privately owned ESD treatment systems and structural
stormwater management measures as described in § 213-25 of this
chapter.
B. Inspection reports shall be maintained by the City for all ESD treatment
systems and structural stormwater management measures.
C. Inspection reports for ESD treatment systems and structural
stormwater management measures shall include the following:
(1) The date of inspection;
(2) Name of inspector;
(3) An assessment of the quality of the stormwater management
system related to ESD treatment practice efficiency and the control
of runoff to the MEP;
(4) The condition of:
(a) Vegetation or filter media;
(b) Fences or other safety devices;
(c) Spillways, valves, or other control structures;
(d) Embankments, slopes, and safety benches;
(e) Reservoir or treatment areas;
(f) Inlet and outlet channels or structures;
(g) Underground drainage;
(h) Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and forebay
areas;
(i) Any nonstructural practices to the extent practicable; and
(j) Any other item that could affect the proper function of the
stormwater management system.
(5) Description of needed maintenance.
§ 213-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-24
1:523
§ 213-25. Maintenance agreement.
§ 213-26. Maintenance responsibility.
D. Upon notifying an owner of the inspection results, the owner shall have
30 days, or other time frame mutually agreed to between the City and
the owner, to correct the deficiencies discovered. The City shall conduct
a subsequent inspection to ensure completion of the repairs.
E. If repairs are not properly undertaken and completed, enforcement
procedures following § 213-25C of this chapter shall be followed by the
City.
F. If, after an inspection by the City, the condition of a stormwater
management facility is determined to present an immediate danger to
public health or safety because of an unsafe condition, improper
construction, or poor maintenance, the City shall take such action as
may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe. Any
cost incurred by the City shall be assessed against the owner(s), as
provided in § 213-25C of this chapter.
A. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for which stormwater
management is required, the City shall ensure that an inspection and
maintenance agreement binding on all current (and all subsequent)
owners of land served by a private stormwater management facility is in
place. This agreement shall either be a document completed and
executed by the applicant or owner, or shall be in the form of inspection
and maintenance requirements or covenants listed on a recorded
subdivision plat for the subject property. Such agreements and/or
covenants shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for
regular inspections by the City or its authorized representative to
ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to
meet design standards.
B. The agreement, or the subdivision plat containing the inspection and
maintenance requirements, shall be recorded by the applicant or owner
in the land records of Washington County.
C. The agreement shall also provide that, if after notice by the City to
correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory
corrections are not made by the owner(s) within 30 days, the City may
perform all necessary work to place the facility in proper working
condition. The owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed the cost of the
work and any penalties. This may be accomplished by placing a lien on
the property, which may be placed on the tax bill and collected as
ordinary taxes by the City.
A. The owner of a property that contains private stormwater management
facilities installed pursuant to this chapter, or any other person or agent
in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and
promptly repair and restore all ESD treatment systems, grade surfaces,
§ 213-24 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-26
1:524
walls, drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment
control measures, and other protective devices in perpetuity. Such
repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be in accordance with
previously approved or newly submitted plans.
B. A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any structural
stormwater management facility or system of ESD treatment systems
and shall state the maintenance to be completed, the time period for
completion, and the responsible party what will perform the
maintenance. This maintenance schedule shall be printed on the
approved stormwater management plan.
§ 213-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-26
1:525

ARTICLE X
Appeals
§ 213-27. Right to appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of any official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, as the result of the disapproval of a properly
filed application for a permit, issuance of a written notice of violation, or
an alleged failure to properly enforce the chapter in regard to a specific
application, shall have the right to appeal the action to the special hearing
examiner. The appeal shall be filed in writing within 30 days of the date of
official transmittal of the final decision or determination to the applicant,
state clearly the grounds on which the appeal is based, and be processed
in the manner prescribed for hearing administrative appeals under the City
Code.
§ 213-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-27
1:527

ARTICLE XI
Severability
§ 213-28. Severability of provisions.
If any portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter. It is the intent of the City that this
chapter shall stand, even if a section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase,
or portion may be found invalid.
§ 213-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-28
1:529

ARTICLE XII
Penalties
§ 213-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding one year or
both for each violation with costs imposed in the discretion of the court
and not to exceed $50,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be a
separate offense. In addition, the City may institute injunctive, mandamus
or other appropriate action or proceedings of law to correct violations of
this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue
temporary or permanent restraining orders, injunctions or mandamus, or
other appropriate forms of relief.
§ 213-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-29
1:531
Chapter 216
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 60.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Loitering — See Ch. 142.
Vendors, peddlers and transient
dealers — See. Ch. 176.
Public utility licenses — See Ch. 189.
Railroads — See Ch. 194.
Snow emergencies — See Ch. 207.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 213.
§ 213-29 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 213-29
1:532
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16; 3-31-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-03]
§ 216-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Annotated Maryland Code, 1957;
Article 23A, and the Charter of the City of Hagerstown, the following
regulations are hereby adopted by the City of Hagerstown, Maryland. It
shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or
in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
§ 216-2. Administration; purpose.
§ 216-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AASHTO — The American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
ALLEY — A minor public way having a narrow right-of-way and affording a
secondary means of access to abutting properties.
BOARD OF CODE APPEALS — The duly appointed Board of Code Appeals
of the City of Hagerstown established under Chapter 10 of the Code of the
City of Hagerstown.
CELLAR DOOR — Metal door and frame system embedded in the public
sidewalk to provide access to a cellar or basement.
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, Maryland, a municipal corporation.
CITY CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS — Unless otherwise defined, shall
be the latest edition of the Maryland State Highway Administration's
Standard Specifications for Construction and Materials, and these
specifications are hereby made part of the Public Ways Construction
Standards by reference, unless otherwise indicated. All present and future
errata and addenda to these Standard Specifications by the Maryland State
Highway Administration are to be made a part of the City specifications.
All references to the "Maryland State Highway Administration" in these
Standard Specifications shall be construed to be the City of Hagerstown.
All references to "state office" shall be construed to be that of the City
of Hagerstown. All reference to the "Chief Engineer, his assistant(s) or
A. The City Engineering Division shall be responsible for administering
and enforcing this chapter.
B. These regulations shall govern the design, construction and
maintenance of all aspects and features of public ways within the
corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
§ 216-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-3
1:533
representative(s)" shall be construed as the City Engineer or his
representative(s).
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
CITY ENGINEER — The duly designated City Engineer of the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland.
CITY STANDARDS — The Public Ways Construction Standards, latest
edition, for the City of Hagerstown, which have been adopted by the Mayor
and City Council and which are available in the Engineering Division. These
standards are made a part of this chapter by reference.
CONSTRUCTION — The process of building, altering, repairing, improving
or demolishing any structure, building or other improvement to real
property.
ENGINEERING DIVISION — The duly designated Division managed and
directed by the City Engineer.
FINAL PLAT — A plan of a proposed subdivision approved by the Planning
Commission and recorded in the land records of Washington County.
FUNCTIONAL STREET CLASSIFICATION — Public ways, such as arterial,
collector or local road, as defined in the Public Ways Construction
Standards.
MANUAL OF UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES (MUTCD) — The
latest edition, adopted and published by the Federal Highway
Administration and adopted by the Maryland State Highway Administration.
This document, and the Maryland Supplement to the Manual, are included
in this chapter by reference.
MARYLAND STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION (MDSHA) — Division of
the Maryland Department of Transportation.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
NUISANCE — Condition which is detrimental to the property of others or
which causes diminution of value of property in the neighborhood. This
includes, but is not limited to, unsafe or substandard conditions as
determined by the City of Hagerstown.
OPEN CHANNEL — Channel, swale, ditch that is graded for the conveyance
of concentrated stormwater flows.
OWNER'S ENGINEER — The civil engineer, surveyor or landscape architect
registered and in good standing with the State Board of Registration of
Maryland who is the agent of the owner of the land which is proposed to be
subdivided or developed.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission for the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland.
PUBLIC WAYS or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — All streets, highways, alleys
and their associated right-of-way accepted and/or maintained by the City of
Hagerstown.
§ 216-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-3
1:534
SIDEWALK — A public pedestrian walkway within the public right-of-way.
STORM DRAIN — A closed system of pipes, inlets, manholes for the
collection and conveyance of stormwater.
STORM DRAIN CULVERT — Single or multiple pipe(s) specifically installed
to convey stormwater under a street, from one side to the other.
STREET or HIGHWAY — Entire width between the boundary lines of any
way or thoroughfare of which any part is used by the public for vehicular
travel.
STREET TREE — A tree located between the curb and sidewalk in the public
right-of-way or a tree located in a tree well within the sidewalk in the public
right-of-way.
SUBDIVIDE — The person(s), firm(s) or corporation(s) owning land in the
process of creating a subdivision of said land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes
resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the
process of resubdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.
TRAFFIC SIGNS — To control traffic, pedestrian and vehicular flow shall be
per the MUTCD and the Standard Sign Book published by Maryland State
Highway Administration, latest edition.
TRANSPORTATION PLAN — The plan for streets and highways included
in the transportation elements of the officially adopted Comprehensive
Development Plan.
TREE — A perennial woody plant having a single self-supporting trunk
generally with a few or no branches on its lower part.
UTILITIES — Municipal and franchised utilities.
§ 216-4. Prevention of loads leaking from vehicles (24 hours).
It shall be unlawful to drive or move a vehicle on any street or highway
unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded, operated and maintained as to
prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Penalty: $200 municipal infraction citation.
§ 216-5. Covers required on certain vehicles (24 hours).
It shall be unlawful for a vehicle containing material of a light, dry, dusty
or bulky nature to be driven or moved on any street or highway except in
completely covered bodies or open bodies covered with heavy tarpaulins
securely lashed to the frame of the bodies. Penalty: $200 municipal
infraction citation.
§ 216-6. Removal of material deposited onto streets (24 hours).
§ 216-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-6
1:535
§ 216-7. Removal of mud from tires of vehicles (24 hours).
§ 216-8. Tampering with barricades and signs in public right-of-way
(24 hours).
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove or destroy
barricades, barriers, signs, survey markers or signals placed in the public
right-of-way by the City or agents thereof. Penalty: $500 municipal
infraction citation.
§ 216-9. Maintenance of vegetation and structures adjacent to
public right-of-way (10 days).
A. Every person, company, utility or corporation, within 24 hours after
being notified to do so by the City, shall remove from the streets and
highways all earth, sand, rock, manure, rubbish, gasoline, petroleum
products or any material that may have dripped, discharged, sifted,
leaked from or otherwise escaped from vehicles, Hazardous conditions
shall be removed immediately. Penalty: $200 municipal infraction
citation.
B. If any person shall fail to comply with this section, the City shall remove
the material, and the cost of such removal and repair of any damage
shall be charged against the person responsible therefor.
A. It shall be unlawful to drive or move a vehicle onto any public street or
alley unless the person driving or moving the vehicle shall first remove
any mud or earth from the wheels, tires or tread of the vehicle in order
to prevent such mud or earth from dropping, tracking or otherwise
escaping therefrom onto the street or alley.
B. If any person shall, after being notified by the City or the Maryland
Department of the Environment to clean and remove any mud or earth
which has been dropped or tracked from the wheels, tires or bed of
vehicles driven or moved onto the streets or alleys, fall to do so within
24 hours after receiving such notice, the City shall have such street or
alley cleaned and the cost of such removal, and repair of any damage,
shall be charged against the owner of said vehicle. Penalty: $200
municipal infraction citation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any tree, vegetation, poles,
wires, signs or structures which may be located on his property to
obstruct the view of the public using the streets, alleys, railroad
crossings and highways of the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit the limbs or
foliage of any tree on his property to extend over any public sidewalk of
the City at a height less than seven feet from the ground or over any
street or alley at a height less than 15 feet, or to block traffic signals or
traffic signs.
§ 216-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-9
1:536
§ 216-10. Trees.
C. After due notice has been given to the property owner by the
Engineering Division of the obstruction of view, and upon the failure of
the property owner to remove the obstruction within 10 days after said
notice is given, then the City Department of Public Works shall have the
right to remove such obstruction and to charge the cost thereof against
the property owner and collect the same, which if unpaid, shall become
a lien against the property.
D. If the person owning any property where any such obstruction exists
shall fail or refuse to have such conditions corrected, after having been
duly notified to do so, or shall interfere with the City or its agents and
servants in correcting the same, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punishable in accordance with the general penalty
provisions of the Code of the City of Hagerstown.
A. The following conditions apply to the installation of street trees:
(1) Any street tree shall be of the species indicated on the approved
street tree list found in the Public Ways Construction Standards. No
other types shall be allowed in the public right-of-way. Trees must
be 1 3/4 inches in caliper or larger.
(2) The approved street trees shall be planted under the supervision
and direction of the Department of Public Works and in such
locations as approved by the Department of Public Works and the
Engineering Division. The planting location shall be approved after
considering factors such as traffic, site distances, maintenance
area and available growing space.
(3) Existing trees in the public right-of-way may be replaced with
approved species under the supervision and direction of the
Department of Public Works. A Maryland Department of Natural
Resources permit is required, by the laws of the State of Maryland,
to remove a street tree in the public right-of-way.
B. It shall be the duty and obligation of the owner of the property abutting
a sidewalk, alley or street or other public right-of-way to maintain all
vegetation within or adjacent to these rights-of-way, except street trees
(as defined in this chapter), the aboveground portion of which shall be
maintained by the City Department of Public Works. Nothing herein
shall impose any liability on the City for subterranean damage by street
trees.
C. The Department of Public Works shall have the right to trim or remove
any vegetation in the public right-of-way for reason of obstruction or
hazard. The Department of Public Works shall comply with the State of
Maryland Department of Natural Resources street tree removal and
replacement policies.
§ 216-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-10
1:537
§ 216-11. Underground utility to be installed or upgraded prior to
street improvements.
§ 216-12. Address numbers (10 days).
Address numbers shall be assigned by the Engineering Division with input
from other agencies. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or other
person to place any number on any building in the City until after such
number is approved by the City. It shall be unlawful for any property owner
or other person to maintain any number on any building in the City which
does not correspond with the correct number of the building as already
determined by the City or for any property owner or other person to change
any number on any building after the building has been numbered by the
City. Address numbers shall be installed on the building structure where
they are legible (four-inch minimum height) when read from the adjoining
public right-of-way, and of contrasting color to the background. Penalty:
$100 municipal infraction citation.
§ 216-13. Cellar doors (30 days).
D. No person shall cut, destroy or injure any tree or shrubbery on any of
the streets, parks or other public places of the City without the consent
of the City. Any person violating this section shall, on conviction thereof,
be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punishable by a maximum fine of
$500 and 90 days' imprisonment.
E. All underground utilities must be located by Miss Utility prior to
planting or digging.
F. Trees shall be planted a minimum distance from all utilities, driveways
and other infrastructure as specified in the Public Ways Construction
Standards.
G. All trees in the public right-of-way or on City-owned property shall be
installed per the details of the Public Ways Construction Standards.
H. See § 216-24 for replacement of sidewalk damaged by trees.
I. Penalty. Any person violating this section (excluding Subsection D) shall
be guilty of a municipal infraction citation and fined up to $200.
A. Utility companies and/or property owners abutting a public right-of-way
of the City which is about to be constructed, paved, repaved or repaired
shall install or upgrade water, gas, sewer or other utility services,
underground conduits, pipes and connections upon receiving written
notice from the City.
B. Except in case of emergency, open cutting of streets constructed or
overlaid within the last three years is prohibited when other alternative
construction methods are available. When open cuts are the only
alternative, the size of the opening shall be minimized.
§ 216-10 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-13
1:538
§ 216-14. Materials stockpiled in public right-of-way (24 hours).
In connection with a validly issued permit and City-authorized "no parking
signs," materials may be placed or stockpiled in the public right-of-way,
provided that the duration is no longer than 24 consecutive hours, is outside
the traffic lane and is not onto a public sidewalk. Materials left in violation
hereof, or left for longer than 24 consecutive hours will constitute a
violation of this section unless specific written permission is obtained from
the Engineering Division. In all cases, materials shall be clearly marked
by the use of adequate warning devices (cones, barrels, etc.), with
retroreflective markings as outlined in the latest edition of the Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Penalty: $200 municipal infraction citation.
§ 216-15. Interference with City employees or agents.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, impede, hinder or
obstruct in any manner the servants, employees, officers or agents of the
City while engaged in constructing, altering, repairing, grading or cleaning
the streets, alleys or highways of the City. Any person violating this section
shall, on conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punishable
by a maximum fine of $500 and 90 days' imprisonment.
§ 216-16. Discharge of water onto streets (10 days).
Other than roof drainage, surface drainage and utility maintenance, it shall
be unlawful for any person to permit flow or discharge of water into the
public right-of-way. Penalty: $100 municipal infraction citation.
§ 216-17. Private signs and banners.
A. No new cellar doors shall be installed in the public right-of-way of the
City without a building permit. Replacement of existing cellar doors is
allowed in compliance with building permit.
B. All cellar doors and supporting frame shall be kept in good repair. Doors
and frames shall be flush with the adjoining sidewalk and shall not
deflect under the weight of pedestrians when closed. The surface of
doors shall have a slip-resistant texture.
C. Cellar doors shall remain closed when not in use. The property owner
shall provide guards or other adequate protection when the door(s) is
open. Penalty: $200 municipal infraction citation.
A. Penalty: $200 municipal infraction citation.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or display any private signs
(nonstandard traffic signs) within the public right-of-way of the City
unless a building permit is acquired for a permanent sign or, if a
temporary sign, it is specifically permissible per the Land Management
Code (five days).
§ 216-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-17
1:539
§ 216-18. Placement of leaves or grass clippings on streets (24
hours).
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or legal entity to
place, rake or store any leaves, grass clippings or any similar material on
or upon the public streets, ways, alleys, rights-of-way or sidewalks within
the corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown. Penalty: $200 municipal
infraction citation.
§ 216-19. Unimproved rights-of-way.
Adjoining property owners are entitled to the use of unimproved right-ofway
to the center line of such right-of-way until such time as it is deemed
necessary that the right-of-way is required for public purpose, subject to the
following conditions:
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or display any banners
within the right-of-way of the City unless approved by the Mayor and
Council (24 hours).
A. Upon demand of access by the City or other property owners who also
abut on said right-of-way, the property owner using this right-of-way for
his purpose must allow such access.
B. The abutting property owner shall not erect any permanent structures
on such right-of-way.
(1) Temporary structures and parked vehicles are allowed, provided
that they can be moved within 48 hours' notice.
(2) Fences can be erected, provided that they can be removed and
reset on demand.
(3) Gardens and other planting are permitted, provided that it is
understood that such plantings may be damaged by access across
such right-of-way by others.
C. The abutting property owner is responsible for keeping this unimproved
right-of-way and items on this unimproved right-of-way in good
maintenance and repair at all times, as outlined in Chapter 64.
§ 216-17 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-19
1:540
ARTICLE II
Sidewalks and Curbs
[Amended 3-31-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-03]
§ 216-20. General sidewalk and curb regulations.
§ 216-21. South Prospect Street Historic District regulations.
Due to the historic significance of this area, the following standards
established within this section shall apply to those curbs and sidewalks
along South Prospect Street only and shall not be applicable along any other
street within the South Prospect Historic District or the City in general.
A. Curbs and sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the Public Ways Construction Standards.
B. The property owner repairing and/or replacing the curb and sidewalk
shall be responsible for any damages caused to the roadway facilities or
private property by himself, his representative, his contractors or
subcontractors or their agents.
C. Integral construction of curbs and sidewalks shall not be permitted.
Curb and sidewalks shall be formed, poured and constructed
separately.
D. Maintenance of sidewalks and curbs shall be in accordance with
§ 216-24 of this chapter.
E. All sidewalks adjoining City streets shall have a minimum width of five
feet and conform to the Public Ways Construction Standards.
Replacement sidewalk shall match existing width but shall never be less
than three feet in width.
F. Utility poles shall be installed in a manner not to impede pedestrian
traffic and shall be installed to provide a minimum three-foot clear
sidewalk. The sidewalk shall be widened by the utility as needed. Poles
shall be located at intersections to allow the standard minimum curb
radius to be constructed.
G. Any damage to public streets, curb, sidewalk, utilities, storm drain, etc.,
caused by the permittee or his agents shall be repaired to the
satisfaction of the City by the permittee.
A. Curb height.
(1) Existing curb. An existing curb determined to be in good condition
by the City may remain in place regardless of height.
(2) Replacement curb shall be in accordance with the Public Ways
Construction Standards; the curb height for replacement shall be
three inches to six inches above the existing pavement.
B. Curb material.
§ 216-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-21
1:541
§ 216-22. Sidewalk construction permit and fees.
(1) Concrete curbs as specified in the Public Ways Construction
Standards are permitted. Stone curbs, including slate, granite, etc.,
in good condition may be installed or reused, provided that the
curb is reset per the Public Ways Construction Standards.
(2) "Good condition" means that the curb is structurally sound, surface
deformations are less than 1/2 inch from normal dimensions and
the curb sections can be placed to allow less than a one-half-inch
joint between sections.
(3) Sidewalk. All sidewalks shall have a brick surface and be
constructed in accordance with the Public Ways Construction
Standards. Existing concrete sidewalks may continue in existence
until such time as their condition warrants replacement in
accordance with City Engineering Division policies.
C. Driveway entrances. All driveway entrances shall have a brick surface
and be constructed in accordance with the adopted standards for brick
driveway entrances; and the design shall be approved by the City
Engineer. Existing concrete driveway entrances may continue in
existence until such time as their condition warrants replacement in
accordance with Engineering Division policies.
A. No sidewalks or curbs shall be constructed, reconstructed, repaired or
altered without first obtaining a curb and sidewalk construction permit
to perform the work. A fee shall be charged for such permit as
established by Mayor and Council resolution. Curbs and sidewalks for
new developments may be considered as part of a general street
construction permit for work in designated public rights-of-way, issued
under the provisions of Article V of this chapter.
B. A curb and sidewalk permit will be issued effective for a period of 60
calendar days, under the following conditions:
(1) Before issuance of a permit, the location of a particular curb and
sidewalk to be constructed must be approved by the City Engineer
or his duly authorized representative.
(2) Payment of the permit fee.
(3) The project is not idle for more than 15 calendar days after portions
of the existing sidewalk or curb are removed. The permittee must
show reasonable progress in completing the work under the
permit.
(4) Violations of this section shall be subject to the penalties outlined
in § 216-25. In addition, it shall be the obligation of the property
owner to correct any incorrect or defective work performed by his
contractor or subcontractor, representative, agent or himself.
§ 216-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-22
1:542
§ 216-23. Entrance permits and fees.
Refer to § 216-48 for requirements on entrance construction and access
permits. A fee shall be charged for such permit as established by Mayor and
Council resolution.
§ 216-24. Responsibility for construction and repair of sidewalks
and curbs and abatement of nuisance.
Failure to do so in the time allotted by the City shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated per § 216-24.
A. Sidewalks and curbs along the public streets and thoroughfares within
the corporate limits of the City shall be constructed and kept in a
reasonable state of repair by the abutting property owner.
B. Nuisances.
(1) In the event that a sidewalk or curb within the corporate limits of
the City of Hagerstown shall be determined by the City Engineer or
his designee, based on policies approved by the Mayor and City
Council, to be in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health,
safety, welfare or property of others, such condition shall constitute
a nuisance. In the event that any person allows any nuisance as
defined herein to exist on any premises or property within the
corporate limits of the City, said person or corporation shall be
provided 90 calendar days' written notice from the Engineering
Division of the City to abate said nuisance.
(2) In the event that said nuisance is not abated within 90 calendar
days of receipt of such notice, such person or corporation shall be
in violation of this subsection and shall be subject to the abatement
procedures contained herein.
(3) In the event that said nuisance is not abated within 90 calendar
days of receipt of such notice, the City shall have the authority at
any time thereafter, within the discretion of the City Engineer or his
designee, to cause the nuisance and violation to be abated. All costs
for any such abatement, plus reasonable administrative fees, shall
be the responsibility of the abutting property owner who was
notified under this section. Said person or corporation shall be
provided a prompt billing notice of all reasonable charges and fees
incurred in connection with the abatement. Payment for said
charges and fees shall be due in full from the abutting property
owner within 30 days of the date the billing notice was mailed by
the City. Failure to remit payment in full may result in collection
pursuant to Article III, Tax Liens, § 223-11 of the City Code, or by
other civil proceeding or remedy.
C. When an abutting property owner is given notice by the Engineering
Division to construct or repair a sidewalk or curb, or both a sidewalk
§ 216-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-24
1:543
§ 216-25. Violation and penalties for permit violation.
and curb, and said owner fails to comply with said notice by the date
set forth by the Engineering Division in the official notice, then the
person or corporation failing to observe the provisions of this section
shall, on conviction thereof, be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall
be fined in an amount not to exceed $500 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
such a violation is permitted to exist. This penalty is in addition to the
abatement procedure and penalties outlined in Subsection B herein.
D. The time frame of 90 calendar days may be extended to 12 calendar
months when said curb and/or sidewalk is adjacent to a planned City
street overlay and the condition of the curb and/or sidewalk is not a
safety hazard as deemed by the inspector.
E. Curbs, curb and gutter or sidewalks damaged by street trees (as
defined in this chapter) shall be replaced by the City of Hagerstown.
Curb, curb and gutter or sidewalks damaged by any other trees shall be
replaced by the adjoining property owners.
A. When the City Engineer or his representative determines that a
violation of a City-issued permit or an approved construction plan has
occurred, the inspector shall notify the on-site personnel or the
permittee in writing of the violation, describing the required corrective
action and the time period in which to have the violation corrected.
B. If the violation persists after the date specified for corrective action in
the notice of violation, the City Engineer or his representative shall
determine the extent to which work shall be stopped, which may
include all work on the site except that work necessary to correct the
violation, and issue a citation. Except when specifically defined
otherwise herein, any violation of this article shall be considered a
municipal infraction. The penalty shall be $200 for each day the
violation occurs.
C. If a person is working without a permit, the City Engineer or his
representative shall stop work on the site immediately, except activity
necessary to provide health and safety, until a permit is secured. Fees
shall be doubled for said permit.
§ 216-24 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-25
1:544
ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Amended 3-31-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-03]
§ 216-26. Removal from sidewalks.
Refer to Chapter 64, Article III, for requirements on the removal of snow
and ice from sidewalks.
§ 216-27. Removal from streets.
Refer to Chapter 207 for requirements on snow removal from streets and
snow emergencies.
§ 216-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-27
1:545

ARTICLE IV
Work Zones and Street Cutting Standards
[Amended 7-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-32; 6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-15; 3-31-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-03]
§ 216-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish standards for excavations in public
rights-of-way and to regulate and improve the safe flow of traffic through
work zones.
§ 216-29. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the Annotated Code of Maryland Article
23A, the Transportation Article, § 25-106, and the Charter of the City of
Hagerstown, which provide that a local authority may require the
placement of appropriate traffic control devices to carry out the Maryland
Vehicle Law.
§ 216-30. Permits.
A. Pavement openings in existing streets, alleys or other public rights-ofway
shall require a permit for street opening issued by the City
Engineering Division. Work plans and traffic control plans shall be
required and approved prior to issuance of the permit. Emergency
street openings can be made without a permit by public utility
companies. In such cases, a permit shall be obtained at the earliest
possible time, but not more than 24 hours after the excavation is made.
(In case an emergency occurs on a weekend or holiday, a permit should
be obtained within the first eight working hours of the Engineering
Division).
B. It is the intent of the City to charge a permit fee which approximates the
actual cost of required inspection services, the loss of the useful life of
the affected street or alley and the increased maintenance efforts by the
City to attend to the street patch over the future years. A permit
application fee of $25 will be charged in addition to a pavement
degradation fee and marking damage fee in accordance with the
following schedule:
§ 216-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-30
1:547
Type of Street
Individual
Trenches
[trench less than
or equal to 25
linear feet
(fee per each
individual
trench)]
Continuous
Trenches
[overall trench
greater than 25
linear feet
(fee charges per
100 linear feet or
parts thereof)]
Newly constructed streets
(year 0 through 3) (only
emergency digs allowed)
$1,000 $1,500
Newly constructed streets
(after year 3, prior to
overlay)
$150 $250
Overlay streets (year 0 to
3)
$400 $500
Overlay streets (after year
3 to next overlay) or grass
and sidewalk areas
$150 $225
(1) Where existing traffic lines or traffic markings exist and are
destroyed by the permittee's work, a marking damage fee shall be
levied to cover the cost of the City to replace or repaint these traffic
lines and markings as follows, with a minimum charge of $5:
(a) Line paintings (four inches wide) at $3 per linear foot.
(b) Markings (greater than four inches wide) at $20 per square
foot.
(2) Existing traffic signs shall be maintained in work zones by the
permittee and shall only be removed with permission by a
representative of the Engineering Division. Where existing traffic
signs are misplaced or destroyed by the permittee's work, the
permittee shall correct the situation within two working days. If the
permittee fails to correct the situation, the City Department of
Public Works shall correct the situation and the permittee shall
reimburse the City for all costs.
C. In addition to the current permit fee required herein, a technology fee
of $25 will be required in connection with the issuance of each permit.
D. Except in case of an emergency, open cutting of streets constructed or
overlaid within the last three years is prohibited when other alternative
construction methods are available. When open cuts are the only
alternative, the size of the opening shall be minimized.
§ 216-30 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-30
1:548
§ 216-31. Performance surety.
§ 216-32. Period of validity of permits.
E. It shall be the responsibility of all utilities to complete all necessary
main and lateral upgrades on all streets scheduled to be resurfaced
prior to the start of the overlay. A fifty-percent reduction in permit fees
shall be granted to utilities performing mainline replacements (in
excess of 25 linear feet) within two years prior to a scheduled overlay.
F. Construction plans and specifications along with a traffic control plan
shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval prior to receipt of a
permit. A copy of the permit shall be available for inspection at all times
at the construction site while work is in progress.
G. Utilities shall assume full responsibility to the State Highway
Administration for securing permits required for openings and their
repair on U.S. Route 40.
A. Prior to the issuance of a permit for work and/or excavation within a
City right-of-way, the City Engineer may require a performance surety.
If required, the permittee shall file with his permit a performance
surety. This shall be presented in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.
The surety shall be in an amount not less than the estimated value of
the restoration of the public right-of-way costs. Said surety shall be in
full force and effect until after final inspection and acceptance by the
Engineering Division of the restoration work.
B. For utilities that require frequent permits, the City Engineer may
request an annual surety for work anticipated in the following calendar
year. The amount of said surety, to be determined by the City Engineer
during the first week in December of each year, will cover a one-year
period beginning January 1.
A. All permits shall be valid for a period of 45 days unless it is determined
by the City Engineer that the nature and scope of the project justifies a
longer period. This time exception shall be requested by the permittee
and shall be identified on the permit.
B. At the expiration date of the permit, the repairs shall be complete and
ready for inspection. If the permit expiration date is between May 1 and
October 31, the work done under these permits shall be permanently
repaired in accordance with the Public Ways Construction Standards.
Failure to comply with this section shall be considered a municipal
infraction and subject to a daily penalty set forth in § 216-35.
C. Work done under permits expiring between November 1 and April 30
can be temporarily repaired in accordance with § 216-33. The
permanent repair shall be done during the following months of April
through May 30. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to maintain all
temporary repairs until the permanent work is completed. Failure to
§ 216-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-32
1:549
§ 216-33. General regulation for street openings.
The City Engineer shall require all work to be accomplished at such times
or on such days as may be required to minimize traffic interference in
accordance with rules and regulations established by the State Highway
Administration and incorporated in § 216-34 herein. Restoration of the
right-of-way structures and surfaces shall be done by the permittee. All
costs shall be borne by the permittee. General requirements for street
openings are as follows:
comply with this section shall be considered a municipal infraction and
subject to the daily penalty set forth in § 216-35.
A. A contractor, corporation, public utility or franchise utility shall
maintain one lane of traffic, utilizing traffic control standards
referenced in § 216-34.
B. No more than 250 linear feet measured longitudinally shall be opened
in any street at any one time unless special permission is granted, in
writing, by the City Engineer.
C. Any existing utility encountered or affected shall be protected from
damage. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to notify any affected
utilities involved. Damage caused by the contractor's work shall be
repaired at the contractor's expense to the satisfaction of the respective
utility or owner. Any damage to public street, curb, sidewalk, utilities,
storm drain, etc., caused by the permittee or his agents shall be
repaired to the satisfaction of the City by the permittee.
D. Work interfering with the established drainage system shall be
accomplished with provisions made for temporary drainage facilities.
E. Trench excavation, backfill, construction procedures and pavement
restoration shall be followed by the permittee throughout the progress
of the work and shall conform to City of Hagerstown Public Ways
Construction Standards and shall comply with federal safety
regulations, as required by law.
F. Access to private driveways shall be provided except when actual
construction operations prohibit provision of such access. Free access
must be provided at all times to all fire hydrants, except those under
repair or otherwise deactivated. When a fire hydrant is to be
deactivated or temporarily put out of service, the permittee shall notify
the Fire Chief 48 hours in advance.
G. Pedestrian movements shall be maintained. Temporary walkways are
required, when possible, for projects with a duration of more than three
working days. When sidewalks must be closed, closure and temporary
signage must comply with standard details available from the
Engineering Division.
§ 216-32 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-33
1:550
H. The construction site shall be thoroughly cleaned of all excavated
materials, tools, equipment, barricades or litter upon completion of the
work. While work is in progress, the site shall be left in a neat and clean
condition at the end of each working day with traffic control in place
and operational. Excavated materials shall be placed so as to cause a
minimum of inconvenience to public travel.
I. Individuals, City departments, corporations, etc., making pavement
cuts, permanent street repairs, or excavation in the public right-of-way
shall be responsible for any work performed for a period of one year
after the expiration date of the permit, or one year after final inspection
and acceptance by the City inspector if such acceptance occurs before
the expiration date of the permit. If the repair becomes defective in any
way within the one-year warranty period, the permittee shall replace or
repair to City Standards and a new one-year warranty period begins.
J. It shall be the responsibility of the utility to notify the City Engineer
prior to and after the completion of work when any traffic lane will be
temporarily blocked or there are any deviations from the approved
traffic control plans. Refer to § 216-34.
K. When the utility is notified that the City is planning a street
construction or reconstruction project, the utility may be required to
provide the City, within 90 days of said notice, an engineering report on
the utility system in the project area. Said report shall include, but not
be limited to the following:
(1) System description (size, location, depth, age, materials, etc.).
(2) Adequacy to serve projected needs (20 years minimum).
(3) Statement of condition.
(4) Proposed improvements to system, time schedule, etc.
L. All underground utilities marked with the rights-of-way of the City of
Hagerstown shall comply with the following color code set forth by
Maryland State Law:
Utility Color Symbol
Electric Red -EGas/
oil Yellow -G-/-OCommunications
Orange -Tel-/-Tv-
Water Blue -WSewer
Green -SProposed
excavation White
NOTE: Anyone intending to excavate shall contact Miss Utility at
1-800-257-7777 a minimum of two working days before the excavation
is planned.
§ 216-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-33
1:551
§ 216-34. Traffic control in utility work areas.
M. General safety requirements to be followed by the permittee
throughout the progress of the work shall conform to Maryland
Occupational Safety Standards.
N. Temporary traffic control signs, channelization devices and barricades
shall have suitable reflectorized portions to be effective at night and
shall be in conformance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
O. At the end of each working day, excavations shall be plated, backfilled
and temporarily restored with bituminous material or shall be
adequately protected by barricades and devices per the Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Plates shall be securely anchored to
the road surface, shall be ramped with bituminous asphalt and advance
warning signs installed. Patches shall be permanently restored prior to
the expiration date of the permit as outlined in § 216-32.
A. Any person, firm, business, corporation or utility company, including
employees of the City, who has obtained permission to excavate any of
the streets, lanes or alleys of the City is required to take all proper
measures to ensure the safety of passing vehicles and pedestrians from
loss of life or injury to person or property. All temporary traffic control
measures shall comply with current Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD) regulations and the Maryland State Highway
Administration's Book of Standard Traffic Control Plans. These MDSHA
traffic control plans may be modified with approval of the City Engineer
or his designee, when appropriate for conditions within the City.
B. The Engineering Division shall review and approve all traffic control
plans. Special requirements may be placed on the permittee based on
traffic patterns, and additional restrictions may apply in the morning
and evening peak traffic volume periods.
C. Emergency operations, at a minimum, shall use advance warning
sign(s), flashing lights on the vehicle and channelizing devices. For
extensive emergency operations it is expected that additional traffic
control devices will be placed as soon as possible to present an array of
devices which are consistent with the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD) regulations and the Maryland State Highway
Administration's Book of Standard Traffic Control Plans. These MDSHA
traffic control plans may be modified with approval of the City Engineer
or his designee, when appropriate for conditions within the City.
D. For nonexcavation activities that are mobile, short-term or of short
duration (as defined in the MUTCD), traffic control shall still be
provided in accordance with the Maryland State Highway
Administration's Standard Traffic Control Plans and the MUTCD.
Typically, mobile operation shall utilize warning lights in front and rear
of the vehicle, and also a rotating and/or yellow flashing light on top of
§ 216-33 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-34
1:552
§ 216-35. Violations and penalties.
the vehicle. However, there will be situations where additional traffic
control devices, such as signs, strobe lights, flags and/or channelizing
devices, should be used.
(1) Additional traffic control devices should be placed in advance on a
hill or curve which obstructs the approaching traffic's view of a
stopped mobile operation. A vehicle should not occupy or be
stopped in a lane beyond a horizontal curve or vertical curve (hill).
Vehicles stopping are to be pulled as far off the road as possible or
be otherwise parked in a manner as to inhibit the movement of
traffic as little as necessary.
(2) Mobile operations that encroach on a travel lane reducing the
effective lane width to less than nine feet may not take place during
the aforesaid peak hours.
E. Prior to beginning any work operations, any person, firm, business,
corporation, utility company or governmental body which in the course
of its work operations will impede or impair the normal flow of traffic
must submit a traffic control plan to the City Engineer for approval. The
City Engineer or designee shall review the traffic control plan for its
adherence to the applicable traffic control standard drawings and/or
the MUTCD before granting a permit. The traffic control plan in utility
work areas will be kept on file at the Engineering Division along with
any subsequent additions or amendments thereto. An exception to this
will only be considered for emergencies and short-term (less than one
day) operations.
A. When the City Engineer or his representative determines that a
violation of a City-issued permit or an approved construction plan has
occurred, the inspector shall notify the on-site personnel or the
permittee in writing of the violation, describing the required corrective
action and the time period in which to have the violation corrected.
B. If the violation persists after the date specified for corrective action in
the notice of violation, the City Engineer or his representative shall
determine the extent to which work shall be stopped, which may
include all work on the site except that work necessary to correct the
violation, and issue citation. Except when specifically defined otherwise
herein, any violation of this article shall be considered a municipal
infraction. The penalty shall be $200 for each day the violation occurs.
C. If a person is working without a permit, the City Engineer or his
representative shall stop work on the site immediately, except activity
necessary to provide health and safety, until a permit is obtained. Fees
shall be doubled for said permit.
§ 216-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-36
1:553
§ 216-36. Enforcement and abatement.
Whenever the City Engineer or his duly authorized representative finds that
work areas under a permit fail to conform to the approved traffic control
plan, to these rules and regulations or to the City standards for pavement
and street openings, he may, by written order, suspend work until direct
conformance has been achieved or he may direct that such other measures
be performed that he deems necessary under the circumstances. In cases
where the permittee is unable or refuses to perform, the City Engineer may
order the appropriate City department or agent of the City to correct the
problem and charge the permittee for the cost of all labor, material and
equipment, plus 15% for administration and billing.
§ 216-36 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-36
1:554
ARTICLE V
General Street Construction Permits
[Amended 3-31-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-03]
§ 216-37. Purpose and general regulations.
The Engineering Division shall issue a general street construction permit
for street construction in designated public rights-of-way or rights-of-way
to be dedicated to the City and from time to time establish by Mayor and
Council resolution such fees as deemed necessary to cover the cost of
administering the provisions of this article.
A. Site plan and/or plat approval by the Planning Commission is a
prerequisite to obtaining a permit to construct any facility or
improvement within a public right-of-way or proposed right-of-way,
unless otherwise provided herein.
B. No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
agency or organization of any kind shall construct, alter or demolish
any facility within a designated right-of-way in any manner without first
obtaining a permit to do so. Surface maintenance activities by City
agencies are exempt from general street construction permits.
However, utility improvements and street openings are subject to
Article IV of this chapter. No work in public rights-of-way or to
construct proposed public ways shall commence until a permit is
obtained. Work without a permit shall be considered a violation of this
chapter and subject to § 216-43.
C. No application will be considered and no permit will be granted unless
it is accompanied by detailed plans and specifications of the proposed
work and such other information as may be required to determine the
adequacy and conformance of the proposed work to the Public Ways
Construction Standards.
D. All applications for permits for general street construction in public
rights-of-way shall be made at the Code Administration Division of the
Department of Community and Economic Development. All applications
will be reviewed for conformance with the Public Ways Construction
Standards. All construction plans for work in an existing public right-ofway
or proposed public right-of-way shall conform to the requirements
of the City Engineering Division with respect to design, final record set
submission and as-builts.
E. If any anticipated work covered by the general street construction
permit requires approval by any other local, state or federal agency, the
applicant shall obtain all approvals prior to the issuance of said general
street construction permit.
F. Any damage to public streets, curb, sidewalk, utilities, storm drain, etc.,
caused by the permittee or his agents shall be repaired to the
satisfaction of the City by the permittee.
§ 216-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-38
1:555
§ 216-38. Issuance of general permit; fees.
§ 216-39. Other required permits.
Unless covered by the general street construction permit, a separate permit
shall be required for grading, the construction of driveway entrances, curbs
and sidewalks or street openings as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 216-40. Insurance and bonds.
§ 216-41. Supervision and control.
A. Filing fee. The filing fee shall be a flat fee of $25 per subdivision or
street, as the case may be.
B. Inspection fee. The inspection fee shall be 2% of the City Engineerapproved
estimated cost of all proposed construction in the existing or
proposed public right-of-way, excluding utility work.
A. Insurance policy. When requested, the applicant shall file a certificate
of insurance policy with the City as coinsured, conditioned to protect
and save harmless the City of Hagerstown from all claims for damages
to property or injury to person by reason of such construction,
alteration or demolition work.
B. Security or performance bond. By the provisions of Chapter 140, Land
Management Code, the applicant shall file a surety, cash bond,
performance bond (from a company qualified to transact business in the
State of Maryland), an irrevocable letter of credit, or other means of
surety. The amount shall be equal to the estimated cost of the required
public improvements, whereby these improvements, including public
utilities, may be installed without cost to the City in the event of default
of the applicant.
C. Bonding and insuring agencies shall be released from financial
responsibility upon official acceptance of the work and with the
expiration of the one-year guaranteed maintenance period.
A. Administration.
(1) All construction, alteration and demolition work for which a permit
is granted hereunder shall be under the administration of the City
Engineer.
(2) The City Engineer shall have the authority to cause all operations
for which a permit is granted hereunder to cease when the
permittee fails to comply with the approved plans and/or conditions
of the general street construction permit.
B. Time limits; extension of time. When a permit has been issued, work
thereunder must be commenced within 60 days and thereafter be
continued to the conclusion of all work covered. A permit shall
§ 216-38 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-41
1:556
§ 216-42. Approval of work.
§ 216-43. Violations and penalties.
automatically expire two years after its issuance. Upon showing a
reasonable necessity, the City Engineer may extend the expiration date
of a permit without payment of additional fee.
C. Inspection services. Inspection services will be performed and
administered by the Engineering Division, or designees, to assure
compliance with the permit.
D. Failure to complete work. Upon failure of the permittee to comply with
the terms of the permit or to correct deficient work, the City Engineer
may order the work corrected or completed and the cost thereof
recovered under the obligation of the surety or this may be cause for
the City to reject acceptance of said work until corrected or completed.
E. Building permits for properties contiguous to the public way shall not
be issued until streets and all other public improvements are accepted
for ownership and maintenance by the City of Hagerstown or adequate
surety is provided to ensure proper construction of the public
improvements per Chapter 140, Land Management.
A. Final approval. Final approval of construction work under the general
street construction permit shall be given by the City Engineer after a
final field inspection shows that the work conforms in all respects to the
City standards and the requirements of the permit.
B. Partial approval. The permittee may request final approval of a part
(less than all) of the work covered by a general street construction
permit. A corresponding reduction in the surety amount can be
requested by the permittee and released at the absolute discretion of
the City Engineer.
A. When the City Engineer or his representative determines that a
violation of City-issued permit or an approved construction plan has
occurred, the inspector shall notify the on-site personnel or the
permittee in writing of the violation, describing the required corrective
action and the time period in which to have the violation corrected.
B. If the violation persists after the date specified for corrective action in
the notice of violation, the City Engineer or his representative shall
determine the extent to which work shall be stopped, which may
include all work on the site except that work necessary to correct the
violation, and issue a citation. Except when specifically defined
otherwise herein, any violation of this article shall be considered a
municipal infraction. The penalty shall be $200 for each day the
violation occurs.
C. If a person is working without a permit, the City Engineer or his
representative shall stop work on the site immediately, except activity
§ 216-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-43
1:557
necessary to provide health and safety, until a permit is obtained. Fees
shall be doubled for said permit.
§ 216-43 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-43
1:558
ARTICLE VI
Street Design Criteria
[Amended 3-31-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-03]
§ 216-44. Street classification system.
The street classification system for public streets shall be defined and
set forth in Public Ways Construction Standards adopted by the City of
Hagerstown and included herein by reference. This classification will be the
basis for specific construction details and design criteria.
§ 216-45. Design elements.
§ 216-46. Street pavement.
§ 216-47. Alley pavement.
A. Vertical and horizontal alignment, rights-of-way and pavement widths
and all shall be in conformance with the Public Ways Construction
Standards and specifications adopted by the City of Hagerstown and
included herein by reference.
B. Design elements not specifically contained in the Public Ways
Construction Standards shall comply with the minimum requirements
of the latest edition of the AASHTO (American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials) design publications, or the
Maryland State Highway Administration Standards and Specifications
or other standards approved by the City Engineer.
C. Traffic impact studies shall be completed by developers following the
latest Engineering Division guidelines. Impacts caused by development
shall be mitigated per these guidelines and constructed per the Public
Ways Construction Standards.
A. Streets shall be so designed and constructed that they meet the
minimum typical paving sections requirements of the Public Ways
Construction Standards based on street classifications as determined
by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may add additional
requirements for pavement thickness, drainage, etc., based on specific
field conditions.
B. Alternate design. Any alternate pavement design other than those given
in the Public Ways Construction Standards must be approved by the
City Engineer.
C. Utilities. No work on street construction above the subgrade shall be
started until all underground utilities have been installed.
A. Alleys shall be so designed and constructed that they meet the
minimum pavement section requirements of the Public Ways
Construction Standards, based on residential or commercial use as
§ 216-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-47
1:559
§ 216-48. Driveways and entrances.
Driveway entrances shall be constructed in accordance with the Public
Ways Construction Standards and in accordance with the following:
determined by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may add additional
requirements for pavement thickness, drainage, etc., based on specific
field conditions.
B. Alternate design. Any alternate pavement design other than those given
in the Public Ways Construction Standards must be approved by the
City Engineer.
C. Utilities. No work on alley construction above the subgrade shall be
started until all underground utilities have been installed.
A. Access permits shall be issued in conformance with the policies of the
City Engineering Division. No access to a City street or right-of-way
from a public or private development shall be allowed except at points
approved by the City Engineer and at points for which an entrance
permit has been obtained. An entrance permit for lots in new
developments may be considered as part of a general street
construction permit to work in public rights-of-way issued under the
provisions of Article V of this chapter.
B. The owner of the property under which an entrance is being
constructed shall be held responsible for any damages caused to the
roadway facilities or private property by himself, his representatives,
his contractor or subcontractor or their agents.
C. Unless contained in the general street construction permit for work in
designated public rights-of-way, an entrance permit will be issued
effective for a period of 60 calendar days after the following procedures
have been satisfactorily completed:
(1) The proposed entrance location as it pertains to public safety and
adequate drainage facilities is approved by the City Engineer.
(2) If requested, an acceptable form of surety for an amount not less
than $1,000 shall be obtained in order to insure satisfactory
completion.
(3) The payment of the permit fee.
(4) The project is not idle for more than 15 calendar days after portions
of the existing entrance is removed. The permittee must show
reasonable progress in completing the work under the permit.
D. An entrance permit may be renewed at the discretion of the
Engineering Division by remitting a renewal fee equal to the original
permit fee.
E. An entrance permit may be revoked under the following circumstances:
§ 216-47 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-48
1:560
(1) The entrance is not completed after the initial sixty-calendar-day
permit period.
(2) Construction is not in accordance with the terms of the permit or
the Public Ways Construction Standards.
F. If a bond is not obtained and the work is unsatisfactory, it is the
obligation of the property owner to correct any incorrect or defective
work performed by his contractor, subcontractor, representative agent
or himself. Failure to do so in the time allotted by the City shall
constitute a nuisance and may be abated per § 216-24.
G. If any entrance permit is revoked, the City will so notify the property
owner of the reason(s), and the Engineering Division shall itemize the
corrective actions which must be undertaken to make an entrance
acceptable. After being so revoked, a property owner must reapply for a
new permit and comply with all conditions therein. The City Engineer
may modify or add additional requirements to the entrance standards
provided in the Public Ways Construction Standards based on field
conditions, proposed use, traffic volumes, type of traffic, etc.
H. The center line of entrances and driveways shall be at a right angle to
the center line of the highway. An angle between 90° and 60° shall be
acceptable only if physical constraints require a skew angle less than
90°. An angle less than 60° is prohibited.
I. No entrance radius or depression of curb for an entrance shall extend
beyond the property frontage which the entrance serves.
J. In general, the distance between a public street intersection and a
proposed entrance shall be maximized, and approved by the City
Engineer.
K. The City reserves the right to close any driveway entrance which is
causing a hazard to the traveling public or causing undue traffic
impediment. The City shall give adequate, written notice to the
property owner and seek alternatives before enforcing this subsection.
L. The access entrance shall be designed to facilitate the movement of
vehicles off the street to prevent the queuing of vehicles on the traveled
way. The City Engineer may require street improvements to
accommodate turning vehicles using the entrance.
M. Access permits shall not be approved for parking areas that require
backing maneuvers within a City right-of-way. All off-street parking
areas must include on-site maneuvering areas and aisles to permit user
vehicles to enter and exit the site in forward drive without hesitation.
The only exception shall be for residential driveways on local streets,
when approved by the City Engineer.
§ 216-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-48
1:561
§ 216-49. Violations and penalties.
N. Unused entrances or entrances without a stone or paved driveway may
be ordered replaced by the property owner with standard curb and
sidewalk at the discretion of the City.
A. When the City Engineer or his representative determines that a
violation of a City-issued permit or an approved construction plan has
occurred, the inspector shall notify the on-site personnel or the
permittee in writing of the violation, describing the required corrective
action and the time period in which to have the violation corrected.
B. If the violation persists after the date specified for corrective action in
the notice of violation, the City Engineer or his representative shall
determine the extent to which work shall be stopped, which may
include all work on the site except that work necessary to correct the
violation, and issue citation. Except when specifically defined otherwise
herein, any violation of this article shall be considered a municipal
infraction. The penalty shall be $200 for each day the violation occurs.
C. If a person is working without a permit, the City Engineer or his
representative shall stop work on the site immediately, except activity
necessary to provide health and safety, until a permit is obtained. Fees
shall be doubled for said permit.
§ 216-48 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-49
1:562
ARTICLE VII
Storm Drainage Design Criteria
[Amended 3-31-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-03]
§ 216-50. General criteria.
§ 216-51. Estimation of runoff.
For drainage areas less than 100 acres, runoff may be estimated by the
Rational Formula (Q = CIA). For drainage areas in excess of 100 acres,
runoff shall be estimated by the methods and procedures as described in
the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service
publication entitled "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" (Technical
Release No. 55) or by other methods and procedures acceptable to the
Maryland Department of the Environment and the City Engineer.
A. Storm drainage systems shall be designed on the basis of ultimate
development of the tributary watershed. Where the nature of future
development is uncertain, the Engineering Division should be consulted
by the designer for the purpose of estimating the type of future
development to be expected.
B. A "public drainage system" is generally defined as those pipes and
structures intercepting water from public streets. The City of
Hagerstown shall only maintain storm drain systems in the accepted
public right-of-way or accepted easements specifically for City
maintenance of the storm drain.
C. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be used for all storm drain systems and
culverts in the public right-of-way. All pipe shall be a minimum of Class
IV.
D. All materials and construction must be in accordance with the Public
Ways Construction Standards and the Maryland State Highway
Administrations Standard Specifications for Construction and
Materials.
A. The Rational Formula is as follows:
Q = CIA
Where:
Q = Flow rate of runoff expressed in cubic feet per second.
C = Runoff coefficient.
I = Rainfall intensity expressed in inches per hour for a given
storm frequency.
A = Drainage area expressed in acres.
B. The values for the coefficient of runoff (C) and the intensity of rainfall (I)
shall be selected from the Maryland State Highway Administration
§ 216-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-51
1:563
§ 216-52. Return frequencies.
Drainage Manual. Design method shall be per this manual and the
following:
(1) Runoff coefficient (C). The runoff coefficient, used in computing
flow to a point under consideration, shall be a composite of the C
factors for all the areas tributary to this point. For drainage areas
containing several different types of soil, cover or slopes, a
weighted value of C must be used.
(2) Rainfall intensity (I). Rainfall intensity shall be determined from the
rainfall intensity curves provided in the Maryland State Highway
Administration Highway Drainage Manual.
(3) Time of concentration (TC). The "time of concentration" shall
generally be defined as the total time required for runoff to flow
from the most remote point in the drainage area to the point of
investigation. It shall be the sum of the duration of flow for all types
such as overland flow (sheet and shallow concentrated flow), swale
flow, ditch flow and pipe flow (each if applicable). The selected flow
path shall be representative of the drainage area as a whole.
Overland flow through most areas will become channel flow within
400 feet. Stream or channel flow time should be computed by
estimating the average velocity in each type of course and dividing
it into the total length of flow through that course. In no instance
shall a time of concentration of less than six minutes be used for
any drainage computation.
(4) Drainage area (A). Care should be taken to assure that all areas
delivering runoff to the point under consideration shall be included.
The extent of the drainage area should be determined from field
observations and one of the following sources (the highest order of
information available shall be used):
(a) Photogrammetric maps that are available at the City
Engineering Division.
(b) Washington County photogrammetric maps.
(c) United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps.
(d) Field observations.
A. All enclosed storm drain systems shall be designed for the ten-year
design storm frequency.
B. All cross culverts shall be designed based on ultimate development of
the contributing watershed and the following design storms:
§ 216-51 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-52
1:564
§ 216-53. Design of pipe and culvert size.
§ 216-54. Storm drain system design.
Storm drains and all closed systems passing longitudinal or transverse to
the roadway shall be designed based on the procedures outlined in the
Maryland State Highway Administration Drainage Manual. The hydraulic
gradient for the ten-year storm shall be a minimum of one foot below the
bottom of manhole covers and inlet grates. The hydraulic gradient shall be
determined for all storm drain systems. Inlets may be spaced to intercept
the portion of the gutter flow for the two-year storm, but storm drain pipes
City Roadway Classification Design Storm Frequency
Local 25
Minor collector 25
Major collector 25
Arterial 50
C. The spacing of storm sewer inlets on closed roadways shall be
determined by the use of a two-year storm design storm frequency.
A. The minimum diameter of storm drain pipe shall be 15 inches (or the
equivalent pipe arch size). Where abrupt alignment changes are
required, an inlet, manhole or bend structure shall be placed at the
point of change.
B. Storm drain shall typically be laid on a straight horizontal and vertical
alignment. Pipes may be deflected per the manufacturer's
recommendation.
C. The minimum slope of pipe shall not be less than 0.40%, and the tenyear
design storm velocity in the pipe shall not be less than three feet
per second, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. The top of
all pipes shall be at least six inches below the subgrade elevation of the
pavement.
D. Manning's Equation shall be used for determining storm sewer pipe
sizes.
E. The procedure contained in the Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 5,
Hydraulic Charts for the Selection of Highway Culverts, as prepared by
the United States Department of Transportation, shall be used for the
design of culverts.
F. Under entrance control conditions, the normal maximum relationship of
the headwater depth to the pipe diameter (HW/D) shall be 1.2. The
computed high-water elevation thus created must not cause damage to
existing properties and must be at least 0.5 foot below the edge of the
roadway shoulder. The value of HW/D may be greater than 1.2 only with
the approval of the City Engineer.
§ 216-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-54
1:565
shall be designed for the total flow from the ten-year design storm at any
location.
A. Inlets. Inlets shall be designed based on the procedures in the Maryland
State Highway Administration Drainage Manual and the following
criteria:
(1) Inlets shall be spaced with runoff from the two-year storm. The
allowable spread of water in a curb or curb-and-gutter section shall
be eight feet. Inlets shall be located at the upgrade side of all public
road intersections and median breaks, and in superelevation
transitions approximately 50 feet ahead of the section where the
cross slope is level. Inlets on a continuous grade shall be spaced to
intercept at least 85% of the total gutter flow where practical. Flow
bypassing that inlet shall be included in the total gutter flow
contributing to the next inlet downstream unless it is carried off on
a side street or is otherwise intercepted.
(2) For closed roadways (with curb), runoff from cut slopes and areas
off the right-of-way shall, wherever possible, be intercepted by
channels in order to reduce the amount of water flowing onto the
street pavement, particularly on the high side of superelevated
roadways.
(3) All inlets shall be City standard inlets as designated in the Public
Ways Construction Standards.
B. Bend structures. The use of bend structures is discouraged and may
only be used on pipe sizes 24 inches in diameter and larger with the
approval of the City Engineer.
C. Manholes and other structures.
(1) Structures shall be as designated in the Public Ways Construction
Standards. Refer to this document for structures, flow channels
and field connections.
(2) For pipe 24 inches in diameter and smaller, manholes or other
structures providing access to the pipe from the surface shall be
placed at intervals not exceeding 400 feet. On pipes 27 inches in
diameter and larger, access structures may be spaced at greater
intervals.
(3) The grade of the main line pipe should normally be carried through
the invert of structures unless greater drop is required by hydraulic
conditions. A minimum drop of 0.1 foot shall be provided through
the invert of any structure.
(4) The use of field connections is discouraged and may only be used
with the approval of the City Engineer.
§ 216-54 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-55
1:566
§ 216-55. Design of open channels.
The hydraulic design of channels consists of determining whether the
proposed channel is sufficient to carry the design peak flow and
determining the type of lining necessary to prevent scour or undesirable
sedimentation in the channel. The second phase of the design should also
include the determination of the point where the ditch lining must change
from one erosion protective lining to another.
A. Design. Open channels shall be designed based on procedures outlined
in the Maryland State Highway Administration Drainage Manual.
B. Location and alignment. Drainage channels shall be located as to
change the original drainagecourse as little as possible. Design should
provide gradual horizontal alignment changes and be located near or
on a property line when feasible.
C. Limiting velocities. The maximum velocity in ditches shall be taken
from the following table, according to the type of lining.
(1) New construction.
Type of Lining
Allowable Velocity
(feet per second)
Seed and mulch 2.0
Solid sodding 4.0
Soil stabilization matting 6.0 (or manufacturer's
recommendation)
Dumped or placed riprap
(four-inch to seven-inch
stone)
Refer to SHA Chart
Concrete or macadam
paving
No maximum
Storm drain outlet
protection
Refer to Maryland Standards and
Specifications for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control
(2) Investigation of existing ditches/channels.
Type of Lining
Allowable Velocity
(feet per second)
Earth, without vegetation 1.0 to 3.0
Grains, still-stemmed grasses 2.0 to 3.0
Stiff clay, or clay and gravel 5.0
Meadow-type grasses, short
pliant blades; lawn grasses,
short pliant blades
5.0
§ 216-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-55
1:567
§ 216-56. Structural considerations.
§ 216-57. Storm drain connection permits.
§ 216-58. Stormwater management.
Refer to Chapter 213, Stormwater Management, for criteria on the
management of runoff caused by development or grading.
§ 216-59. Violations and penalties.
Except when specifically defined otherwise herein, any violation of this
article shall be considered a municipal infraction. Citations shall be $200
for each day the violation occurs.
§ 216-60. Appeals.
Any person, corporation, taxpayer or department of the City aggrieved by
any decision resulting in a disapproval of a properly filed application for
a permit, issuance of a written notice of violation or any alleged failure to
properly enforce the chapter in regard to a specific application shall have
the right to appeal the action to the Board of Technical Appeals of the City
Coarse gravel (shingled
channels)
5.0 to 8.0
Shale and rock No maximum
D. Ditch lining. Concrete or macadam paved ditches are to be considered
as the final alternate or solution to be employed as ditch protection and,
as such, shall be avoided whenever possible.
A. Pipes, manholes, inlets, etc., located under existing or proposed paving
or public right-of-way shall be designed for a minimum HS-20 truck
load in accordance with the requirements set forth in the latest
applicable Maryland State Highway Regulations. Maximum and
minimum depths of cover allowable on pipes under various loading
conditions shall be obtained from the pipe loading tables published and
certified by the certified pipe manufacturer.
B. Reinforced concrete box culverts or bridges shall be designed in
accordance with the latest applicable Maryland State Highway
Regulations.
A. No person or firm shall make any connection to any storm drain
appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit from the City
Engineer. The permit fee shall be $150 per connection.
B. The owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by
the City of Hagerstown. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent
in the judgment of the City Engineer.
§ 216-55 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-60
1:568
of Hagerstown. Each appeal to the Board of Technical Appeals shall be
filed in writing on the appropriate form accompanied by the appropriate
fee within 20 days of the date of official transmittal of the final decision or
determination to the applicant, and shall state clearly the grounds on which
the appeal is based, and shall be processed in the manner prescribed for
hearing administrative appeals under the Code of the City of Hagerstown.
§ 216-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-60
1:569

ARTICLE VIII
Private Use of Public Sidewalks
[Added 1-27-2015 by Ord. No. O-14-25]
§ 216-61. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish standards and licensing provisions
for private use of public sidewalks that have been deemed appropriate by
the Mayor and City Council.
§ 216-62. Sidewalk business license in City Center.
In the City Center Mixed-Use (CC-MU) Zoning District, the display of
merchandise on the public sidewalk shall only be permitted for abutting
businesses if a license is granted by the City for a specified time per the
parameters outlined in the City's adopted Standards and Conditions for
Sidewalk Business Licenses.
§ 216-63. Sidewalk cafe license.
The City Engineer may grant a license to occupy a portion of public
sidewalks with seating for abutting restaurant uses in those districts where
restaurants are a permitted use, provided that the cafe area is delineated
on the sidewalk cafe license. The seating area shall be subject to the criteria
of the City's Sidewalk Cafe Standards and shall be operated as approved in
the license.
§ 216-64. Sidewalk yard sales.
A. The use of the public sidewalk for display of merchandise shall be
subject to the criteria of the City's Standards and Conditions for
Sidewalk Business Licenses and shall be operated as approved in the
license.
B. Any ongoing and unlicensed merchandise display in public street
rights-of-way in existence as of the effective date of this chapter
amendment shall cease upon the effective date of this amendment.
C. This provision shall not apply to those enterprises licensed under
Chapter 176, Vendors, Peddlers and Transient Dealers, as that chapter
delineates the standards by which those enterprises may operate.
D. This provision shall not apply to activities on the public sidewalks
associated with City-sponsored or City-supported events, as those
activities are addressed by separate City policy.
A. For residential buildings abutting public sidewalk, yard sales by
homeowners or tenants is permitted on the sidewalk in front of their
dwelling unit subject to the limitations on yard sales in Chapter 140,
Land Management Code, and provided that:
(1) At least five feet of clearance is kept open for pedestrian traffic;
§ 216-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-64
1:571
§ 216-65. License for right-of-way encroachments.
A license is required for any private structure or object that encroaches into
the public right-of-way of a street or alley.
(2) No display is in front of or two feet on either side of a building
entrance, fire hydrant, or property line;
(3) The display is at least 15 feet from any adjoining street corner, alley
or driveway to provide adequate sight distance.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, "yard sale" is defined as all general
sales open to the public, conducted by a resident within the public
right-of-way abutting his/her residential premises in any zoning district.
A yard sale shall not include the sale of inventory purchased or acquired
by the resident for the purpose of resale.
A. The City Engineer or City Administrator is hereby authorized (but not
required) to negotiate the terms of and execute nonexclusive license
agreements on behalf of the City for replacement of handicap ramps,
steps, stairs, porches, stoops, fences, roof overhangs, canopies, etc.,
and for the temporary placement of street furniture that encroaches
into the public right-of-way.
B. All other license agreements including new or enlarged encroachments
into the public right-of-way shall require City Council approval.
C. All such licenses agreements shall be nonexclusive with the City
retaining its right and the public's right, where applicable, to use the
property in conjunction with the licenses.
D. Any such license agreements shall contain language that holds
harmless the City from any liability not caused by the negligence of the
City.
E. Any such license agreement shall be signed by the applicant and
recorded with the City Clerk.
F. All such license agreements shall include a clause that allows the City
to terminate the agreement at its will after giving reasonable notice to
the licensee.
G. The procedure for obtaining a license shall be in accordance with the
Engineering Division's standards and regulations for license
agreements.
§ 216-64 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 216-65
1:572
Chapter 219
(RESERVED)
Chapter 223
TAXATION
§ 216-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-65
1:573

ARTICLE I
Tax Credits for Elderly
[Adopted 4-1-1974]
§ 223-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMBINED GROSS INCOME — The combined gross income of all
homeowners, if more than one, and all persons actually residing in the same
dwelling, except persons whose contributions reasonably apportionable
towards the cost of upkeep, maintenance and repair of the dwelling are in
the form of fixed rental charges.
DWELLING — The dwelling house of one or more homeowners and the
lot or curtilage where the same is erected, which is used as the principal
residence of such homeowner or homeowners. No dwelling shall be deemed
a principal residence which is not actually occupied or expected to be
actually occupied by such homeowner or homeowners for more than six
months of some twelve-month period, including the date of application for
credit. A homeowner or homeowners may claim credit on only one such
dwelling. The Tax Collector or other official administering this program may
qualify a homeowner otherwise eligible for the tax credit if he does not
actually reside in the dwelling the required time period for reason of illness
or need of special care. If any property which is owned by a person who is
entitled to a tax credit under this article is sold to a purchaser, the tax credit
shall be terminated as of the date of transfer of the property between the
parties. The total amount of any tax credit shall be included in the amount
of ordinary taxes which were paid by the seller of the property and which
are adjusted at the time of settlement for the property between the seller
and the purchaser. The seller of the property shall receive credit only for
that portion of the tax credit which his period of ownership of the property
during the taxable year in which the transfer occurs bears to the entire
taxable year. The remaining portion of the tax credit shall be paid by the
buyer to the City, and said sums shall be deposited in the general fund of
the City.
GROSS INCOME — The total gross income from all sources, including but
not limited to gifts, whether or not included in the definitions of "gross
income" for federal or state income tax purposes, but "gross income" does
not include the amount of old-age, survivors' or disability benefits received
under the Social Security Act, as amended, or under the Railroad
Retirement Act, as amended, or any of these as subsequently amended in
the future.
HOMEOWNER — Every person who actually resides in a dwelling in which
such person has a legal interest, including any life estate, whether sole
owner, joint tenant, tenant in common or tenant by the entireties.
§ 223-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-2
1:575
§ 223-2. Amount of credit; eligibility.
There shall be allowed upon the application of any homeowner who shall
have attained the age of 65 years by the July 1 which is the first day of
the taxable year for which the credit is sought, or there may be allowed
upon the application of any homeowner who has not attained the age of
65 years and who receives benefits as a result of a finding of permanent
and total disability under the Social Security Act or under the Railroad
Retirement Act, and whose gross income or whose combined gross income,
as the case may be, shall not be in excess of $5,000 for the calendar year
immediately preceding the fiscal year of application, a single tax credit from
City real property taxes upon the dwelling for which the application for tax
credit is made, which tax credit shall equal 50% of the assessed value of
such dwelling or $4,000, whichever is the lesser amount, multiplied by the
applicable rate of taxation in force for the City for the fiscal year in question.
§ 223-3. Administrative official.
The Tax Collector shall be the administrative unit or official that is hereby
designated to administer the program of tax credits authorized by Section
12F of the Annotated Code of Maryland49 and as provided for in this
article. The Tax Collector shall be responsible for the promulgation of
rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of Article 81
of the Annotated Code of Maryland50 and for the modification, repeal or
amendment from time to time of such rules and regulations as deemed
necessary for the efficient and convenient administration of this system of
tax credits, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council.
§ 223-4. Notice of possible credit; application.
Every taxpayer shall be given a notice of the possible credit provided by this
article at the time said tax bill is sent to the taxpayer. The taxpayer shall not
be required to submit the application in person. The taxpayer may do so by
his or her duly authorized agent, in writing, or his or her attorney-in-fact.
The taxpayer entitled to credits under this article may apply for said credit
at any time up to September 1 of the taxable year, but if said person has not
made application on or before that date, the credit shall not be allowed.
§ 223-5. Application to be made under oath.
The application for tax credit provided for in this article shall be made under
oath or affirmation that the matters and facts stated in the application are
true to the best of the applicants knowledge, information and belief.
§ 223-6. Making of false statements on application; violations and
penalties.
49.Editor's Note: See now Title 9 of the Tax-Property Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
50.Editor's Note: Article 81 of the Annotated Code of Maryland was repealed.
§ 223-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 223-6
1:576
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to make any false
statement to the agents, servants or duly designated representatives of
the City of Hagerstown or Washington County in obtaining or
attempting to obtain the benefits provided for in this article.
B. Any person or persons found guilty of the same shall be subject to the
penalties provided in the general provisions of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown.51
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, Violations and Penalties.
§ 223-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-6
1:577

ARTICLE II
Admission and Amusement Tax
[Adopted 12-14-1982; amended in its entirety 4-29-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-13]
§ 223-7. Tax levy and rates.
Pursuant to the authorization of § 4-102(b)(1) of the Tax-General Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from time
to time, a tax (hereinafter called "tax") is imposed on the gross receipts
derived from any admissions and amusement charge as defined in
§ 4-101(b) of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as
amended or recodified from time to time at the rate of 10%; except as this
rate may be limited pursuant to § 4-105(b) of the Tax-General Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from time to time;
and except that:
§ 223-8. Additional tax for no-charge or reduced-rate admissions.
Pursuant to the authorization of § 4-102(b)(2) of the Tax-General Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from time to
time, an additional tax is imposed on reduced charges or free admissions as
set forth in § 4-105(f) of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, as amended or recodified from time to time.
§ 223-9. Exemptions. [Amended 9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-35]
In addition to the exemptions provided in § 4-103 of the Tax-General Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from time
to time, the following shall be exempt from the admissions and amusement
tax:
A. The tax on gross receipts derived from charges for admission to any
theater, opera or concert shall be at the rate of 3%.
B. The tax on gross receipts derived from bingo operations shall be at the
rate of 3%.
C. The tax on gross receipts derived from concessions, beaches and
carnivals shall be at the rate of 5%.
D. The tax on gross receipts derived from shows and exhibits shall be at
the rate of 5%.
A. The gross receipts derived by:
(1) The City of Hagerstown; or
(2) The Board of County Commissioners of Washington County,
Maryland.
§ 223-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-9
1:579
§ 223-10. Notification of Comptroller.
The City Administrator and/or the Director of Finance are hereby
authorized and directed to notify the Comptroller of the Treasury of the
State of Maryland of the passage of this article.
B. Restaurants providing entertainment for its patrons during the time of
such entertainment in the form of an individual roving performer who
does not employ or is not dependent on amplified sound.
C. Gross receipts from any admissions and amusement charge levied by an
arts and entertainment enterprise or qualifying residing artist in an arts
and entertainment district designated under state law.
§ 223-9 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 223-10
1:580
ARTICLE III
Tax Liens
[Adopted 8-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-34]
§ 223-11. Collection of municipal charges.
The City of Hagerstown Finance Officer may add to any municipal tax bills
issued by or on behalf of the City of Hagerstown, in addition to real estate
taxes, the following charges: any amounts due the City of Hagerstown for
the cost of abating any violation of the City Code and/or fines levied by any
court for any violation of the City Code and/or any other charges against
the owners of real property within the City of Hagerstown to the extent that
such charges are identified with or related to such real property. This power
is supplemental to and not in limitation of any other authority the city may
have under state or municipal law for the collection of such charges.
§ 223-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-11
1:581

ARTICLE IV
Property Tax Credit
[Adopted 9-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2003-35]
§ 223-12. Arts and entertainment district.
§ 223-13. Residential rehabilitation tax credit program. [Added
7-25-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-18]
A. In this section, the following words have the meanings indicated. "Arts
and entertainment district," "arts and entertainment enterprise," and
"qualifying artist" are defined in § 4-701 of Article 83A of the Maryland
Code.
B. The Director of Finance shall allow a tax credit, as authorized by state
law, to a taxpayer against the City property tax imposed on a
manufacturing, commercial, or industrial building that:
(1) Is located in an arts and entertainment district designated under
state law; and
(2) Is wholly or partially renovated for use by a qualifying residing
artist or an arts and entertainment enterprise.
C. A tax credit granted under this section applies for 10 years, as
authorized by state law, as long as the building is used by a qualifying
residing artist or an arts and entertainment enterprise.
D. The Director shall allow a tax credit equal to 50% of the tax resulting
from the increase in assessment generated as a result of the
renovations to create housing for a qualified residing artist or the
commercial space for an arts and entertainment enterprise. The tax
credit shall apply only to that portion of the building occupied by the
qualifying residing artist or arts and entertainment enterprise.
E. The arts and entertainment district property tax credit shall not be
granted for properties utilizing the enterprise zone property tax credit.
A. Tax credit is hereby allowed equal to the municipal property tax
increase attributable to the increase in the assessment of the real
property over the assessment before the real property was
rehabilitated in accordance with the provisions of this section. But the
credit shall in no event exceed the amount of the cost of the qualifying
improvements.
B. The credit shall commence on July 1 of the tax year following the
completion of the rehabilitation project and shall run with the real
estate for a period of five consecutive years. Eligibility for the tax credit
is conditioned upon the property owner submitting to the Department
of Planning an annual self-certification application to ensure continued
compliance with the program's eligibility requirements.
§ 223-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-13
1:583
C. In order to receive such tax credit, the rehabilitation must meet the
following eligibility requirements:
(1) The building must be located in Hagerstown's Community Legacy
Area.
(2) The exterior of the building and all core systems must be brought
up to code.
(3) If alley access is available, the property owner is encouraged to
create off-street parking in the rear yard for use by the building's
occupants. (The City's Project Park Inside Program provides grants
for such activities.)
(4) If practical, ground-floor bathrooms should be made handicapped
accessible.
(5) For rental property, written rental agreements must be put in place
which identify unacceptable habitation standards for the tenants
(i.e., drug dealing, other illegal activities, addition of unauthorized
tenants, destruction of property, etc.).
(6) No additional residential units shall be added to existing residential
property; however residential units may be created through
adaptive reuse of nonresidential space if zoning permits such
activity. [Amended 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-21]
(7) For single-family residences, the property owner must spend at
least 25% of the pre-rehabilitation assessed value of the property
on the improvements.
(8) For multifamily residences, the property owner must spend at least
$20,000 per unit for the total number of units in the building on the
improvements.
(9) The property owner must not be delinquent on taxes for the
property.
(10) The Engineering Department may by regulation further define
eligibility requirement not inconsistent with the foregoing.
D. Eligibility for the tax credit is subject to the following application
requirements:
(1) The application must be filed with the Department of Planning by
the owner of the building prior to the commencement of any
rehabilitation work.
(2) An on-site inspection must be conducted by the Engineering
Department prior to the commencement of any rehabilitation work
and immediately following such work. The final inspection will
determine compliance with the program's eligibility requirements.
§ 223-13 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 223-13
1:584
§ 223-14. Conversion of multifamily to single-family residence tax
credit program. [Added 7-25-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-19]
(3) No tax credit will be granted if access to the entire property is
denied to the Engineering Department for inspection.
(4) All appropriate building permits must be obtained prior to
commencement of any work.
A. Tax credit is hereby allowed equal to the municipal property tax
increase attributable to the increase in the assessment of the real
property over the assessment before the real property was converted
from a multifamily to a single-family residence in accordance with the
provisions of this section. But the credit shall in no event exceed the
amount of the cost of the qualifying improvements.
B. The credit shall commence on July 1 of the tax year following the
completion of the rehabilitation project and shall run with the real
estate for a period of five consecutive years. Eligibility for the tax credit
is conditioned upon the property owner submitting to the Department
of Planning an annual self-certification application to ensure continued
compliance with the program's eligibility requirements.
C. In order to receive such tax credit, the rehabilitation must meet the
following eligibility requirements:
(1) The building must be located in Hagerstown's Community Legacy
Area.
(2) The exterior of the building and all core systems must be brought
up to code.
(3) The conversion must eliminate apartments of record.
(4) If practical, ground-floor bathrooms should be made handicapped
accessible.
(5) Extra kitchens and fire escapes must be removed, public spaces
(i.e., entrance and stair halls) must be brought back to original
configuration.
(6) Extra utility service elements must be disconnected and meters
removed.
(7) Property owner must spend at least 25% of the pre-conversion
assessed value of the property on the improvements.
(8) The property must remain owner-occupied for at least five years
following the conversion project.
(9) The owner must not be delinquent on property taxes for the
property.
§ 223-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-14
1:585
§ 223-15. High-performance buildings tax credit (green buildings).
[Added 3-31-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-02]
(10) The Engineering Department may by regulation further define
eligibility requirement not inconsistent with the foregoing.
D. Eligibility for the tax credit is subject to the following application
requirements:
(1) The application must be filed with the Department of Planning by
the owner of the building prior to the commencement of any
rehabilitation work.
(2) An on-site inspection must be conducted by the Engineering
Department prior to the commencement of any conversion work
and immediately following such work. The final inspection will
determine compliance with the program's eligibility requirements.
(3) No tax credit will be granted if access to the entire property is
denied to the Engineering Department for inspection.
(4) All appropriate building permits must be obtained prior to
commencement of any work.
A. In this section, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
HIGH-PERFORMANCE BUILDING — A building that achieves at least
a silver rating according to the U.S. Green Building Council's LEED
(Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) green building rating
system as adopted by the Maryland Green Building Council.
LEED GREEN BUILDING RATING SYSTEM — The Leadership in
Energy and Environment Design rating system of the U.S. Green
Building Council, as may be adopted and amended.
B. In accordance with § 9-242 of the Tax-Property Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the Director of Finance shall allow a tax credit to the
taxpayer against the City property tax imposed on a high-performance
building.
C. A tax credit granted under this section applies for three years.
D. A tax credit for a qualifying project commences on July 1 of the tax year
following completion of the construction project to achieve highperformance
building status.
E. The Director of Finance shall allow a tax credit against the increase in
property tax, resulting from the property tax assessment increase,
imposed on a high-performance building, as follows:
(1) LEED Certified Silver: 20%.
(2) LEED Certified Gold: 25%.
§ 223-14 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 223-15
1:586
(3) LEED Certified Platinum: 30%.
F. A property tax credit granted under this section shall terminate if
during the credit period, the Director of Finance finds that the property
has been altered so that it no longer complies with the LEED rating
system, version and level that was the basis for granting the credit at
the time the credit was granted.
G. A property owner may not receive more than one City property tax
credit per building.
H. A tax credit granted under this section runs with the property and a
change in ownership does not result in a lapse of the tax credit.
I. The Director of Finance may adopt guidelines, regulations, or
procedures to administer this section.
§ 223-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-15
1:587
Chapter 227
THEATERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 73.
Entertainment clubs — See Ch. 92.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
§ 227-1. License required; fees.
No person shall act, play or perform any play, farce, interlude, show, opera
or other theatrical or dramatic performance or entertainment or give any
public exhibition or amusement in any public hall or theater of the City
without first applying to the City Clerk and obtaining a license therefor, for
which such person shall pay as follows:
§ 227-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-39]
Any person or persons violating any provision of this Article shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II.
Chapter 232
VACANT NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Property maintenance habitual
offender — See Ch. 65.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Vacant residential structures — See Ch. 233.
A. For each exhibition or performance in any hall or theater of a seating
capacity of more than 300: $5.
B. For each exhibition or performance in any hall or theater of a seating
capacity of 300 or fewer: $2.50.
C. In lieu of the above rates for each exhibition, the owner or lessee of any
hall or theater of a seating capacity of 300 or less shall pay an annual
license therefor of $50, and the owner or lessee of any hall or theater of
a seating capacity of more than 300 shall pay an annual license fee of
$100.
§ 223-15 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 232-1
1:588
§ 232-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and assure public safety, health
and welfare, to prevent deterioration of vacant nonresidential structures
in the City of Hagerstown, to support property values, and to encourage
responsible management and use of vacant nonresidential structures
through licensing and inspections.
§ 232-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE WORK — Regularly ongoing modifications to bring a structure up
to code and which involve two or more systems, including but not limited to
constructing, enlarging, altering, moving, demolishing, erecting, installing,
removing, converting or replacing any electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
system. "Active work" also includes modifications to the structure
itself.[Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-19]
BLIGHTED CONDITION — A condition is blighted when it exhibits
objectively determinable signs of deterioration sufficient to constitute a
threat to human health, safety, and public welfare.
CITY — City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
DEPARTMENT — The Community and Economic Development Department
of the City.
MIXED-USE STRUCTURE — A building that contains at least one permitted
nonresidential use and at least one permitted residential use.
NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Any structure or premises in whole
or in part that contains spaces for commercial or industrial uses, such as
manufacturing operations, offices, warehouses, shopping centers, retail and
wholesale facilities, and other similar uses. This definition shall include
mixed-use structures.
OWNER —
Any person, partnership, association, company, corporation or other
entity having a legal or equitable interest in or control of real property.
A.
Any person who, alone, jointly or severally, shall have the charge,
care or control of any premises as executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner.
B.
Any person having any interest in a partnership, association, company,
corporation or other entity which owns or has any ownership interest
or control of the premises.
C.
Any person, firm, partnership, association, company, corporation or
other entity whose name appears on the deed or property tax bill for
the premises shall be deemed to be the owner of the premises.
D.
§ 232-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-2
1:589
PREMISES — Any single parcel or lot of real property in the City, including
the land and all improvements or structures, upon which a vacant
nonresidential structure or vacant blighted nonresidential structure is
located.
VACANT BLIGHTED NONRESIDENTAL STRUCTURE — Any nonresidential
structure that is vacant with a pending action to foreclose a mortgage or
deed of trust; or is vacant with blighted conditions; or has been placarded
by the City as uninhabitable. For properties with multiple structures, such
as shopping centers with pad sites, if any individual structure meets this
definition, that structure shall be subject to the terms of this chapter.
VACANT NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Any nonresidential structure
that is vacant for a continuous six-month period. For properties with
multiple structures, such as shopping centers with pad sites, if any
individual structure is vacant for a continuous six-month period, that
structure shall be subject to the terms of this chapter. For calculation
of the continuous six-month period required to satisfy the definition of
"vacant nonresidential structure," the following periods of time shall not be
included:[Amended 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-19]
§ 232-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for the owner(s) of any vacant nonresidential structure
or vacant blighted nonresidential structure to fail to apply for and obtain
a vacant nonresidential structure license and abide by the inspection
requirements contained in this chapter.
§ 232-4. Application; license fee.
In addition to the inspection requirements of § 232-5 of this chapter, an
applicant for a vacant nonresidential structure license shall provide the
following information and documents for each vacant nonresidential
structure or vacant blighted nonresidential structure on the appropriate
application form provided by the Department:
The one-year period immediately following the issuance of certificate of
occupancy permit for new construction;
A.
Any period of time during which active work is being legally performed
pursuant to a valid permit issued by the City;
B.
The six-month period immediately following the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy permit for existing construction; or
C.
The first year of vacancy of a nonblighted structure while being
marketed via a currently licensed real estate agent through Maryland's
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation.
D.
A. The address of the vacant structure;
B. The number and location of the spaces contained in the structure;
§ 232-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 232-4
1:590
§ 232-5. Inspections.
C. The name, street, address and telephone number of all owners of the
vacant structure;
D. If the owner of the vacant nonresidential structure or vacant blighted
nonresidential structure is not an individual, the applicant shall provide
the name, street address, resident agent, resident agent address and
telephone number;
E. The name, street address and telephone number of a designated
contact person for the owner(s);
F. A certificate of property insurance in the amount equivalent to or
greater than the assessed tax value; and
G. A nonrefundable annual license fee pursuant to the following schedule
for each vacant nonresidential structure:
(1) Vacant blighted nonresidential structure:
(a) $500 at initial application;
(b) $1,000 at first annual application renewal and each
subsequent annual application renewal.
(2) Vacant nonresidential structure:
(a) $250 at initial application;
(b) $500 at first annual application renewal;
(c) $1,000 at second and each subsequent annual application
renewal.
H. Payment for said license shall be due in full from the owner within 30
days from the application mailing. Failure to remit payment in full may
result in collection pursuant to Article III, Tax Liens, § 223-11, of the
City Code, or by other civil proceeding.
I. When a vacant blighted nonresidential structure is purchased by a bona
fide purchaser for value who promptly registers the structure in the
vacant structures program in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, the license fee may be refunded if the owner is issued building
permits for comprehensive renovation of the structure within six
months of purchase. [Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-19]
A. In connection with the application requirements contained in § 232-4 of
this chapter, the exterior of the vacant structure shall be inspected at
the time of the initial application and on an annual basis thereafter.
Required reinspections for noted conditions shall be as directed by the
Department.
§ 232-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-5
1:591
§ 232-6. Maintenance standards.
In addition to the inspection requirements of § 232-5 of this chapter, an
owner of a vacant nonresidential structure or vacant blighted
nonresidential structure shall maintain the structure to the following
standards, which are based on crime prevention through environmental
design.
B. Interior inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the
following schedule:
(1) Vacant blighted nonresidential structures: at initial application and
on an annual basis thereafter.
(2) Vacant nonresidential structures: at first renewal and annually
thereafter.
C. All inspections conducted hereunder shall be conducted by the
Department and shall be performed to ensure compliance with all
applicable property maintenance, fire and other City codes for vacant,
unoccupied structures and § 232-6 of this chapter.
D. In the event that any noted violations are not corrected at the time of
the reinspection requested by the owner or the owner's agent, or the
premises is not safely accessible, the Code Official may impose a
reinspection fee as established by the City of Hagerstown's fee
schedule for each additional visit for the same violation. [Added
10-25-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-19]
A. Exterior lighting.
(1) Exterior lighting at all entry doors shall:
(a) Be illuminated from dusk to dawn.
(b) Be directed downward and away from adjoining premises.
(c) Maintain one footcandle of light measured at one foot above
the ground to a minimum distance of 20 feet from the center of
each entry door:
(2) Exterior lighting is not required at any entry door where
streetlighting meets the minimum illumination level required by
this section.
B. Doors.
(1) All entry doors shall have engaged deadbolt locks.
(2) Doors not capable of deadbolt locks shall be secured in an
approved manner.
(3) All exterior sliding doors shall have lift and slide protection.
§ 232-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 232-6
1:592
§ 232-7. Issuance of license; renewal.
Upon receipt of a completed application form and full payment of the
appropriate fee, the Department shall, within 30 days, issue a license for the
subject vacant nonresidential structure or vacant blighted nonresidential
structure, unless such license is or was denied, suspended or revoked
pursuant to § 232-8 hereof. Said license shall expire on its anniversary
date, and shall be renewable annually, with application for said renewal
being made at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the thencurrent
license. License renewal shall be made on the form provided by the
Department.
§ 232-8. Denial; revocation or suspension.
A vacant nonresidential structure license may be denied, revoked or
suspended at any time by the Department if, after receipt of a notice of
violation, the owner fails to eliminate violations of the applicable code
sections (including § 232-6) identified during any inspection within the
time ordered in the notice. Denial, revocation or suspension of a vacant
nonresidential structure license shall be in addition to, and not in
substitution of the penalties provided for in § 232-10 of this chapter. Said
denial, revocation or suspension may be appealed within 20 days pursuant
to Chapter 10 of the Code to the Board of Technical Appeals.
§ 232-9. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not effect the other provisions or applications of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
§ 232-10. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the sanctions outlined in § 232-8 hereof, any owner violating
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and
subject to a fine of up to $1,000. Each day a structure is not in compliance
with this chapter shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
C. All windows shall have lift and slide protection.
D. All shrubbery, hedges, trees or similar vegetation shall be maintained
so that a clear view of the entry doors from the public sidewalk or street
is not impeded.
§ 232-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-10
1:593
Chapter 233
VACANT RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Property maintenance habitual
offender — See Ch. 65.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Vacant nonresidential structures – See Ch.
232.
§ 233-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and assure public safety, health
and welfare, to prevent deterioration of vacant residential structures in
the City of Hagerstown, to support property values, and to encourage
responsible management and use of vacant residential structures through
licensing and inspections.
§ 233-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE WORK — Regularly ongoing modifications to bring a structure up
to code and which involve two or more systems, including but not limited to
constructing, enlarging, altering, moving, demolishing, erecting, installing,
removing, converting or replacing any electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
system. "Active work" also includes modifications to the structure
itself.[Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-20]
BLIGHTED CONDITION — A condition is blighted when it exhibits
objectively determinable signs of deterioration sufficient to constitute a
threat to human health, safety and public welfare.
CITY — City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
DEPARTMENT — The Community and Economic Development Department
of the City.
OWNER —
Any person, partnership, association, company, corporation or other
entity having a legal or equitable interest in or control of real property.
A.
Any person who, alone, jointly or severally, shall have the charge,
care or control of any premises as executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner.
B.
Any person having any interest in a partnership, association, company,
corporation or other entity which owns or has any ownership interest
or control of the premises.
C.
§ 232-10 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 233-2
1:594
PREMISES — Any single parcel or lot of real property in the City, including
the land and all improvements or structures, upon which a vacant
residential structure or vacant blighted residential structure is located.
VACANT — Not occupied as a domicile or residence.
VACANT BLIGHTED RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Any residential
structure, single- or multi-unit, that is vacant with a pending action to
foreclose a mortgage or deed of trust; or is vacant with blighted conditions;
or has been placarded by the City as uninhabitable. For properties with
multiple structures, such as apartment complexes, if any individual
structure meets this definition, that structure shall be subject to the terms
of this chapter.
VACANT RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — [Amended 10-25-2016 by Ord.
No. O-16-20]
§ 233-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for the owner(s) of any vacant residential structure or
vacant blighted residential structure to fail to apply for and obtain a vacant
residential structure license and abide by the inspection requirements
contained in this chapter.
Any person, firm, partnership, association, company, corporation or
other entity whose name appears on the deed or property tax bill for
the premises shall be deemed to be the owner of the premises.
D.
Any residential structure, single or multi-unit, that has been vacant for
a continuous six-month period. For properties with multiple structures,
such as apartment complexes, if any individual structure is vacant for
a continuous six-month period, that structure shall be subject to the
terms of this chapter. For calculation of the continuous six-month period
required to satisfy the definition of "vacant residential structure," the
following periods of time shall not be included:
The one-year period immediately following the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy permit for new construction;
(1)
Any period of time during which active work is being legally
performed pursuant to a valid permit issued by the City;
(2)
The six-month period immediately following the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy permit for existing construction; or
(3)
The first year of vacancy of a nonblighted structure while being
marketed via a currently licensed real estate agent through
Maryland's Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation.
(4)
A.
A vacant residential structure shall not include a structure that falls
within the definition of a nonresidential structure pursuant to Chapter
232 of the City Code.
B.
§ 233-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-4
1:595
§ 233-4. Application; license fee.
In addition to the inspection requirements of § 233-5 of this chapter, an
applicant for a vacant residential structure license shall provide the
following information for each vacant residential structure or vacant
blighted residential structure on the appropriate application form provided
by the Department.
§ 233-5. Inspections.
A. The address of the vacant structure;
B. The number of dwelling units contained in the structure;
C. The name, street, address and telephone number of all owners of the
vacant structure;
D. If the owner of the vacant residential structure is not an individual, the
applicant shall provide the name, street address, resident agent,
resident agent address and telephone number;
E. The name, street address and telephone number of a designated
contact person for the owner(s);
F. A certificate of property insurance in the amount equivalent to or
greater than the assessed tax value; and
G. A nonrefundable annual license fee pursuant to the following schedule
for each:
(1) Vacant blighted residential structure: $500 at initial application
and at each annual renewal.
(2) Vacant residential structure: $100 at initial application and at each
annual renewal.
H. Payment for said license shall be due in full from the owner within 30
days from the application mailing. Failure to remit payment in full may
result in collection pursuant to Article III, Tax Liens, § 223-11, of the
City Code, or by other civil proceeding.
I. When a vacant blighted residential structure is purchased by a bona
fide purchaser for value who promptly registers the structure in the
vacant structures program in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, the license fee may be refunded if the owner is issued building
permits for comprehensive renovation of the structure within six
months of purchase. [Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-20]
A. In connection with the application requirements contained in § 233-4 of
this chapter, the exterior of the vacant structure shall be inspected at
the time of initial application and on an annual basis thereafter.
Required reinspections for noted conditions shall be as directed by the
Department.
§ 233-4 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 233-5
1:596
§ 233-6. Neighborhood maintenance standards.
In addition to the inspection requirements of § 233-5 of this chapter, an
owner of a vacant residential structure or vacant blighted residential
structure shall maintain the structure to the following neighborhood
standards, which are based on crime prevention through environmental
design.
B. Interior inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the
following schedule:
(1) Vacant blighted residential structures: at initial application and on
an annual basis thereafter.
(2) Vacant residential structures: at first renewal and annually
thereafter.
C. All inspections conducted hereunder shall be conducted by the
Department and shall be performed to ensure compliance with all
applicable property maintenance, fire and other City codes for vacant,
unoccupied structures and § 233-6 of this chapter.
D. In the event that any noted violations are not corrected at the time of
the reinspection requested by the owner or the owner's agent, or the
premises is not safely accessible, the Code Official may impose a
reinspection fee as established by the City of Hagerstown's fee
schedule for each additional visit for the same violation. [Added
10-25-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-20]
A. Exterior lighting.
(1) Exterior lighting at all entry doors shall:
(a) Be illuminated from dusk to dawn.
(b) Be directed downward and away from adjoining premises.
(c) Maintain one footcandle of light measured at one foot above
the ground to a minimum distance of 20 feet from the center of
each entry door.
(2) Exterior lighting is not required at any entry door where
streetlighting meets the minimum illumination level required by
this section.
B. Doors.
(1) All entry doors shall have engaged deadbolt locks.
(2) Doors not capable of deadbolt locks shall be secured in an
approved manner.
(3) All exterior sliding doors shall have lift and slide protection.
§ 233-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-6
1:597
§ 233-7. Issuance of license; renewal.
Upon receipt of a completed application form and full payment of the
appropriate fee, the Department shall, within 30 days, issue a license for the
subject vacant residential structure or vacant blighted residential structure,
unless such license is or was denied, suspended or revoked pursuant to
§ 233-8 hereof. Said license shall expire on its anniversary date, and shall be
renewable annually, with application for said renewal being made at least
60 days prior to the expiration date of the then-current license. License
renewal shall be made on the form provided by the Department.
§ 233-8. Denial; revocation or suspension.
A vacant residential structure license may be denied, revoked or suspended
at any time by the Department if, after receipt of a notice of violation, the
owner fails to eliminate violations of the applicable code sections (including
§ 232-6) identified during any inspection within the time ordered in the
notice. Denial, revocation or suspension of a vacant residential structure
license shall be in addition to, and not in substitution of the penalties
provided for in § 233-10 of this chapter. Said denial, revocation or
suspension may be appealed within 20 days pursuant to Chapter 10 of the
Code to the Board of Technical Appeals.
§ 233-9. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not effect the other provisions or applications of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
§ 233-10. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the sanctions outlined in § 233-8 hereof, any owner violating
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and
subject to a fine of up to $500. Each day a structure is not in compliance
with this chapter shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
Chapter 235
URBAN RENEWAL
§ 235-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the City of Hagerstown to
acquire blighted properties and to subsequently dispose of said properties
C. All windows shall have lift and slide protection.
D. All shrubbery, hedges, trees or similar vegetation shall be maintained
so that a clear view of the entry doors from the public sidewalk or street
is not impeded.
§ 233-6 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 235-1
1:598
thereby promoting public health, safety, and welfare, and facilitating the
use and enjoyment of property.
§ 235-2. Acquisition of real property.
A. Pursuant to Maryland law and the Charter of the City of Hagerstown,
the City may:
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsection D of this section, acquire,
within the corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown, land and
property of every kind, and any right, interest, franchise, easement
or privilege therein, by purchase, lease, gift, condemnation or any
other legal means, for development or redevelopment, including,
but not limited to, the comprehensive renovation or rehabilitation
thereof; and
(2) Sell, lease, convey, transfer or otherwise dispose of any of said land
or property, regardless of whether or not it has been developed,
redeveloped, altered or improved and irrespective of the manner or
means in or by which it may have been acquired, to any private,
public or quasi-public corporation, partnership, association, person
or other legal entity.
B. No land or property taken by the City for any of the aforementioned
purposes, or in connection with the exercise of any of the powers
authorized hereunder, shall be taken without just compensation, as
agreed upon between the parties or awarded by a jury, being first paid
or tendered to the party entitled to such compensation.
C. All land or property needed, or taken by the exercise of the power of
eminent domain, by the City for any of the aforementioned purposes, or
in connection with the exercise of any of the powers authorized
hereunder, is hereby declared to be needed or taken for a public use or
a public benefit.
D. Before the acquisition of any single-family or multiple-family dwelling
unit, or other structure, is made under this chapter, a finding or
determination shall be made that:
(1) The dwelling unit or structure has deteriorated to such an extent as
to constitute a serious and growing menace to the public health,
safety and welfare;
(2) The dwelling unit or structure is likely to continue to deteriorate
unless corrected;
(3) The continued deterioration of the dwelling unit or structure will
contribute to the blighting or deterioration of the area immediately
surrounding the dwelling unit or structure; and
(4) The owner of the dwelling unit or structure has failed to correct the
deterioration thereof.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-2
1:599
§ 235-3. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any provision, sentence,
clause, paragraph or part hereof is held or determined to be illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person or circumstances, such
illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not affect
or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, paragraphs
or parts of this chapter or their application to other persons or
circumstances.
Chapter 238
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 98.
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Sediment control — See Ch. 209.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 213.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
Water pollution control — See Ch. 240.
E. The City shall adopt an ordinance for each acquisition of land or
property made under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 235-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 235-3
1:600
ARTICLE I
Contaminations; Discharges into Streets
[Adopted as Ch. 63, Art. I, of the 1967 Code]
§ 238-1. Filth and debris in watercourses.52
No person shall cast or throw any filth or other debris into any City
watercourse or sewer or dam up or obstruct the same in any way.
§ 238-2. Obstruction of watercourses, drains and sewers.
If any owner of any lot or the occupant of any lot within the corporate or
sanitary limits of the City shall willfully obstruct or allow to be obstructed
in any manner, either by filth or otherwise, any watercourse, drain or
sewer passing over or through such lot and shall permit such obstruction
to remain for a longer period than 24 hours, such owner or occupant shall
be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code, and the trial
magistrate who shall impose such fine and cost shall proceed immediately
to order such watercourse, drain or sewer cleaned and relieved from any
such obstruction and collect all costs and expenses thereof in the name of
the Mayor and Council of the City from either the owner or occupant of such
lot.
§ 238-3. Privy contents and excrement.
Any person who shall place or cause to be placed in any open stream or
sanitary sewer manhole the contents of any privy or who shall permit any
filth or excrement to flow from any hogpen, stable or manure pile or from
any other place upon his lot or premises into any open stream or sanitary
sewer manhole shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this
Code.
§ 238-4. Discharge of water from buildings onto streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or residing in any
house, building or premises situated within the corporate limits of the
City to cause, suffer or permit any water of any character whatsoever
to issue, be thrown, be discharged or flow from any house, building or
premises or through or by means of a pipe or otherwise or to flow from any
pump, hydrant, cistern, spigot or pipe located in and upon any such house,
building or premises in such a manner as to be discharged, issued, thrown
or diverted directly or indirectly into, upon or over any sidewalk, gutter,
street, lane or alley of the City; provided, however, that such person shall
be permitted to use clean water for washing down the front of any building
or house, the windows thereof, storefronts and store windows of any such
building or house of the City from the first day of April to the 30th day of
September, inclusive, in each and every year.
52.Editor's Note: Original § 63-1, Water bill payment, which immediately preceded this
section, was deleted 7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-39.
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-4
1:601

ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 63, Art. II, of the 1967 Code]
§ 238-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER — Any customer engaged in a trade or
commerce.
CUSTOMER, HE, HIM OR HIS — Where applicable in context, includes and
refers to any person, persons, firm, agency or corporation, irrespective of
gender, who may be an applicant for or a user of water service.
CUSTOMER SERVICE PIPE — That portion of the service pipe between the
connection at or near the property line and the structures on the premises
to be supplied.
INDIVIDUAL BUILDING — A permanent building which can be sold as
a separate building. Determination as to whether or not a building is a
separate unit or a multiple unit shall be made on the basis of whether or not
there exists a permanent wall-bearing partition and such other pertinent
factors as may exist.
INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMER — Any customer whose primary business is the
creation, fabrication or manufacturing of a product.
INITIAL SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGE — That charge which is
applicable to the first application for water service piping or an application
for an enlarged water service piping to an individual building. It is intended
to cover those instances where new or enlarged piping is necessary to
provide water service at an address.
LATERAL — That portion of the street service connection running from the
main across the street to supply water to more than one individual building.
MAIN — A supply pipe, owned and maintained by the Water and Sewer
Department, to which street service connections are attached to supply
water to one or more customers.
METER — A mechanical device or devices to measure and record the
quantity of water supplied to the customer.
NOTICE TO WATER DEPARTMENT — Written notice addressed to the
Superintendent, Water and Sewer Department, City Hall, Hagerstown,
Maryland, and deposited in the United States Mail postage prepaid or
delivered in person to the Superintendent of the Water and Sewer
Department.
PRIVATE FIRE CONNECTION — A pipe with appurtenances used to
conduct water from the main to the customer's private fire protection
system.
§ 238-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-5
1:603
PROPERTY LINE — The curbline in all cases where a side walk is
established or provided for in front of any lot or property abutting on any
street or highway.
SEASONAL SERVICE — One which is used to supply water to customers
who are primarily seasonal in operation or who require increased water
service for equipment or processes operated only for part of the year.
STANDBY SERVICE — One which is used to supply water to customers
for standby or breakdown purposes or to supplement the customer's water
supply.
STREET SERVICE CONNECTION — A pipe with appurtenances used to
conduct water from the mains to the property line.
STUB — That portion of the street service connection attached to a main or
a lateral through which an individual building is served.
TEMPORARY SERVICE — One which is used to supply water to customers
for temporary purposes and to housing without permanent foundations.
TURN-ON CHARGE — That charge applicable to the initial turn-on of water
service at a customer's billing address when service has been discontinued
due to nonpayment of bills.
WATER DEPARTMENT — In context, the City of Hagerstown, Maryland; the
Board of Water Commissioners of Hagerstown, Maryland; the Water and
Sewer Department of Hagerstown, Maryland; or a combination of one or
more thereof, together with their officers, agents and employees.
YEARLY SERVICE — One which is used to supply water to customers who
use said supply during 12 months of each year.
§ 238-6. Effect on City obligations and responsibilities.
Nothing in these rules and regulations shall be construed to impose or place
upon the Water and Sewer Department (i.e., upon the City of Hagerstown,
Maryland, or upon the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland, or upon any agent, servant or employee of said City
or said Board of Water Commissioners) any obligation, responsibility or duty
to inspect, maintain and/or repair any water piping, apparatus, appliance or
equipment, except only such metering facilities, if any, owned by the Water
and Sewer Department as may be installed on the customer's premises, on
the customer's side of the point of delivery of water to such customer.
§ 238-7. Limitation of authority of Water and Sewer Department
representatives.
No agent, employee or representative of the Water and Sewer Department
shall have any right or authority to make any promise, commitment or
agreement not expressly authorized by these rules and regulations.
§ 238-8. Applications and contracts for service.
§ 238-5 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-8
1:604
§ 238-9. Conditions prerequisite to furnishing service. [Amended
7-15-1974]
§ 238-10. Service connection charges. [Amended 5-27-1969;
7-15-1974; 6-5-1978; 4-17-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-15; 10-16-1990 by
Ord. No. 1990-48; 7-21-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-31; 6-21-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994-20; 12-22-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-60; 11-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999-51; 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-28]
A. All contracts for water service shall be subject to all rules and
regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the
Board of Water Commissioners and all applicable ordinances of the City
of Hagerstown, Maryland, which may be now or hereafter in force.
B. All applicants for water service shall sign such application to obtain
water service as the Water and Sewer Department may require. A fee
shall be charged for each application for water service which shall be
due and payable at the time the application is filed. The Council of the
City of Hagerstown shall by ordinance fix, establish and adjust the
amount of the water service application fee in accordance with the
Charter of the City of Hagerstown. All applicants for water service shall
sign such form of service contracts as may be acceptable to the Water
and Sewer Department. [Amended 6-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-23]
A. Water service shall not be supplied to any customer or customers until
the Water and Sewer Department determines from its examination and
consideration of the application of said customer that the furnishing of
water service to said customer shall be feasible from the standpoint of
the Water and Sewer Department.
B. Any proposed connections and waterlines connecting to the waterlines
of the City shall comply with all existing rules, regulations, ordinances
and statutes that may be applicable.
C. No connection shall be made to the facilities of the Water and Sewer
Department until the initial service connections shall be paid by the
customer in accordance with § 238-10.
A. The initial service connection charge for water service shall be due and
payable at the time of application for water service and shall be
determined in accordance with the following schedule of fees:
[Amended 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-18; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-10; 7-1-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-24]
Service Pipe Size Fee
3/4-inch $715.00
1-inch $925.00
1-inch double $1,160.00
1-inch RS Special $1,510.00
§ 238-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-10
1:605
Service Pipe Size Fee
2-inch $1,790.00
B. The fee for all services larger than two-inch shall be based on the cost
of materials, labor, equipment and overhead at the time of formal
application for service.
C. Front-footage charges, where applicable, shall be a minimum of $21 per
accessible front foot and shall be considered a part of the service
connection fee.
D. All necessary trench excavation and repair shall:
(1) Be performed by and be the responsibility of the property owner in
the following cases:
(a) All service connections outside the corporate limits of the City.
(b) All service connections inside the corporate limits of the City
made in conjunction with street construction and/or
subdivisions.
(2) Be performed by and be the responsibility of the City in the
following cases:
(a) All initial service connections two-inch size or smaller, inside
the corporate limits of the City, made along existing streets or
rights-of-way.
E. Length of service extensions shall not exceed the limits as set forth in
the rules and regulations of the Water and Sewer Department.
F. Charges are based on standard installation specifications for each type
of service as established by the Water and Sewer Department. Any
variation or change required by the property owner which results in a
higher cost shall be performed at the property owner's expense.
G. Water benefit charge.
(1) General.
(a) In addition to all other charges, fees and assessments there is
hereby established a water benefit charge. A water benefit
charge shall be assessed for all properties currently served and
new customers requesting water service. The water benefit
charge shall be the amount or amounts equal to the product of
the allocation established by the City in annual average of the
gallons used per day multiplied by the current established
benefit charge rate per gallon.
(b) The water benefit charge is due and payable prior to the
approval and issuance of any permits for improvements on a
property. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10]
§ 238-10 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-10
1:606
(c) Administrative policies for the water benefit charge shall be
established by the Water and Sewer Department and shall be
available at the Water and Sewer Department and the office of
the City Clerk.
(2) Residential customers. All residential properties will have a
minimal allocation for service of 200 gallons per day per dwelling
unit. This allocation shall not be adjusted except for changes in the
number of dwelling units or changes to nonresidential use.
(3) Nonresidential customers.
(a) General. All nonresidential customers shall pay for each gallon
of allocation based on the customer's annual average daily
usage. Usage shall be averaged for the billing periods in each
calendar year. The minimum allocation for all service
connections shall be 200 gallons per day. The estimated daily
volume of water usage by a customer shall be determined by
the Water and Sewer Department from the previous, current
and/or anticipated amount of water consumption and other
factors considered significant by the Water and Sewer
Department and/or from information provided by the applicant
or other approved sources.
(b) New customers. The water benefit charge shall be levied upon
an applicant for water service or a building permit based upon
the allocation established with the approval of an application
for water service. The initial fee shall be calculated in
accordance with the benefit charge administrative policies and
this article. The established allocation shall not be transferable
to any other property.
(c) Existing customers. The Water and Sewer Department shall
notify each nonresidential customer of the proposed allocation
for said customer who, on the date of the adoption of this
article, is a customer. The allocation assignments for existing
nonresidential customers shall be based on previous water use
patterns. Unless a customer shall inform the Water and Sewer
Department, in writing, within 30 days of receipt of said
notification of allocation of his intention to file a written
request for an allocation increase, and unless, said customer
shall have filed said written request within 90 days of his
receipt of said notification of allocation, the proposed
allocation shall be the established allocation for the customer,
and any subsequent written request by him for an allocation
increase shall be subject to a water benefit charge in
accordance with the provisions of this article. All written
requests for an allocation increase shall be handled in
accordance with the provisions of this article and the
administrative policies. The allocation established for an
§ 238-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-10
1:607
existing customer shall not be transferable to any other
property.
(d) Modification. If as a result of reviews conducted by the Water
and Sewer Department, it is determined that the volume of
water usage by a nonresidential customer has been less than
the established allocation for said customer by 100 gallons per
day or more for at least one year, the Water and Sewer
Department may notify the customer, or the owner or his agent
thereof that his established allocation will be reduced to the
proposed allocation as determined by the Water and Sewer
Department. When notified by the Water and Sewer
Department of such decrease, the customer, or owner or his
agent, shall then have a total of 90 days from the date of
receipt of said notification to file a request to again increase
his established allocation. If the customer, or the owner or his
agent, does not file an application for an allocation increase,
then the new reduced allocation amount as determined by the
Water and Sewer Department shall automatically take effect. If
however, the customer or owner exceeds this new determined
allocation but stays within his original allocation, the customer
or owner or his agent will not be assessed any additional
benefit charge. If, as a result of reviews conducted by the
Water and Sewer Department, it is determined that the volume
of water usage by any nonresidential customer shall be greater
than the established allocation for said customer by 100
gallons or more for at least one year the Water and Sewer
Department may notify said customer of his new established
allocation and he shall have the same rights to request a
decrease in the allocation as provided in this subsection for a
customer whose allocation has been decreased. If the new
allocation as finally determined hereunder is higher the
customer will be charged at that level of allocation.
(4) Benefit charge rate. The Mayor and Council of the City of
Hagerstown shall by ordinance fix and establish the amount of
benefit charge rate per gallon of allocation in accordance with the
Charter of the City of Hagerstown. If for any reason the benefit
charge is not paid when due, then the outstanding balance owed by
the property owner shall constitute a lien on the property served
and shall be a collectible in accordance with Article 23(a) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. The benefit charge rate per gallon
shall be assessed as follows: [Amended 7-12-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-19; 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-0453]
53.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 30 days after passage,
with the increases in rates effective for all bills rendered in the current fiscal year on or
after July 1, 2019, and for all bills rendered on or after July 1 of each of the subsequent
four fiscal years.
§ 238-10 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-10
1:608
§ 238-11. Use of fictitious names on contract prohibited.
All contracts for water service shall be signed in the true name of the
customer desiring such service, and the use of a fictitious name by the
prospective customer shall be sufficient reason for the refusal and/or
termination of service.
§ 238-12. Temporary service.
When it may appear to the Water and Sewer Department that the requested
water service will be temporary, the Water and Sewer Department may, at
its option, either furnish or decline to furnish such service. If the Water and
Sewer Department elects to furnish such service, the applicant for service
shall pay to the Water and Sewer Department, in advance, the estimated
cost of constructing such service, including the cost of all labor, materials
and supervision required.
§ 238-13. Availability of piping and equipment for inspections.
All water piping and equipment on the customer's premises shall be
available to the Water and Sewer Department and to all inspectors of the
City of Hagerstown, Maryland, who may have jurisdiction over such piping
and equipment; provided, however, that the Water and Sewer Department
shall not be deemed to have assumed the responsibility to inspect, repair
or maintain any piping or equipment on the customer's side of the point of
delivery as hereinafter located and defined in these rules and regulations.
§ 238-14. Security deposits.
Inside and Outside Water Benefit Charges
Benefit Fee Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Per gallon $12.50 $12.88 $13.27 $13.67 $14.08 $14.50
Minimum: 200
gallons
$2,500 $2,576 $2,654 $2,734 $2,816 $2,900
H. All applicable connection fees and front footage charges shall be paid
when application is made for service connection.
I. Use of funds. The revenues received from the Water and Sewer
Department benefit charge are to be used exclusively to fund major
capital additions, replacements or improvements to the water
treatment plants, transmission system, pumping stations and water
storage facilities.
A. Before water service is connected, or at any time thereafter, the Water
and Sewer Department may require evidence satisfactory to itself from
any water customer that all bills for water service rendered or to be
rendered will be paid promptly, or in lieu thereof, the Water and Sewer
Department may require any such water customer to maintain on
§ 238-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-14
1:609
§ 238-15. Rendering and payment of bills.
deposit with the Water and Sewer Department an amount sufficient
to pay the estimated bills for all water service to such customer for
not more than one billing period plus 30 days. Deposits shall not bear
interest. The Water and Sewer Department may discontinue water
service without notice to any customer who may fail to make or
maintain the deposit required by the Water and Sewer Department. All
or any portion of the deposit by a water customer may be applied by
the Water and Sewer Department at any time upon any delinquent or
unpaid bill owned by such customer.
B. Such deposits, as outlined above, shall be refunded at the termination
of service after all charges that may be due and payable by the
customer have been paid.
C. A customer who has made application for water service to a premises
shall be held liable for all water service furnished to such premises until
such time as the customer properly notifies the Water and Sewer
Department to discontinue the service for his account.
D. In the event that the Water and Sewer Department is unable to collect
all bills for water service rendered at any location by other means, it
may require payment from the property owner at such location, as
provided by law.
A. All bills shall be due and payable when mailed and shall become
delinquent 20 days after such date. If any bill rendered by the Water
and Sewer Department is not paid within 30 days after the date thereof,
the Water and Sewer Department may discontinue water service to
such customer after notice. A reconnection charge shall be assessed
when service has been discontinued due to nonpayment of bills and
shall be payable prior to reconnection of the water service. The charge
for reconnection shall be $35 when performed between 8:00 a.m. and
3:30 p.m. and $45 when performed between 3:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
and $85 when performed between 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and on
weekends and holidays. An account transfer fee shall be assessed for
each water account transferred when a property is sold or the owner of
record for a property is changed and special readings or account
information must be provided by the City to facilitate the transfer. The
transfer fee shall be $30 per each water account transferred.
[Amended 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-48; 7-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 1992-31; 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-18; 6-20-2006 by Ord.
No. O-06-16]
B. Bills and notices to any customer shall be deemed to have been
presented and given when deposited in the United States Mail,
addressed to the last known address of such customer as shown on
records of the Water and Sewer Department, or when delivered in
person by a Water and Sewer Department employee. Notices to the
§ 238-14 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-15
1:610
Water and Sewer Department shall be given in writing as defined in
§ 238-5, definition of "notice to Water Department."
C. Water service to each customer shall be for the sole use of such
customer on the premises described in the service application, and the
resale or submetering of water by such customer is prohibited. A
separate bill shall be rendered for each meter, and water furnished to
the same customer through separate meters shall not be added or
cumulated for billing purposes, irrespective of the location of the
meters, excepting only when such separate meters are installed on the
same premises for the convenience and at the request of the Water and
Sewer Department, in which event the water furnished through said
meters may be cumulated for billing purposes.
D. Payments shall be made at the office of the City Treasurer or at such
other conveniently located places as may be designated by the City
Treasurer.
E. The Water and Sewer Department will not be bound by bills rendered
under mistake of fact as to the quantity and nature of water service
rendered.
F. The Water and Sewer Department shall have the right to read meters
and render bills either monthly or quarterly, or for such other period as
may be deemed practicable by the Water and Sewer Department, and
such bills shall be due and payable as provided in Subsection A of this
section.
G. In the case of a disputed account involving the accuracy of a meter,
such meter may be tested upon the request of the customer, and bills
will be adjusted as provided in § 238-36D(1) and (2).
H. The minimum charge for each applicable tariff shall be paid whether
such quantity of water is used or not, and no credit shall be allowed for
any cause unless discontinuance of service has been requested by the
customer and water has been shut off by the Water and Sewer
Department for the period involved.
I. If, for any reason, service is discontinued before the expiration of one
month from the commencement of service, a bill for at least the
minimum charge for one month will be rendered.
J. A late payment charge of 10% will be calculated upon the total charges
and applied to the water and wastewater bill or any portion of the bill
not paid by the current amount due date. Each subsequent water and
wastewater bill not paid in full will be subject to the aforementioned
late payment charge on the unpaid balance. [Added 6-18-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-16]
§ 238-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-16
1:611
§ 238-16. Cross-connection prohibited.
The Water and Sewer Department will not allow its mains or services to
be connected on any premises with any service pipe or piping which is
connected with any other source of water supply; nor will it allow its mains
or service pipes to be in any way connected to any vat, tank or other
apparatus which contains or may contain any other liquid or chemicals. The
Water and Sewer Department will refuse to give service to any premises
having such connections until any and all such existing conditions are
terminated.
§ 238-17. Discontinuance or refusal of service.
The Water and Sewer Department shall have the right and privilege to
discontinue water service to any customer and/or refuse water service to
any customer, whether theretofore served or not, for any reason which, in
the sole judgment and direction of the Water and Sewer Department, may
be valid or sufficient.
§ 238-18. Discontinuance at customer's request.
§ 238-19. Right of entry.
Employees of the Water and Sewer Department, with proper identification,
shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any water customer at any
time during ordinary business hours for the purpose of examining, testing,
changing and/or moving any water equipment, meters, apparatus and/or
piping of the Water and Sewer Department or measuring the customer's
water demand.
§ 238-20. Water and Sewer Department responsibilities and
liabilities limited.
A. The Water and Sewer Department shall, on verbal notice of the
customer or his agent, turn water on or off for repairs or alterations
without in any way affecting the existing application. If such service is
rendered, a reasonable charge may be made to cover costs incurred by
the Water and Sewer Department for such services.
B. Service will be temporarily discontinued upon the written order of the
customer without in any way affecting the existing application;
provided, however, that the turn-on-charge may be made to cover costs
incurred by the Water and Sewer Department for such services.
C. Services will be permanently discontinued at the customer's request
when proper notification is made to the Water and Sewer Department.
Upon receipt of such notification, the Water and Sewer Department
shall read the customer's meter, and charges for water service
rendered up to and including the time of cutoff shall be computed and
will become due and payable immediately.
§ 238-16 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-20
1:612
§ 238-21. Responsibility of customer.
A. The Water and Sewer Department shall have no duty, obligation or
responsibility with respect to water piping, appliances, equipment or
apparatus on the premises of any water customer other than to provide
a water meter and a service connection from the distribution system of
the Water and Sewer Department to the point of delivery of water to the
customer, which point shall be considered the connection at or near the
property line.
B. The customer shall notify the Water and Sewer Department
immediately of any change or changes in connected load or in water
equipment on the customer's premises which might affect water service
to such customer or to any other water customer of the Water and
Sewer Department, and the Water and Sewer Department shall have no
duty, obligation or responsibility arising out of or resulting from the
customer's failure to so notify the Water and Sewer Department.
C. The Water and Sewer Department shall not be liable for any injury,
damage or loss resulting from the use of water on the customer's
premises or from the presence, location, maintenance or use of any
water piping, fixtures or equipment on the customer's premises.
D. If, for the purpose of making repairs, extensions or connections or for
any other reason beyond the control of the Water and Sewer
Department, it becomes necessary to shut off water in mains, the Water
and Sewer Department will not be responsible for any damage
occasioned by such shutoff. The Water and Sewer Department will not
be responsible for damages caused by turbid water which may be
occasioned by cleaning of pipes, reservoirs or standpipes or the
opening or closing of any gates or hydrants or any other cause which is
not the result of negligence on the part of the Water and Sewer
Department.
E. In order to maintain proper and sufficient pressures in the distribution
system for fire protection and other purposes; the Water and Sewer
Department reserves the right, at all times, to determine, limit and
regulate, in a reasonable and nondiscriminating manner, the maximum
amounts of water a customer may use.
F. Nothing shall be attached or fastened to or placed upon any meter,
fixture or equipment of the Water and Sewer Department unless prior
permission, in writing, shall have been given by the Superintendent of
the Water and Sewer Department, and the Water and Sewer
Department shall not be liable for any injury, damage or loss arising out
of or resulting from any such attachment to its meters, fixtures or
equipment.
A. Each customer shall pay the Water and Sewer Department for all
damage to or destruction of property of the Water and Sewer
Department located on or off the customer's premises where such is
§ 238-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-21
1:613
§ 238-22. Interruption to service.
caused directly or indirectly by the customer's officers, agents or
employees, excepting only that resulting from ordinary wear and tear,
acts of God and acts of employees of the Water and Sewer Department.
B. Each customer shall notify the Water and Sewer Department promptly
of any defect in water piping equipment or apparatus of the Water and
Sewer Department or of any existing condition which might affect
water service to the customer or might be dangerous to persons or
property. All such notices and all complaints concerning water service
by the Water and Sewer Department shall be made in writing to the
Water and Sewer Department at City Hall.
C. If any water customer has on his premises any water piping connection
apparatus or device which prevents a water meter or meters on such
premises from registering or recording properly all water used or to be
used or which enables such customer to obtain or use any water
without the same having been registered and/or recorded properly by a
water meter or meters of the Water and Sewer Department or if any
water customer shall fail or refuse to observe, fulfill and comply
faithfully with all rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter
promulgated by the Water and Sewer Department, the Water and Sewer
Department shall have the right to discontinue water service to such
customer and to terminate any contract or contracts with such
customer immediately and without notice to the customer.
D. The Water and Sewer Department may, at its option, refuse to render
water service to any water customer whose service has been
discontinued until the customer has paid in full for all water theretofore
furnished by the Water and Sewer Department to the customer's
premises (including all water which has not been registered or
recorded properly by a water meter or meters of the Water and Sewer
Department) and has paid for all damage to water meters and other
equipment, facilities or property of the Water and Sewer Department
and until the customer's water piping and service installation shall, at
the customer's sole cost, risk and expense, have been placed in such
condition as shall be acceptable to the Water and Sewer Department.
A. The Water and Sewer Department shall make every reasonable effort to
eliminate interruption of service and when such interruption does occur
will endeavor to establish service with the shortest possible delay.
Whenever the service is interrupted for the purpose of working on the
distribution system or the station equipment, all customers affected by
such interruption will be notified in advance whenever it is possible to
do so.
B. The Water and Sewer Department reserves the right to shut off the
water in its mains at any time without notice for making repairs,
extensions or alterations but will, so far as possible, notify customers of
the intent to shut off. It is expressly stipulated by the Water and Sewer
§ 238-21 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-22
1:614
§ 238-23. Change in meter location.
Whenever a customer requests the location of a water meter to be changed,
the Water and Sewer Department may make a reasonable charge to cover
the cost of such relocation. No piping work on the customer's side of the
point of delivery, as defined in § 238-20A, will be done by the Water and
Sewer Department either before or after moving said meter, except that a
spool may be installed in place of the old meter location.
§ 238-24. Extension of water mains within City.
The Water and Sewer Department will extend its water mains along any
public highways or streets which are laid out in which grades have been
established and rough grading completed and which are dedicated to public
use within the City, provided that:
§ 238-25. Extension of water mains outside City.
The Water and Sewer Department will extend its water mains outside
the City in accordance with § 238-24 above, provided, in addition to the
limitations in § 238-24, that:
Department that no claim shall be made against it and that no person
shall be entitled to any damages by reason of the breaking of any pipe
or by reason of any other interruption of the supply of water caused by
mechanical breakdown or by other causes beyond its control.
C. No refunds or proration of charges of private fire protection or hydrant
or other minimum rate will be made for interruptions of service unless
the interruption is in effect for a continuous period in excess of 10 days.
A. Such extension conforms to the Water and Sewer Department extension
policy;
B. Each applicant or group of applicants desiring water service shall, as
part of the consideration for the Water and Sewer Department
extending its water distribution system, execute and deliver, without
cost to the Water and Sewer Department, such easements and other
rights-of-way as, in the opinion of the Water and Sewer Department, are
or may be required at the time the extension is made or may be
required in the future to extend the water distribution system to
properties located adjacent to the premises to be served by such
extension;
C. Sufficient funds are available in the current annual budget of the Water
and Sewer Department or in other funds available to the Water and
Sewer Department, in excess of prior commitments, to defray the Water
and Sewer Department's portion of the cost of such extension; and
D. Such extension will be in the best interests of the Water and Sewer
Department and its existing customers.
§ 238-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-25
1:615
§ 238-26. Street service connections.
A. Further expansion of the water distribution system outside the City
limits will be permitted only in areas where the capacity of existing
water mains and other water system facilities to which an extension is
to be connected is sufficient to accept the new water demand, including
adequate supply for fire protection;
B. As a prerequisite to any such extension, the Superintendent of the
Water and Sewer Department shall have filed with the Board a written
opinion that, to his best knowledge and belief, the addition of the
customers to be served from such extension will not reduce the supply
available to existing customers below satisfactory pressures under fire
service conditions;
C. Preference shall be given to applicants for water system extensions
where such applicants indicate, in writing, their agreement to future
annexation to the City at such time as it becomes practicable; and
D. All costs of such extensions, including any required reinforcement of
the existing system to provide satisfactory service to both the
prospective and existing customers, shall be paid by those persons
desiring such extensions. The allowance of $100 per customer shall not
be made for such extensions outside the City limits.
A. The location of the street service connection shall be along that
frontage of the customer's property abutting the street in which the
main lies or as determined by the Water and Sewer Department. In the
event that service is requested at a point not already served by a main
of adequate capacity, the Water and Sewer Department shall extend its
main as provided in § 238-24 and the Water and Sewer Department
extension policy.
B. The size of the street service connection shall be determined by the
Water and Sewer Department on the basis of information given in the
application of the customer.
C. All street service connections shall be laid to provide a minimum cover
of 36 inches.
D. The Water and Sewer Department shall not be obliged to install a street
service connection until the initial service connection charge as set
forth in § 238-10 hereof has been paid and until the customer's service
pipe is installed in accordance with existing Plumbing Codes54 and the
Water and Sewer Department specifications.
E. Any change in the location of an existing service at the request of the
customer shall be made at the expense of the customer.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Building Construction.
§ 238-25 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-26
1:616
§ 238-27. Maintenance or alteration of street service connection.
Maintenance or alteration of any street service pipe shall be done by
the Water and Sewer Department. When such work is necessary for the
convenience of the customer, it will be done at the customer's expense.
§ 238-28. Customers' service pipes.
F. The Water and Sewer Department will not be required to replace any
existing street service connection with a larger size until the customer
has paid the initial service connection charge for such larger size of
service as set forth in § 238-10 hereof, less the amount of the initial
service connection charge applicable for the size of the present service.
A. The customer's service pipe shall be furnished and installed by the
customer at his expense and risk. Pipe shall be of ample strength to
withstand the water pressures at the point where located and will
conform to the existing Plumbing Codes55 and the requirements of the
Water and Sewer Department in furnishing adequate and safe service.
B. The customer's service pipe shall include the connection to the street
service pipe, and all liability for such connection shall be the
customer's. If the customer's service pipe is installed prior to the
installation of a street service pipe or stub by the Water and Sewer
Department, the Water and Sewer Department will, at the customer's
request, make the physical connection between those pipes, but in so
doing the Water and Sewer Department assumes no liability for said
connection.
C. The customer's service pipe shall be laid to the property line at a point
designated by the Water and Sewer Department before the Water and
Sewer Department shall be required to connect such service pipe with
the street service connection.
D. Service pipe in buildings shall be located in the parts thereof best
protected from the frost. In buildings where there are no cellars, the
pipe shall be carried up from the center or unexposed part of the
building or shall otherwise be installed in such a manner as reasonably
to protect said pipe from freezing.
E. The customer shall make all changes in his portion of the service pipe
required on account of changes of grade, relocation of mains or other
causes.
F. No attachment to the customer's service pipe shall be made between
the meter and the street main.
G. Any repairs or maintenance necessary on the customer's service pipe or
in any pipe or fixture in or upon the customer's premises, including the
connections to the street service, shall be performed by the customer at
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Building Construction.
§ 238-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-28
1:617
§ 238-29. Laterals across streets.
When a water main carrying adequate pressure and capacity is on the
opposite side of the street from the premises to be served, the Water and
Sewer Department may run one lateral across the street to serve one or
more stubs.
§ 238-30. Determination of single or separate services for
individual buildings.
§ 238-31. Private fire service.
his expense and risk. Such pipe and fixtures shall be kept and
maintained in good condition and free from all leaks, and for failure
on the part of the customer to do so, the water supply may be
discontinued.
H. All customers' service pipes must have placed thereon a cutoff
immediately inside the building or foundation wall at the place of entry.
I. When it becomes necessary to thaw a frozen service pipe and it cannot
be determined where it is frozen and the Water and Sewer Department
is requested by the customer to undertake to thaw the same, 1/2 of the
cost thereof shall be paid by the customer.
A. Each separate permanent building, that is, one which can be sold as a
separate building, regardless of ownership, shall have its own water
service pipe. A permanent wall-bearing partition shall be the basis in
determining whether or not a building is a separate unit or a multiple
unit. This shall be the basis for running one service or separate
services.
B. Tourists' courts or establishments consisting of a group of buildings
may, at the discretion of the Water and Sewer Department, be served by
a single service pipe.
A. It shall be expressly understood and agreed by and between the parties
receiving private fire service that the Water and Sewer Department
does not assume liability as an insurer of property or persons and that
the agreement does not contemplate any special service, pressure,
capacity or facility, and, further, that all private fire service furnished
shall be subject to the ordinary and changing conditions of the Water
and Sewer Department, as the same exist from day to day.
B. All materials for such private fire protection shall be approved by the
Water and Sewer Department, and the services must be provided with
suitable valves outside of the building, under the exclusive control of
the Water and Sewer Department. The entire cost and expense of
installing a private fire service connection shall be borne by the owners
of the premises. Said service shall be used exclusively for the
§ 238-28 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-31
1:618
§ 238-32. Seasonal, standby and temporary connections; special
services.
extinguishment of fires, and no connection for domestic, commercial or
industrial use may be attached to this fire service.
C. All sprinkler pipes and other private fire connection pipes on presently
installed services shall be so placed as to be readily inspected, and, if
concealed or so arranged with other pipes so as to not be readily
inspected or if any unauthorized connections are in existence, meters
shall be installed on each service at the expense of the customer.
D. Customers desiring private fire service must consult, before
installation, with the Water and Sewer Department as to the availability
of mains, pressure, etc. No private fire service connection will be made
on a water main of less than six inches in diameter.
E. Annual fee. The annual fee in dollars for fire line service by pipe size
shall be as follows: [Added 12-22-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-60;
amended 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-18; 7-12-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-19; 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-12; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-01; 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-0456]
Annual Inside Fire Line Service Charge
Pipe Size Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
4-inch $192.44 $198.21 $204.16 $210.28 $216.59 $223.09
6-inch $432.41 $445.38 $458.74 $472.51 $486.68 $501.28
8-inch $769.76 $792.85 $816.64 $841.14 $866.37 $892.36
10-inch $1,202.17 $1,238.24 $1,275.38 $1,313.64 $1,353.05 $1,393.64
12-inch $1,729.64 $1,781.53 $1,834.98 $1,890.02 $1,946.73 $2,005.13
Annual Outside Fire Line Service Charge
Pipe Size Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
4-inch $257.36 $265.08 $273.03 $281.22 $289.66 $298.35
6-inch $576.16 $593.44 $611.24 $629.59 $648.47 $667.93
8-inch $1,024.80 $1,055.54 $1,087.21 $1,119.83 $1,153.42 $1,188.02
10-inch $1,602.12 $1,650.19 $1,699.69 $1,750.67 $1,803.20 $1,857.29
12-inch $2,306.96 $2,376.17 $2,447.46 $2,520.87 $2,596.51 $2,674.40
A. The entire cost of seasonal, standby and temporary street service
connections shall be borne by the customer. Title to such service within
the street lines remains in the Water and Sewer Department in
56.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 30 days after passage,
with the increases in rates effective for all bills rendered in the current fiscal year on or
after July 1, 2019, and for all bills rendered on or after July 1 of each of the subsequent
four fiscal years.
§ 238-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-32
1:619
§ 238-33. House numbering.
Permanently assigned house numbers shall be obtained before application
for service is accepted and suitably displayed on the property in a visible
location before the water service pipe is installed.
§ 238-34. Meter installations.
consideration of its perpetual upkeep and maintenance. The initial
service connection charge shall not apply when temporary water
service is rendered through a fire hydrant.
B. The entire cost of any special service installation will be defrayed by the
applicant.
A. These house numbers should be assigned by the Postmaster of the City
of Hagerstown or should conform to the City numbering system; if
located outside the City limits, each house shall be properly identified
as requested by the Water and Sewer Department.
B. No meter is to be set at a house without proper and correct
identification.
C. If a house number or identification is changed for any reason, the Water
and Sewer Department shall be notified of such change.
A. All new services shall be metered, except private fire service
connections, and the Water and Sewer Department shall have the right
to place a meter on an existing service pipe and charge for water
service by meter measurements.
B. All meters shall be furnished, installed, maintained and removed by the
Water and Sewer Department and shall remain its property.
C. The Water and Sewer Department shall have the right to determine, on
the basis of the customer's stated flow requirements, the size and type
of meter to be installed and the location of the same. If flow
requirements decrease subsequent to installation and a smaller meter
is requested by the customer, the cost of installing such meter shall be
borne by the customer.
D. Plumbers installing new services and house plumbing in a premises
shall determine from the Water and Sewer Department the proposed
location of the meter and, if inside the building, shall leave sufficient
horizontal space next to the entrance cutoff for the installation of
meters as follows:
Size of Meter
Horizontal Space
(inches)
5/8-inch 13 1/2
3/4-inch 16 1/2
§ 238-32 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-34
1:620
§ 238-35. Interconnection of house piping systems.
House piping systems designed to be supplied from separate meters shall
not be interconnected. No house piping shall be interconnected to any
individual water system.
§ 238-36. Meter tests.
Size of Meter
Horizontal Space
(inches)
1-inch 21
1 1/2-inch 26
2-inch 32
E. When a meter is installed at or near the curbline, it shall be placed in a
meter box or vault in accordance with the specifications of the Water
and Sewer Department as follows:
(1) Meters one inch and smaller in yearly services shall be installed in
a meter box or tile at the expense of the Water and Sewer
Department.
(2) Meters larger than one inch shall be placed in a vault which will be
furnished and installed at the expense of the customer.
F. All meters shall be maintained by the Water and Sewer Department at
its expense insofar as ordinary wear is concerned, but damage due to
hot water, freezing or other external causes arising out of or caused by
the customer's negligence or carelessness shall be paid for by the
customer. The meters furnished by the Water and Sewer Department
shall remain its property, and the owners of the premises wherein or
whereon they are located shall be held responsible for their
safekeeping and liable for any damage there resulting from the
carelessness of said owner, his agent or tenant and for failure to protect
the same against freezing and/or damage by hot water. The Water and
Sewer Department may refuse to supply water until such damage is
paid.
G. Where, at the request of the customer, a change in location of an
existing meter is made, the expense thereof, at the option of the Water
and Sewer Department, may be billed to the customer.
A. Upon the request of any customer, the meter supplying water to the
customer making the request will be tested by the Water and Sewer
Department. If the meter is found to be accurate within the limits of
plus or minus 2%, the customer shall pay a just and reasonable fee for
its test to the Water and Sewer Department; provided, however, that if
the meter has not been tested during 12 months prior to the request,
§ 238-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-36
1:621
§ 238-37. Tampering with Water and Sewer Department property.
No person shall turn the water on or off at any street valve, corporation
cock, curb cock or other street connection or disconnect or remove any
meter without the consent of the Water and Sewer Department. Penalties
provided by law for any such action will be rigidly enforced.
§ 238-38. Tampering with fire hydrants.
No unauthorized person shall, without written consent of the Water and
Sewer Department, open any fire hydrant except for the legitimate purpose
of extinguishment of fire.
§ 238-39. Installation of fire hydrants within City.
The installation of fire hydrants within the City shall be made, provided that:
the Water and Sewer Department will make the test without charge to
the customer.
B. The Water and Sewer Department may remove any meter for routine
tests, repairs and replacement.
C. The tests of the meter requested by the customer may be witnessed by
the customer or his duly authorized representative.
D. Meters registering fast or slow beyond allowable limits.
(1) If, upon test by the Water and Sewer Department, any water meter
shall be found to have an average error of more than plus or minus
2%, such meter shall be corrected or replaced, at the option of the
Water and Sewer Department, and an appropriate correction or
charge in keeping with the percentage of error found upon test of
such meter shall be made in the bills or charges for water service
measured through said meter during a period of not more than two
billing periods prior to the date of such test.
(2) If it is found during any period of time that a water meter has failed
to register, the customer served through said meter shall be billed
by the Water and Sewer Department and shall pay to the City
Treasurer a charge for water service delivered during such period
of time, which shall be estimated and computed by the Water and
Sewer Department on a basis of the water accurately measured
during the billing period preceding or succeeding the time when
such meter was discovered to have failed to register or before the
same was found to be in error and any and all available information
pertaining to the proper determination of the customer's usage and
load.
A. Each such installation shall be covered by a written recommendation of
the Fire Chief and approved by the Board;
§ 238-36 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-39
1:622
§ 238-40. Installation of fire hydrants outside City.
It shall be the general policy of the Water and Sewer Department to install
fire hydrants only in locations where the capacity of the lines serving
such locations is sufficient to provide a reasonable-flow for fire protection
purposes. It shall be expressly understood, however, that the City does
not assume liability as an insurer of property or persons and that there
is no guarantee of any special service, pressure or capacity and, further,
service from all fire hydrants shall be subject to the ordinary and changing
conditions of the City water system as the same exists from day to day.
§ 238-41. Conflict with other standards.
Where these rules and regulations are in conflict with any other ordinance
of the City, such as the Plumbing Code, Building Code or Fire Prevention
Code,57 such other ordinance now or hereafter adopted shall prevail.
§ 238-42. Severability.
It is hereby declared that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and all other parts of these rules and regulations, either large or
small, are severable and are not matters of mutually essential inducement,
it being the purpose of the Board of Water Commissioners of the City
of Hagerstown, Maryland, to determine, approve and enact appropriate
rules and regulations pertaining to and governing the operation of the
Water and Sewer Department of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, and
the furnishing of water to customers of the Water and Sewer Department,
in accordance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Maryland
and the Charter of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland; and, if any one
or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or other
parts of these rules and regulations shall be, for any reason, adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not impair, invalidate or
B. There are funds available in the annual budget or water bond funds for
the cost of such installation; and
C. The capacity of the lines serving such locations is sufficient to provide a
reasonable flow for fire protection purposes. At locations where fire
hydrants are needed and such capacity is not available, the
Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department shall submit a
written report to the Board which shall detail the system
reinforcements needed to make such capacity available and the
estimated costs thereof, together with such recommendations as he
deems advisable. In the event that the Board finds that it is not feasible
to provide the funds necessary for such reinforcements from the
current annual budget or other funds available, it shall report such
situation to the Mayor and Council for such action as the Mayor and
Council may deem appropriate.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Building Construction, and Ch. 98, Fire Prevention.
§ 238-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-42
1:623
affect the remaining portions and provisions of these rules and regulations,
and such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the specific
provision or provisions so held to be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 238-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of these rules
and regulations shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $50.
§ 238-42 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-43
1:624
ARTICLE III
Rates and Charges
[Adopted 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-30]
§ 238-44. Service charges for City customers. [Amended 5-22-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-18; 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-14]
A. The charges and rates for use and service of the public water system of
the City to the owners of every building, house or other property
connected with or using such system within the corporate limits of the
City of Hagerstown shall be based on the amount of water delivered to
the property from the public water supply as determined by meter
readings or established minimums in accordance with the schedule of
water rates and charges which the Mayor and Council of the City of
Hagerstown shall by ordinance from time to time fix, establish and
adjust in accordance with the Charter of the City of Hagerstown.
B. The rate in dollars per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumption per
quarter for those customers located within Hagerstown's corporate
boundaries shall be: [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-29;
10-25-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-24; 6-20-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-16;
9-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-12; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-01;
4-23-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-0458]
Inside City - Volume Fee per 1,000 Gallons
Residential Cost
per 1,000
Gallons Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
0-18,000 gallons $1.62 $1.67 $1.72 $1.77 $1.82 $1.87
>18,000 gallons $3.08 $3.17 $3.27 $3.37 $3.47 $3.57
NOTE: Current structure is same as nonresidential tiers below.
Non-residential
Cost per 1,000
Gallons Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
0-100,000 gallons $1.62 $1.67 $1.72 $1.77 $1.82 $1.87
>100,000 gallons $1.44 $1.48 $1.52 $1.57 $1.62 $1.67
(1) In addition, for customers billed quarterly, a fixed minimum charge
in dollars will be assessed and shall be:
58.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 30 days after passage,
with the increases in rates effective for all bills rendered in the current fiscal year on or
after July 1, 2019, and for all bills rendered on or after July 1 of each of the subsequent
four fiscal years.
§ 238-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-44
1:625
§ 238-45. Service charges for non-City, non-booster customers.
Inside - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Quarterly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
5/8 1 $7.17 $7.39 $7.61 $7.84 $8.08 $8.32
3/4 1 $7.17 $7.39 $7.61 $7.84 $8.08 $8.32
1 2.5 $17.93 $18.48 $19.03 $19.60 $20.20 $20.80
1.5 5 $35.85 $36.95 $38.05 $39.20 $40.40 $41.60
2 8 $57.36 $59.12 $60.88 $62.72 $64.64 $66.56
3 16 $114.73 $118.24 $121.76 $125.44 $129.28 $133.12
4 25 $179.27 $184.75 $190.25 $196.00 $202.00 $208.00
6 50 $358.53 $369.50 $380.50 $392.00 $404.00 $416.00
8 80 $573.65 $591.20 $608.80 $627.20 $646.40 $665.60
10 138 $989.54 $1,019.82 $1,050.18$1,081.92 $1,115.04 $1,148.16
(2) In addition, for customers billed monthly, the fixed minimum
charge in dollars shall be 1/3 of the quarterly fixed minimum
charge.
Inside - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Monthly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
5/8 1 $2.39 $2.46 $2.53 $2.61 $2.69 $2.77
3/4 1 $2.39 $2.46 $2.53 $2.61 $2.69 $2.77
1 2.5 $5.98 $6.15 $6.33 $6.53 $6.73 $6.93
1.5 5 $11.95 $12.30 $12.65 $13.05 $13.45 $13.85
2 8 $19.12 $19.68 $20.24 $20.88 $21.52 $22.16
3 16 $38.24 $39.36 $40.48 $41.76 $43.04 $44.32
4 25 $59.76 $61.50 $63.25 $65.25 $67.25 $69.25
6 50 $119.51 $123.00 $126.50 $130.50 $134.50 $138.50
8 80 $191.22 $196.80 $202.40 $208.80 $215.20 $221.60
10 138 $329.85 $339.48 $349.14 $360.18 $371.22 $382.26
§ 238-44 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-45
1:626
A. The charges and rates for use and service of the public water system of
the City to the owners of every building, dwelling, house or other
property connected with or using such system outside of the corporate
limits of the City of Hagerstown but not within Booster Zones 2 or 3
shall be based on the amount of water delivered to the property from
the public water supply as determined by meter readings or established
minimums in accordance with the schedule of water rates and charges
which the Mayor and Council of the City of Hagerstown shall by
ordinance from time to time fix, establish and adjust in accordance with
the Charter of the City of Hagerstown.
B. The rate in dollars per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumption per
quarter for those customers that are not located within Hagerstown's
corporate boundaries shall be: [Amended 5-22-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18; 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-14; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-29; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-24; 6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-1659; 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-12; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-01; 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-0460]
Outside City — Volume Fee per 1,000 Gallons
Residential
Cost per 1,000
Gallons Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
0-18,000 gallons $3.91 $4.03 $4.15 $4.27 $4.40 $4.53
>18,000 gallons $7.43 $7.65 $7.88 $8.12 $8.36 $8.61
NOTE: Current structure is same as nonresidential tiers below.
Non-residential
Cost per 1,000
Gallons Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
0-100,000 gallons $3.91 $4.03 $4.15 $4.27 $4.40 $4.53
>100,000 gallons $3.51 $3.62 $3.73 $3.84 $3.96 $4.08
(1) In addition, for customers billed quarterly, a fixed minimum charge
in dollars based on water meter size shall be assessed and shall be:
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided the following: "A discount of 16% off the non-
City of Hagerstown water rates shall be offered to the City's three municipal resale water
customers. They are the Towns of Smithsburg, Funkstown and Williamsport. The discount
will be offered contingent upon the completion of written water service agreements
between each of the towns and the City of Hagerstown. The discount of 16% is based on
the determination by our rate consultant of the City's avoided cost of service due to the
towns' operation and maintenance of the water system within their municipal limits and
direct billing of their own municipal customers."
60.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 30 days after passage,
with the increases in rates effective for all bills rendered in the current fiscal year on or
after July 1, 2019, and for all bills rendered on or after July 1 of each of the subsequent
four fiscal years.
§ 238-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-45
1:627
§ 238-46. Service charges for non-City, booster customers.
Outside - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Quarterly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
5/8 1 $20.88 $21.51 $22.16 $22.82 $23.50 $24.21
3/4 1 $20.88 $21.51 $22.16 $22.82 $23.50 $24.21
1 2.5 $52.20 $53.78 $55.40 $57.05 $58.75 $60.53
1.5 5 $104.40 $107.55 $110.80 $114.10 $117.50 $121.05
2 8 $167.04 $172.08 $177.28 $182.56 $188.00 $193.68
3 16 $334.07 $344.16 $354.56 $365.12 $376.00 $387.36
4 25 $521.99 $537.75 $554.00 $570.50 $587.50 $605.25
6 50 $1,043.97$1,075.50 $1,108.00$1,141.00 $1,175.00$1,210.50
8 80 $1,670.35$1,720.80 $1,772.80$1,825.60 $1,880.00$1,936.80
10 138 $2,881.36$2,968.38 $3,058.08$3,149.16 $3,243.00$3,340.98
(2) In addition, for customers billed monthly, the fixed minimum
charge in dollars shall be 1/3 the quarterly fixed minimum charge.
Outside - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Monthly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
5/8 1 $6.96 $7.17 $7.39 $7.61 $7.84 $8.08
3/4 1 $6.96 $7.17 $7.39 $7.61 $7.84 $8.08
1 2.5 $17.40 $17.93 $18.48 $19.03 $19.60 $20.20
1.5 5 $34.80 $35.85 $36.95 $38.05 $39.20 $40.40
2 8 $55.68 $57.36 $59.12 $60.88 $62.72 $64.64
3 16 $111.36 $114.72 $118.24 $121.76 $125.44 $129.28
4 25 $174.00 $179.25 $184.75 $190.25 $196.00 $202.00
6 50 $347.99 $358.50 $369.50 $380.50 $392.00 $404.00
8 80 $556.78 $573.60 $591.20 $608.80 $627.20 $646.40
10 138 $960.45 $989.46 $1,019.82$1,050.18 $1,081.92$1,115.04
§ 238-45 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-46
1:628
§ 238-47. Charges for private fire line City customers.
The charges for use of the public water system by private fire line
connection by owners of buildings connected for such use within the
corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown shall be charged an annual fee
for same in accordance with the schedule of water rates and charges which
the Mayor and Council of the City of Hagerstown shall by ordinance from
time to time fix, establish and adjust in accordance with the Charter of the
City of Hagerstown.61
§ 238-48. Charges for private fire line non-City customers.
The charges for use of the public water system by private fire line
connection by owners of buildings connected for such use outside of the
corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown shall be charged an annual fee
for same in accordance with the schedule of water rates and charges which
the Mayor and Council of the City of Hagerstown shall by ordinance from
time to time fix, establish and adjust in accordance with the Charter of the
City of Hagerstown.62
§ 238-49. Plan review and inspection fees. [Added 6-17-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-23]
A. The charges and rates for use and service of the public water system of
the City to the owners of every building, dwelling, house or other
property connected with or using such system outside of the corporate
limits of the City of Hagerstown and within Booster Zones 2 or 3 shall
be based on the amount of water delivered to the property from the
public water supply as determined by meter readings or established
minimums in accordance with the schedule of water rates and charges
which the Mayor and Council of the City of Hagerstown shall by
ordinance from time to time fix, establish and adjust in accordance with
the Charter of the City of Hagerstown.
B. The rate per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumption for those
customers that are not located within Hagerstown's corporate
boundaries and are located within Booster Zones 2 and 3 shall be $2.42
for the first 100,000 gallons, $2.18 for the next 900,000 gallons, and
$1.98 for over 1,000,000 gallons used. A minimum charge shall be
assessed equivalent to the charges for 10,000 gallons of water
consumption per quarter $24.20, or 3,333.33 gallons of water
consumption per month $8.07. [Amended 5-22-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18; 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-14; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-29]
A. All persons constructing any water main extensions and/or pump
stations which are to become part of the water system of the City of
61.Editor's Note: See § 238-31E for specific charges.
62.Editor's Note: See § 238-31E for specific charges.
§ 238-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-49
1:629
Hagerstown shall submit to the City for review plans for such
construction. A fee shall be charged for review by the City of these
plans which shall be due and payable at the time that the plans are
submitted for review. The Council of the City of Hagerstown shall by
ordinance fix, establish and adjust the amount of the main extension
and/or pump station plan review fee in accordance with the Charter of
the City of Hagerstown.
B. All persons constructing any water main extensions and/or pump
stations which are to become part of the water system of the City of
Hagerstown shall have the same inspected by the Water and Sewer
Department during the course of its construction in accordance with
policies to be established by the Department. A fee shall be charged for
such construction permits/inspections which shall be due and payable
prior to such inspections taking place. The Council of the City of
Hagerstown shall by ordinance fix, establish and adjust the amount of
the main extension and/or pump station construction permit/inspection
fee in accordance with the Charter of the City of Hagerstown.
C. The Water and Sewer Department shall establish administrative
policies for the administration of the main extension and/or pump
station plan review and inspection process.
§ 238-49 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 238-49
1:630
Chapter 240
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land management — See Ch. 140.
Sanitation — See Ch. 200.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 213.
§ 238-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-49
1:631

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 240-1. Purpose and intent.
A. It is the purpose and intent of the Mayor and Council of the City of
Hagerstown, Maryland:
(1) To establish uniform requirements for contributors into the
wastewater collection and treatment system owned and operated
by the City of Hagerstown and to enable the City to comply with
applicable state and federal laws and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 CFR Part 403).
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipality's
wastewater system which will:
(a) Interfere with the operation of the system;
(b) Contaminate the sludge;
(c) Pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters or the atmosphere;
(d) Pose a health threat to sewer workers; or
(e) Be otherwise incompatible with the system.
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
B. It is the purpose and intent of the Mayor and Council of the City of
Hagerstown to restore, maintain and protect the chemical, physical and
biological integrity of the waters and watercourses of the City of
Hagerstown and to permit the discharge of sanitary sewage and of
industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system of the City of
Hagerstown, provided that such discharge does not damage the sewer
system or unduly restrict the capacity of the system to receive sanitary
sewage or adversely affect the wastewater treatment process or in any
other way constitute a detriment to the wastewater collection system,
the wastewater treatment plant or the receiving waters. Further, it is
intended that the sanitary sewer services will be under the direct
control of the Water and Sewer Department, such services to include
but not be limited to sewer extensions, installations of service
connections and the operation and maintenance of the complete water
pollution control system in accordance with the standards set forth
herein.
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2
1:633
§ 240-2. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the purpose of this chapter to specify the following:
§ 240-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. Sewage, waters, wastes and wastewaters, including industrial sewage,
waters, wastes and wastewaters which will be accepted into the
sanitary sewer system of the City of Hagerstown.
B. Types of sewage, waters, wastes and wastewaters which will be
prohibited from discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the City of
Hagerstown.
C. Conditions, including but not limited to pretreatment, under which such
sewage, waters, wastes and wastewaters will be accepted in the
sanitary sewer system of the City of Hagerstown.
A. Terms defined. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ALLOCATION — The allowable quantity and concentrations of sewage,
water, waste and wastewater to be discharged into the sanitary sewer
system by any person, firm, corporation or legal entity as determined by
the approving authority or in accordance with applicable federal, state,
county or City statutes, ordinances or regulations, the more stringent
of which shall govern and control.
APHA — The American Public Health Association.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Manager of the Water and Sewer
Department or some other person or agency as may be designated by
the Mayor of the City of Hagerstown, subject to the approval of the
Council.
ASTM — The American Society for Testing and Materials.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE —
A responsible corporate officer such as a president, secretary,
treasurer or vice president of the corporation in charge of a
principal business function or any other person who performs
similar policy- or decision making functions for the corporation
or the manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000, if
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(1)
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or sole proprietorship respectively.
(2)
§ 240-2 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-3
1:634
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The value
expressing the quantity of oxygen required by the bacteria to stabilize
the organic matter in the wastewater in a test of five consecutive days
at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), as determined in
accordance with the latest issue of the APHA's Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater or by a method acceptable
to the State Department of the Environment or the State Department
of Natural Resources of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from waste pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
1.5 meters (five feet) outside the thinner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The sewer from the building drain to the service
connection.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of an industrial user's treatment facility.
CITY — The City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
CITY ENGINEER or ENGINEER — The duly designated City Engineer
of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the oxygenconsuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water
or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from
a chemical oxidant in a specific test, expressed in milligrams per liter
(mg/l), as determined in accordance with the latest issue of the APHA's
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater or
by a method acceptable to the State Department of the Environment
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Subsection A(1) or (2) above if:
The authorization is made in writing by the individual
described in Subsection A(1) or (2);
(a)
The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, operator of a well or a position of
equivalent responsibility or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and
(b)
(c) The written authorization is submitted to the Control Authority.
(3)
If authorization under Subsection A(3) is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility, a new
authorization must be submitted to the publicly owned treatment
works (POTW) prior to or together with any reports to be signed by
an authorized representative.
(4)
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:635
or the State Department of Natural Resources of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
COLOR OF SEWAGE, WATER, WASTE AND WASTEWATER — The hue,
lightness and saturation of the light transmitted by the waste solution
prior to, during and after removing the suspended material and the
pseudocolloidal particles representing apparent color, as well as the
soluble matter representing true color.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving sewage, water, waste and
wastewater, to include stormwater, groundwater and surface water.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or any portion
thereof intended to be used wholly or in part for the purpose of carrying
on a trade, business or profession or for social, amusement, religious,
educational, charitable or public uses and which contains plumbing for
kitchen, toilet, testing or washing facilities.
CROSS-CONNECTION — The direct arrangement of any piping, line or
hose which allows the potable water supply to be connected to a drain,
tank or sewer which contains a contaminant.
CUSTOMER — Includes any person, persons, institution, firm, business,
agency or corporation or legal entity of whatsoever nature or kind,
irrespective of gender, who may be an applicant for or a user in any
manner of the sanitary sewer system of the Water and Sewer
Department of the City. The terms "he," "him," "his" and others that
may be used in the plural or singular vernacular shall be construed as
falling within the above, whether used in the singular or plural case and
regardless of gender.
DISCHARGE — The act of or point at which sewage, water, waste
and/or wastewater are emptied or released into, permitted to flow
into or escape into manholes, sanitary sewers, storm drains or similar
appurtenances or fixtures thereof or into receiving waters by means of
various plumbing fixtures, piping or channels or in any other manner
whatsoever, whether intentional or otherwise.
DOMESTIC WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance containing
only human wastes and/or household wastes discharged, permitted
to flow or escaping from any residential, industrial, manufacturing,
commercial, institutional or business establishment.
FEDERAL — Of or relating to the government or any administrative
agency of the United States of America.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic or commercial
preparation, cooking and/or dispensing of food or from the handling,
storage and/or sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure intended to be used
wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
testing, cleaning, laundering or assembly of any product, commodity or
article.
§ 240-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-3
1:636
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy discharged, permitted to flow or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial, institutional
or business establishment or process or from the development,
recovery or processing of any natural resource, which substance,
during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or
results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate
product, finished product, by-product or waste product or which
substance possesses any characteristic of other than a domestic waste
nature.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
MANAGER — The duly appointed Manager of the Water and Sewer
Department of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, who shall be
responsible for all aspects of the Water and Sewer Department.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE —
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(1)
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions
and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent
state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act;
the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA); the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
(2)
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
(1)
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:637
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exists the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMIT — A sanitary sewer connection permit or an industrial waste
discharge permit or an allocation increase permit.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, public corporation, private
corporation, municipal corporation, nonprofit corporation, partnership,
association, society, state of the United States of America, political
subdivision or agency of a state, interstate body or any other legal
entity of whatsoever nature or kind.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source should be considered.
(c)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction
does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of Subsection A(1)(b) or (c) of this section but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source, as defined under this subsection, has
commenced if the owner operator has:
Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program any placement, assembly or installation
of facilities or equipment or significant site preparation work,
including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings,
structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement,
assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment;
or
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in
its operation with a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this subsection.
(b)
(3)
§ 240-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-3
1:638
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The duly designated Plumbing Inspector of
the City of Hagerstown, Maryland.
POLLUTED WATERS — Waters which have been contaminated by the
addition of wastewater or other harmful or objectionable materials or
by any man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical,
biological and/or radiological integrity of water.
PRETREATMENT — Any process whereby undesirable constituents in
the sewage, water, waste and wastewater, including but not limited to
soluble organics, toxic materials, heavy metal ions, color and turbidity,
nutrients, refractory materials, oils, grease and immiscible liquids,
acids and alkalis, organic and inorganic solids, excessive temperatures,
pathogenic wastes and radioactive isotopes, are reduced to levels
deemed acceptable by the Water and Sewer Department before these
wastewaters are admitted to the water pollution control system.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or NATIONAL CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which
applies to a specific category of industrial users.
PRIVATE DWELLING OR LIVING UNIT — A structure or dwelling
intended to be used as a single-family residence or an apartment
intended to be used as a single-family residence or any other singlefamily
living unit.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and/or dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in the public sanitary sewers, with no particle
greater than 1.27 centimeters (1/2 inch) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — A sanitary sewer owned by the City
or other government agency and an integral part of the City's water
pollution control system.
PUBLIC STORM DRAIN — A storm drain owned by the City and an
integral part of the City's drainage system.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm-, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SERVICE CONNECTION — That portion of the sanitary sewer between
the sewer main and the curbline, existing or proposed, to which the
building sewer is connected.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence
of a bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:639
SEWAGE — Any combination of the water-carried domestic and/or
industrial wastes from various customers, including residences,
business buildings, institutions or industrial establishments, together
with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be
present.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit which carries sewage, water, waste and
wastewater.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
SLUG — Any discharge of significant quantities of water, sewage,
industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or
quantity of flow could cause interference of the treatment works, passthrough
the POTW treatment plant, endanger sewer worker safety,
contaminate the sludge or cause a violation of any permit issued to the
POTW.
STATE — The State of Maryland or any of its various departments or
administrative agencies.
STORM DRAIN — A pipe or conduit which carries storm- and surface
waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other
than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT OF THE WATER POLLUTION CONTROL
COLLECTION SYSTEM — The duly appointed Superintendent of the
water pollution control collection system of the City of Hagerstown,
Maryland, who shall be directly responsible to the approving authority
for all aspects of the water pollution control collection system.
Any industrial user who:
(a) Is subject to National Categorical Standards;
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more
of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(b)
Contributes a process waste stream that makes up 5% or more
of the hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
(c)
Is found by the City, state or EPA to have significant impact
either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries to the POTW, the quality of the sludge, the POTW's
effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system.
(d)
(1)
Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the above criteria of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or
in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial
user is not a "significant industrial user."
(2)
§ 240-3 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-3
1:640
SUPERINTENDENT OF THE WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT
— The duly appointed Superintendent of the water pollution control
plant of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, who shall be directly
responsible to the approving authority for all aspects of the water
pollution control plant.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
WASTEWATER — Any combination of the water-carried domestic and/
or industrial wastes from various customers, including residences,
business buildings, institutions or industrial establishments, together
with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be
present.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conduit in which a flow of water occurs
either continuously or intermittently, whether natural or constructed,
coated or caused by any person as defined herein.
WATERS — Odorless, tasteless, very slightly compressible liquid oxides
of hydrogen H2O, to include both surface waters which flow on top of
the ground and groundwaters which penetrate into the soil.
WEF — The Water Environment Federation.
WPC COLLECTION SYSTEM (DENOTING "WATER POLLUTION
CONTROL COLLECTION SYSTEM") — All facilities and processes for
collecting and transporting sewage, including but not limited to
collectors, interceptors, force mains, manholes and pump stations, and
also including all materials, equipment and vehicles for its proper
operation and maintenance.
WPC DEPARTMENT (DENOTING "WATER POLLUTION CONTROL
DEPARTMENT") — The City of Hagerstown, Maryland, the Water and
Sewer Department of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, or a
combination of one or more thereof, together with their officers, agents
and employees.
WPC PLANT (DENOTING "WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT")
— Any arrangement of structures, devices, equipment, chemicals and
processes used for treating and disposing of sewage.
B. Word usage. The term "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:641

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required; General Restrictions
§ 240-4. Prohibited deposit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City of Hagerstown or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 240-5. Treatment of polluted waters required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or permit to be discharged,
intentionally or unintentionally, to any natural outlet within the City of
Hagerstown or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 240-6. Private facilities restricted.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage; provided, however, that the approving authority
may issue a written permit for the temporary use of a sanitary pot, chemical
toilet or equivalent. The duration of such permit shall not exceed one year
but may be renewed at the discretion of the approving authority.
§ 240-7. Connection to public sewer required.
Any owner of a house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the City and
abutting upon any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may at some time in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of
the City is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet and
other facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
within 30 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said
public sanitary sewer is within 61 meters (200 feet) of any point of the
property line. If any owner shall, after notice as provided herein, refuse or
neglect to connect such premises with the public sanitary sewer, the City
shall cause the connection to be made at the owner's expense. This expense
shall be a lien against the property as provided by law.
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7
1:643

ARTICLE III
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 240-8. Conditions under which private systems allowed.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 240-7, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 240-9. County Health Department permit.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Washington
County Health Department. The owner shall apply for such permit in the
manner specified by the Washington County Health Department. The owner
shall furnish any and all plans, specifications and other information as
is deemed necessary by the Washington County Health Department. The
Washington County Health Department shall furnish any and all plans,
specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the
approving authority and the City Engineer for review and approval.
§ 240-10. Inspection of installation.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the approving
authority and the Plumbing Inspector. They shall be allowed to inspect the
work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for
the permit shall notify the approving authority and the Plumbing Inspector
when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two working
days of the receipt of notice by the approving authority and the Plumbing
Inspector. Failure to inspect within said specified time shall not be
construed as approval.
§ 240-11. Compliance with requirements and recommendations.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all requirements of the Maryland State Department of
the Environment and all other federal and state agencies and with all
recommendations of the approving authority. No permit shall be issued for
any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil-absorption
facilities where percolation tests have not been made to determine the size
of the absorption area. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 240-12. Connection to public sewer and filling of private system.
At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 240-11, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sanitary sewer within 30 days
after the receipt of notice, and any septic tanks, cesspools and/or other
§ 240-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-12
1:645
private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
clean bank-run gravel or dirt or as required by the approving authority and/
or the City Engineer. If any owner or user shall, after notice as provided
herein, refuse or neglect to discontinue the use of cesspools, sinks, wells,
privy vaults or other private sewage disposal systems and to clean, fill up
and close the same, the City shall cause the same to be cleaned, filled up
and closed at the owner's expense. This expense shall be a lien against the
property.
§ 240-13. Responsibility of owner.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facility
in a sanitary manner and in compliance with its intended use at all times, at
no expense to the City.
§ 240-14. Additional requirements.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to preclude any
additional requirements that may be imposed by federal, state, county
or City statutes, ordinances or administrative regulations applicable to
systems referred to in this Article III.
§ 240-12 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-14
1:646
ARTICLE IV
Sewer Service Permits; Allocation Procedure; Charges
§ 240-15. Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer or
appurtenance thereof, nor shall any unauthorized person discharge any
industrial waste into any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof,
nor shall any customer increase the volume of acceptable wastewater
discharged into any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof above
the established allocation for said customer, without first obtaining a
written permit of approval from the approving authority.
§ 240-16. Classes of permits.
There shall be three classes of sanitary sewer service permits:
§ 240-17. Permit application.
To obtain a permit, the owner or his agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications and/or other information
required in accordance with the administrative regulations of the approving
authority. These supplements shall be part of the application. The date of
the application shall be the date that the completed application is received
by the City. A sanitary sewer service application fee shall be charged in
accordance with § 240-19 of this article. A permit shall not be issued unless
the application has been approved by the approving authority. The approved
permit must contain the signatures of both the approving authority and the
Plumbing Inspector.
§ 240-18. Time period between application approval and securing
permit.
If an application is approved as herein set forth and the owner, applicant or
agent does not secure the permit within one year of the approval date, then
said approval may be deemed null and void.
§ 240-19. Sanitary sewer service application fee.
A sanitary sewer service application fee shall be charged for each
application for a permit and shall be due and payable at the time that
A. Sanitary sewer connection permit, for the approval of all residential and
nonresidential service connections.
B. Industrial waste discharge permit, for acceptance into the WPC system
of discharges of industrial waste as defined in this chapter.
C. Allocation increase permit, for the approval of any increase in the
volume of acceptable wastewater above the established allocation.
§ 240-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-19
1:647
the application is filed. The Council of the City of Hagerstown shall, by
ordinance, fix, establish and adjust the amount of the sanitary sewer service
application fee, in accordance with the Charter of the City of Hagerstown.
§ 240-20. Allocation procedure.
To preserve the integrity of the WPC system as it is designed to function,
the approving authority shall maintain a controlled allocation of wastes to
be discharged into said system. The approving authority shall establish an
appropriate allocation to each applicant for a permit prior to the approval
of the application for said permit. The approving authority shall establish
an appropriate allocation for each multiple-unit residential customer and
for each nonresidential customer. Each allocation shall be based upon the
estimated daily volume of wastewater to be discharged or being discharged
into the WPC system, as determined by the approving authority.
§ 240-21. Determination of allocation.
The estimated daily volume of wastewater to be discharged or being
discharged to the WPC system shall be determined by the approving
authority from the previous, current and/or anticipated amount of water
consumption and other factors considered significant by the approving
authority and/or from information provided by the applicant and/or by other
sources.
§ 240-22. Partial allocations.
For any allocation issued to an applicant for a permit, the approving
authority may divide the total allocation and proportionally distribute these
partial allocations in increments to coincide with the schedule of
development.
§ 240-23. Effective date of allocation.
The allocation to an applicant for a permit shall become effective on the
date that the applicant or his agent secures his grant permit.
§ 240-24. Establishment of allocations for existing customers.
The approving authority shall notify each customer who on the date of
adoption of this article is a customer of the proposed allocation for said
customer, except that said notification shall not be required for single-family
residential customers. Unless a customer shall have informed the approving
authority, in writing, within 30 days of his receipt of said notification of
allocation of his intention to file an application for an allocation increase
permit and unless said customer shall have filed said application within 90
days of his receipt of said notification of allocation, the proposed allocation
shall be the established allocation for said customer, and any subsequent
application by him for an allocation increase permit shall be subject to
a benefit charge in accordance with the provisions of this article. All
§ 240-19 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-24
1:648
applications for an allocation increase permit shall be handled in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 240-25. Transferability of allocation location.
The allocation established for any applicant for a permit as specified in
this article shall be for the location specified in the application for said
permit, and said established allocation shall not be transferable to any other
location. The allocation established for an existing customer as specified
in this article shall be for the location at which said customer is receiving
sanitary sewer service, and said established allocation shall not be
transferable to any other location.
§ 240-26. Records.
The approving authority shall establish, maintain and keep records
ordinarily deemed necessary in the development of an estimate of the
volume of discharge of wastewater to a sanitary sewer system from various
type of residential and nonresidential establishments and facilities. These
records shall be available to the public.
§ 240-27. Review of established allocation.
The approving authority shall review and assess the actual daily volume of
sewage, waters, wastes and wastewaters being discharged into the water
pollution control system by its customers. If, as a result of these reviews,
it is determined by the approving authority that said volume of discharge
of any customer has significantly exceeded his established allocation, the
approving authority may notify said customer, or the owner thereof, and
said customer, or the owner or his agent, shall, within 30 days of receipt
of said notification, file an application for an increased allocation permit in
accordance with this article. If the amount of increased discharge above
the established allocation is determined by the approving authority to be 50
gallons per day or more, the approving authority shall notify the customer
or the owner or his agent (except single-family residences or single-family
residential units) as specified herein.
§ 240-28. Reduction of established allocation.
If, as a result of reviews conducted by the approving authority as specified
in this article, it is determined by the approving authority that the volume
of sewage, waters, wastes and wastewaters being discharged into the water
pollution control system by any customer has been less than the established
allocation for said customer by 50 gallons per day or more for at least one
year, the approving authority shall notify said customer, or the owner or his
agent thereof, that his established allocation shall be reduced to a proposed
allocation as determined by the approving authority. The customer, or the
owner or his agent, shall then have a total of 90 days from the date
of receipt of said notification to file an application to again increase his
established allocation. If the customer, or the owner or his agent, does not
§ 240-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-28
1:649
file an application for allocation increase, then the new reduced allocation
amount as determined by the approving authority automatically takes
effect. If, however, the customer, or the owner or his agent, exceeds this new
determined allocation but stays within his original allocation, the customer,
or the owner or his agent, will not be assessed any additional benefit
charge. The approving authority shall have the right to apply any allocation
amount that is taken from a customer, or an owner or his agent, to another
customer, owner or his agent.
§ 240-29. Number of service connections per lot.
One service connection shall be provided for each lot at the time of
installation of the public sanitary sewer to serve such lot. Additional service
connections or any changes requested after the public sanitary sewer is
installed shall be at the sole expense of the property owner. Any lot shall
be served once only and may be served at any point, front, rear or side,
whichever is deemed most feasible by the approving authority. In the event
that a lot or parcel of land is subdivided or reallotted in any manner, the
cost of all service connections, charges or extensions needed shall be at the
sole expense of the property owner. This shall be in addition to all other
applicable charges required by this chapter.
§ 240-30. Connection charge. [Amended 5-28-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-15]
A charge of $1,200 shall be made for the installation of each service
connection to the sanitary sewer system and shall be due and payable at the
time the connection permit is issued.
§ 240-31. Benefit charge.
A. A benefit charge shall be assessed for each allocation established with
the approval of an application for a permit and shall be due and payable
at the time that the permit is issued. The benefit charge is intended,
generally, to distribute the City's installed cost of the WPC collection
system and a pro rata share of the WPC plant cost to the benefited
property owners. The benefit charge shall be levied upon the applicant
for a permit, or the owner or owners of the property or properties to be
served, and shall be in the amount or amounts equal to the product of
the allocation established with the approval of an application for a
permit, in gallons per day as determined by the approving authority,
multiplied by the established rate per gallon of allocation, except that
the benefit charge for an allocation established with the approval of an
application for a sanitary sewer connection permit shall not be less than
the established minimum benefit charge. The Mayor and Council of the
City of Hagerstown shall, by ordinance, fix, establish and adjust the
amount of the minimum benefit charge and the amount of the benefit
charge rate per gallon of allocation, in accordance with the Charter of
the City of Hagerstown. If for any reason, the benefit charge is not paid
when due, then the outstanding balance owed by the property owner(s)
§ 240-28 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-31
1:650
will constitute a lien on the property served and be collectible in
accordance with applicable legal remedies. [Amended 10-28-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-38]63
(1) The Mayor and Council may establish as provided in this section a
different benefit charge for service within the City's corporate
boundaries from that established for service outside the City's
corporate boundaries.
(2) The county will collect and remit to the City in accordance with the
terms of the flow transfer agreement between the City and the
county the City's benefit charge collected in the joint service areas
as defined in the consolidated general services agreement between
the City and the county.
(3) The City will collect the City benefit charge and the county
connection charge and the construction reserve charge, also
referred to as "allocation fees," provided for in the flow transfer
agreement applicable to sewer service provided by the City outside
its corporate boundaries, not in a joint sewer area. The City will
remit to the county the county connection charge and construction
reserve charge. The City will retain the City benefit charge.
B. Use of funds. The revenues received from the WPC benefit charge are
to be used exclusively to fund major capital additions, replacements or
improvements to the WPC treatment plant, collection system or related
system facilities required for additional capacity. [Added 7-26-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-27]
C. Administrative policies for the sewer benefit charge shall be
established by the Water and Sewer Department and shall be available
at the Water and Sewer Department or the Office of the City Clerk.
[Added 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-29]
63.Editor's Note: Ord. No. O-05-19, adopted 7-12-2005, amended this subsection to provide a
City customer sewer benefit charge of $22 per gallon of average daily usage and a non-
City customer sewer benefit charge of $25 per gallon of average daily usage.
§ 240-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-31
1:651

ARTICLE V
Building Sewers
§ 240-32. Responsibility for costs of installation and connection and
maintenance of building sewers; indemnification of City. [Amended
9-28-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
and hold harmless the City from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The
Utility Department – Wastewater Division shall have no duty, obligation or
responsibility with respect to maintenance of wastewater piping, equipment
or apparatus on the premises of any wastewater customer. "Customer
premises" will be defined as any property that is located behind the curb or
the property line in absence of a curb.
§ 240-33. Separate building sewer for each building.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, unless it is determined by the approving authority that it would
be impractical to do so or would cause undue hardship to the owner. The
determination as to whether to allow an exception shall be within the
discretion of the approving authority. A separate permit shall be required
for each structure or unit serviced, even though the whole may constitute a
single building sewer.
§ 240-34. Use of existing building sewers with new buildings.
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when:
§ 240-35. Construction.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and
the methods to be used in excavating, bedding, placing of pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling and trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the Plumbing Code and other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In
the absence of the code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF
Manuals of Practice shall apply. All building sewers shall be laid from the
A. Proper application is made for a sanitary sewer connection permit
under the provisions of Article IV of this chapter;
B. The application is approved by the approving authority; and
C. The building sewer is found, on examination and test by the approving
authority and Plumbing Inspector, to meet all requirements of this
chapter and those of the Plumbing Code and all other applicable
federal, state, county and City statutes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 240-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-35
1:653
service connection or the point of connection to the public sanitary sewer
to the building drain. All such connections shall be subject to inspection by
the approving authority and the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 240-36. Means of lifting sewage; responsibility for costs.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-7]
A. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
drain at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sanitary
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such a building sewer shall be lifted
by a means approved by the approving authority and the Plumbing
Inspector and discharged to the building sewer. All costs and expenses
incident to the proper installation, operation and maintenance of said
means of lifting the sewage shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation,
operation and maintenance of said means of lifting the sewer.
B. Except as otherwise provided herein, the construction, installation or
use of low-pressure grinder pump systems, or any similar installations
or facilities, shall not be directly connected to a building sewer or any
public sanitary sewer in order to provide sanitary sewer service to a
private dwelling or existing unit(s). No low-pressure grinder pump
systems shall be donated, transferred or dedicated, impliedly or
directly, to the City of Hagerstown for ownership, maintenance or
operation, except as otherwise provided herein.
C. The Mayor and Council of the City of Hagerstown may, within its
absolute discretion, make exceptions to the provisions(s) of this section
for low-pressure grinder pump construction, installation or use in
connection with the City water pollution control system, provided that
same meets standards and specifications of the City, and further
provided that said permission and granting of an exception, in each and
every instance and installation, be by formal vote of the Mayor and
Council at a duly authorized and constituted public meeting.
D. This chapter does not apply to existing low-pressure pump systems
constructed or approved by the Water and Sewer Department of the
City of Hagerstown prior to the effective date of this section.
E. In addition to the standard service charge rates for all classes of
customers, customers with low-pressure sewer service with grinder
pumps shall be charged a low-pressure service surcharge for the
additional cost of maintaining the low-pressure system. The quarterly
surcharge shall continue to be $97.80 per each grinder pump serving
one unit and $53.73 per each grinder pump serving two units. [Added
5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-15; amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-28; 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-19; 6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-17; 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-15; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No.
§ 240-35 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-36
1:654
§ 240-37. Prohibited connections.
No person shall make a connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer
or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer. If any owner shall, after notice as provided herein,
refuse or neglect to disconnect any such illegal connection from the public
sanitary sewerage system, the City shall cause the disconnection to be made
at the sole expense of the owner. This expense shall be a lien against the
property as provided by law.
§ 240-38. Conformance with other requirements.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sanitary sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Plumbing Code and other applicable
rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be sealed to
prevent infiltration and exfiltration of gas and water. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved in writing by the
approving authority and the Plumbing Inspector before installation.
§ 240-39. Inspection and connection to public sewer.
The applicant for the sanitary sewer connection permit shall notify the
approving authority and the Plumbing Inspector when the building sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sanitary sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the approving authority
and the Plumbing Inspector or his representative.
§ 240-40. Guarding of excavations; restoration of streets and public
property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in accordance with the existing City standards
and specifications.
O-08-19; 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-13; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-02; 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-0364]
64.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 30 days after passage,
with the increases in rates effective for all bills rendered on or after July 1, 2019, and for
all bills rendered on or after July 1 of the subsequent four fiscal years.
§ 240-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-40
1:655

ARTICLE VI
Use of Public Sewers
§ 240-41. Discharge of unpolluted waters.
§ 240-42. Swimming pool drainage.
Drain lines from all in-ground swimming pools in the City shall be connected
to storm drains, and filter backwash lines shall be discharged to the public
sanitary sewerage systems as follows:
§ 240-43. Air-conditioning or refrigeration equipment.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any public sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such watercourses or appurtenances thereto as are specifically
designated as storm drains or to such natural outlets approved by the
approving authority and the City Engineer. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon written approval of
the approving authority, to a storm drain or natural outlet.
A. Sand filter backwash shall be discharged to the public sanitary sewer.
B. Where required, diatomaceous earth filter backwash shall be connected
to the public sanitary sewer through settling tanks with four months'
storage capacity, which tanks shall be readily accessible for removing
solid waste for disposal. Maintenance of these tanks shall be the
responsibility of the owner, but subject to periodic inspection by the
approving authority or its representative.
A. No air-conditioning, refrigeration or other water-cooled equipment
using water as a direct cooling medium may be installed or operated
unless a means of water disposal other than discharge into the City's
public sanitary sewers is provided, except as hereinafter provided.
B. No air-conditioning, refrigeration or other water-cooled equipment
using water as an indirect cooling medium may be installed or operated
unless evaporative condensers, a cooling tower, spray pond or a similar
device requiring no sewer connection (except for seasonal cleaning and
flushing) is used or a means of water disposal other than discharge into
the City's public sanitary sewers is provided, except as hereinafter
provided.
C. Water from both direct and indirect cooling mediums may be
discharged into any adjacent storm drain, provided that an air gap
(free-fall) condition is maintained at all times to prevent the possibility
of a cross-connection. The vertical air gap distance from any discharge
§ 240-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-43
1:657
§ 240-44. Prohibited discharges and conditions.
pipe to the highest point on the collection drain must be two times the
diameter of the discharge pipe, but never less than two inches.
D. Before any such connection to a storm drain shall be made, appropriate
plans shall be submitted to and approved by the approving authority
and the City Engineer.
E. All such discharges to the storm drains shall be inspected at least
annually by the approving authority or his designated representative.
Such inspection shall be at the expense of the owner. This expense shall
be a lien against the property as provided by law. Where discharge
connections are found to be defective, all such drainage to the storm
drain shall be prohibited until the defects are corrected.
A. No person shall discharge or cause, allow or permit to be discharged
any of the following-described waters or wastes to any public sanitary
sewers:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including but not limited to waste streams with a closed cup flash
point of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods specified
in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
(3) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(4) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW.
(5) Any slug load, release rate of pollutants or concentration of
pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants either singly or
by interaction with other pollutants or waste streams, which may
cause interference with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, contaminate the sludge,
pass-through the treatment plant to receiving waters or could
result in a violation of the City's NPDES permit.
(6) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited
to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 240-43 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-44
1:658
(7) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to
the review and approval of the approving authority and the
Plumbing Inspector.
(8) Waste containing chemicals from any source that will cause the
WPC plant to produce an effluent unacceptable to federal or state
regulatory agencies.
(9) Any waters, wastes, sewage or wastewaters having a pH lower than
5.5 or greater than 10.0 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
bacterial action and human life.
(10) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 65° C. (150°
F.).
(11) Any waters, wastes, sewage or wastewaters containing a total
phosphate concentration which exceeds 50 milligrams per liter at
any given time.
(12) Any waters, wastes, sewage or wastewaters containing sulfides,
sulfites, hydrosulfites or other materials having an immediate
oxygen demand in concentration greater than one milligram per
liter.
(13) Any waters, wastes, sewage or wastewaters containing fats, wax,
grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 50 milligrams
per liter or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at a temperature between 0° C. and 65° C. (between 32° F.
and 150° F.).
(14) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits as established by any and all Atomic Energy
Commission (Branch of the United States Department of Energy)
regulations for the disposal of radioactive waste.
(15) The Water and Sewer Department shall allocate among the City's
industrial users which discharge toxic substances into the City
public sanitary sewer system in accordance with the local limits as
approved by the Maryland Department of Environment for
prohibited or limited toxic substances and shall issue as part of the
permit process specific limits for each industrial user so
discharging the identified pollutants into the public sanitary sewer
system. The Water Pollution Control staff is authorized to amend
the allocations based upon changes in state allocation and/or
particular industry discharges in their discretion. The limits
established shall not be exceeded by the industrial user. [Amended
9-25-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-38]
§ 240-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-44
1:659
§ 240-45. Surcharge required for excessive concentration.
All persons discharging wastes into the WPC system shall be subject to a
surcharge, in addition to any other sewer service charges, if these wastes
possess a characteristic in excessive concentration as determined by the
approving authority. A waste characteristic of excessive concentration shall
include but may not be limited to:
§ 240-46. Surcharge information.
The approving authority shall establish, maintain and make available to the
public a list to specify:
§ 240-47. Surcharge rates.
B. No person shall make or maintain any connection with any public
sanitary sewer, public storm drain or appurtenance thereof whereby
there may be conveyed into the same any hot, suffocative, corrosive,
flammable or explosive liquid, gas vapor, substance or similar material.
A. A five-day, 20° C. biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 milligrams
per liter or a chemical oxygen demand (COD) of 350 milligrams per
liter;
B. A suspended solids content of 200 milligrams per liter; or
C. A fats, oils and grease concentration in excess of 50 milligrams per liter.
A. All waste characteristics which, in excessive concentration, are subject
to surcharge.
B. A definition for each waste characteristic of the level of concentration
which is excessive.
C. The rate of surcharge for each excessive waste characteristic.
A. In accordance with the Charter of the City of Hagerstown, the Mayor
and Council of the City of Hagerstown shall, by ordinance, fix, establish
and adjust the rates of surcharge for each and every waste
characteristic which, in excessive concentration, shall be subject to
surcharge. The rate of surcharge shall reflect the cost incurred by the
City in treating the excessive concentrations of these waste
characteristics.
B. The rates of surcharge shall be reviewed at least annually by the
approving authority in order to determine from the WPC Department
records whether or not they are justifiable to meet the cost incurred by
the City in treating the excessive concentrations of these waste
characteristics. If the difference between the revenue derived from the
surcharge and the total annual cost related to those wastes subject to
surcharge is sufficient to justify a change in rates, the approving
§ 240-44 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-47
1:660
§ 240-48. Duties of approving authority.
If any waters or wastes are proposed to be discharged to the WPC system
by a customer, which contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in this article and which exceed the standards and/or
limitations, which create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance or
which, in the judgment of the approving authority, may have a deleterious
effect upon the WPC system or the receiving waters, the approving
authority shall require said customer to register and furnish all information
requested by the approving authority concerning the proposed discharge,
operations and processes and require that said customer obtain all
applicable permits for the discharge. The approval authority shall also have
the authority:
§ 240-49. Industrial waste discharge limitations.
authority shall recommend to the Mayor and Council of the City that
the appropriate change be made.
C. Excess strength, industrial surcharge rates. In addition to the standard
service charge rates for all classes of customers, customers with
excess-strength waste for the following waste characteristics shall pay
the following industrial surcharge rates. The industrial surcharge rate
for chemical oxygen demand in excess above 2.919 pounds shall
continue to be $0.33 per 1,000 gallons. For biochemical oxygen demand
in excess above 1.688 pounds, the surcharge rate shall continue to be
$0.82 per 1,000 gallons. For suspended solids in excess above 1.688
pounds, the surcharge rate shall continue to be $0.82 per 1,000 gallons.
For grease and oil in excess of 0.0000 pounds, the surcharge rate shall
continue to be $0.47 per 1,000 gallons. [Added 7-12-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-19; amended 6-20-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-17; 5-22-2007
by Ord. No. O-07-15; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-19; 9-22-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-13; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-02; 4-23-2019
by Ord. No. O-19-03]65
A. To reject the waters or wastes.
B. To require pretreatment of the waters or wastes to an acceptable level
prior to discharge.
C. To limit the quantities and rates of discharge of the waters or wastes.
A. All major industrial discharges discharged or permitted to flow into the
WPC system shall comply with applicable Federal Environmental
Protection Agency pretreatment standards and the Maryland
Department of the Environment (MDE) regulations, in addition to the
Hagerstown City Code, whichever is more stringent, prior to obtaining
an industrial waste discharge permit as set forth in the subsequent
65.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 30 days after passage,
with the increases in rates effective for all bills rendered on or after July 1, 2019, and for
all bills rendered on or after July 1 of the subsequent four fiscal years.
§ 240-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-49
1:661
sections. The approving authority shall have the authority to establish
a waste load allocation procedure for various industrial wastes when
effluent standards are established by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or the Maryland Department of the Environment
(MDE), if necessary due to local conditions.
B. Pretreatment standards and requirements. All industrial users shall
comply with the federal general pretreatment regulations in 40 CFR
Part 403 and the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standards set out in 40 CFR Subchapter N, Parts 401 through 471, upon
promulgation and all applicable federal, state or local requirements or
standards.
C. The WPC Department shall have the authority to issue industrial waste
discharge permits to industrial customers to establish limitations on
industrial waste discharged to the sanitary sewer system. The industrial
waste discharge limitations established in an industrial waste discharge
permit shall not be exceeded by the industry to which the permit is
issued.
D. Industrial discharge limitations will be established at the discretion of
the WPC Department. Industrial waste discharge permits will limit the
strength and quantity of industrial waste discharged to the sanitary
sewer system based on such measurements as gallonage, BOD, COD,
pH, toxic concentrations, temperature, flow rate or any other
measurement deemed necessary by the WPC Department. Industrial
waste discharge permits shall also require that industries perform
certain laboratory testing and flow measurements and report the
results to the WPC Department on a periodic basis as required in
accordance with regulations promulgated by the Water and Sewer
Department. The cost of such testing, measurement and reporting will
be borne by the industry. An industrial customer must comply with the
provisions of an industrial waste discharge permit upon issuance.
E. The WPC Department shall have the authority to order industries to
take corrective action when industrial waste discharge limitations are
violated. Corrective actions which the WPC Department may order
include but are not limited to pretreatment or discontinuance of all
industrial waste discharge. The WPC Department shall also require that
industries take corrective actions in accordance with a schedule for
compliance established at the discretion of the approving authority. All
costs associated with industrial pretreatment, including attorney's fees
and corrective actions required by the WPC Department, shall be borne
by the industry. If additional pretreatment or operation and
maintenance will be required for an industrial user to comply with any
provisions of this chapter or a state or federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, the City may require the industrial user to submit for
approval a schedule specifying the shortest time frame for the industry
to achieve compliance. This schedule will contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of
§ 240-49 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-49
1:662
§ 240-50. Industrial waste discharge permit required.
Prior to discharging any industrial waste to the WPC system or to a public
storm drain or prior to continuing the discharge of any industrial waste
to the WPC system or to a public storm drain, the owner of the improved
property from which such discharge is proposed to be made shall apply to
the City, in writing, for an industrial waste discharge permit to make such
discharge.
§ 240-51. Industrial waste discharge permit application.
major events leading to the construction and operation of the additional
pretreatment to bring the industrial user into compliance.
A. To obtain an industrial waste discharge permit, the owner or his agent
shall make application as specified in this chapter. Supplemental
information to the application considered pertinent by the approving
authority shall include but may not be limited to the quantity of
discharge, the rates of discharge (maximum, average and minimum)
and whether these rates of flow are continuous or intermittent, the
character and the chemical content of the industrial waste and
proposed and/or existing pretreatment facilities.
B. Permits shall contain:
(1) Effective and expiration dates.
(2) Statement of nontransferability as specified in section (list
appropriate section).
(3) Effluent limitations based on applicable general pretreatment
standards, Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits and/or
state and local law.
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency
and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment
standards, Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits and/or
state and local law.
(5) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the
compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines.
(6) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
C. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. Permits can be extended in writing by the City for
§ 240-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-51
1:663
up to 180 days past the expiration date. The terms and conditions of
the permit may be subject to modification by the City during the term
of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified herein are
modified or other just cause exists (i.e., changes in the federal or state
pretreatment requirements or standards). Users shall apply for a new
permit at least 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
permit.
D. Permit nontransferability. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises or a new or changed operation without the prior
written approval of the City.
E. Wastewater discharge permit appeals. Any person, including the
industrial user, may petition the Water and Sewer Department to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 60 days
of its issuance.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
(4) If the City fails to act within 60 days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be
considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial
review.
(5) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the appropriate court having jurisdiction within
appropriate state statute of limitations.
F. Wastewater discharge permit modification.
(1) The Water and Sewer Department may modify the wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including but not limited to the
following:
(a) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
§ 240-51 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-51
1:664
(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character
since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(c) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge.
(d) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to Hagerstown's Water and Sewer Department,
Hagerstown Water Pollution Control personnel, the general
public or receiving waters.
(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit.
(f) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting.
(g) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
(h) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
(i) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation
to a new owner/operator.
(2) The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit
condition.
G. Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to
any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if
either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may
be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
H. Permit application fee. The fee for the issuance of an industrial waste
discharge permit in accordance with this section, which permit shall be
valid for a five-year period, shall be $300 for significant industrial users
(SIU) and $150 for all other permitted industrial users. A significant
industrial user is defined in § 240-3 of the City Code. A major
modification in the industrial waste discharge permit may require the
payment of a new application fee in the discretion of the Water and
Sewer Department. [Added 9-25-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-39]
I. Annual permit maintenance fee. In addition to the permit application
fee, all persons or entities discharging any industrial waste under a
valid industrial waste discharge permit into the water pollution control
system of the City of Hagerstown shall pay an annual permit
maintenance fee according to the following schedule: [Added
9-25-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-39]
§ 240-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-51
1:665
§ 240-52. Change in industrial waste discharge.
§ 240-53. Review, approval and inspection of facilities.
Wastewater Flow
(gallons/day)
Annual Maintenance Permit
Fee
Less than 1,000 $250.00
1,000 to 9,999 $500.00
10,000 to 25,000 $1,000.00
More than 25,000 $2,000.00
A. The owner, or his agent, of any improved property who is discharging
industrial waste into the WPC system or to a public storm drain under a
valid industrial waste discharge permit and who contemplates a change
in the method of operation or a change of any other nature, which
change may cause the industrial waste discharge of said owner to be of
a nature or characteristic not approved by the approving authority in
said valid industrial waste discharge permit, shall have 30 days to apply
for a new industrial waste discharge permit prior to such change.
B. All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their
discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for
which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40
CFR 403.12(p).
A. The design and installation of the plants, equipment and other facilities
as referred to herein shall be subject to review, approval and inspection
by the City Engineer and the approving authority and subject to the
requirements of all applicable federal, state, county and City statutes,
codes, ordinances and regulations. [Amended 6-17-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22]
(1) Review fees. All persons constructing any main extension and/or
pump stations which are to become part of the sewer collection
system of the City of Hagerstown shall submit to the City for review
plans for such construction. A fee shall be charged for review by
the City of these plans which shall be due and payable at the time
that the plans are submitted for review. The Council of the City of
Hagerstown shall by ordinance fix, establish and adjust the amount
of the pump station plan review fee in accordance with the Charter
of the City of Hagerstown.
(2) Inspection fees. All persons constructing any main extension and/or
pump stations which are to become part of the sewer collection
system of the City of Hagerstown shall have the same inspected by
the Water and Sewer Department during the course of its
construction in accordance with policies to be established by the
§ 240-51 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-53
1:666
§ 240-54. Simple dilution not acceptable pretreatment.
Dilution is prohibited as a substitute for treatment to meet any applicable
requirements and/or standards.
§ 240-55. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided at the expense of
the customer when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the type and
capacity approved by the approving authority, the City Engineer and the
Department. A fee shall be charged for such inspections which
shall be due and payable prior to such inspections taking place.
The Council of the City of Hagerstown shall by ordinance fix,
establish and adjust the amount of the main extension and/or pump
station inspection fee in accordance with the Charter of the City of
Hagerstown.
(3) Administrative policies. The Water and Sewer Department shall
establish administrative policies for the administration of the main
extension and/or pump station plan review and inspection process.
B. Accidental discharge/slug control plans. The Water and Sewer
Department may require any industrial user to develop and implement
an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years
the Water and Sewer Department shall evaluate whether each
significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user
required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/control slug
plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental
or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any
discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in
§ 240-44.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
§ 240-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-55
1:667
City Plumbing Inspector and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. The WPC Department reserves the
right to periodically test for the effectiveness of an interceptor by methods
hereinafter described. The WPC Department shall not be liable for the lack
of efficiency of an approved interceptor, and all maintenance costs shall be
borne by the customer.
§ 240-56. Maintenance of facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 240-57. Control vault required.
The owner or owners of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes as hereinbefore defined shall install a suitable control
vault, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in
the building sewer line to facilitate observation, proportional sampling and
continuous flow measurement and recording of the wastes. Each vault shall
be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the approving authority. The vault shall be installed
by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times for public inspection.
§ 240-58. Waiver of control vault requirements.
When a person discharging less than 10,000 gallons in a normal working
day elects to be relieved of the requirement of a control vault as specified
in this article, he may do so, provided that:
§ 240-59. Measurements, tests and analyses.
A. Such wastes meet all other requirements of this chapter, as determined
by the approving authority.
B. All such wastes are discharged through a single standard sewer
manhole before entrance into the public sanitary sewers.
C. Said person agrees to pay a surcharge double or equal that required in
this article and that the strength of waste on which the surcharge is
made will be based on tests made on similar wastes discharged by other
industries of the same type, if such information is available; if not, by
such other methods as the approving authority may wish to employ.
Whatever method is used for finding the strength of the waste, the
determination of the approving authority shall be binding as a basis for
surcharges.
A. All analyses, including sampling techniques, submitted in support of
any application, report or evidence or required by any permit or order
shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136 and
§ 240-55 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-59
1:668
§ 240-60. Sampling.
§ 240-61. Recordkeeping; certification; signatory requirements;
reports; hazardous wastes.
amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question or where
the Administrator (as defined in 40 CFR Part 136) determines that
the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for
the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by
using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling
and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
POTW or other persons, approved by the Administrator (as defined in
40 CFR Part 136).
B. The approving authority shall determine the analyses which are
required for each industrial waste, and the decision of the approving
authority shall be final and binding.
A. When the additional service charge is $500 or less per month, samples
shall be taken semiannually.
B. When the additional service charge is between $500 and $1,000 per
month, samples shall be taken quarterly.
C. When the additional service charge is greater than $1,000 per month,
samples shall be taken six times per year.
D. More frequent samples may be taken by the City at any time. If more
frequent sampling is requested by the customer, the City shall do the
additional sampling and analysis at the entire expense of the person
requesting it. Analysis of the waste shall be in accordance with 40 CFR
Part 136.
E. A fee for sampling shall be established by the WPC Department and
billed to industries by the approving authority.
F. The industrial user shall have the choice of monitoring a segregated
process waste stream or a combined waste stream in accordance with
40 CFR 403.6(e)(4).
A. Users shall retain and make available upon request of an authorized
representative of the City, the state or EPA all records required to be
collected by the user pursuant to this article. These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three years after their
collection. This period shall be extended during any litigation
concerning compliance with this chapter or permit conditions.
B. Certification requirements. All industrial users shall submit the
following certification with all reports, certifications and required
notifications:
§ 240-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-61
1:669
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete.
I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations."
C. Signatory requirements. All applications, reports, certification
statements or any other information requested by the City shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the user as defined in
§ 240-3A.
D. Submission of required reports. Upon request of the City, any
discharger or potential discharger of industrial wastes into the POTW
may be required to submit plans, reports, questionnaires, notices or
analytical data to evaluate waste discharge characteristics and ensure
compliance with this chapter. These may include baseline monitoring
reports, compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports,
compliance schedule progress reports, violation reports and notice of
slug loadings, upset, bypass or any other reporting requirement
specified in 40 CFR 403.12.
E. Required reports. Any significant industrial user of the POTW shall
submit, at a minimum, semiannual reports (on dates specified by the
POTW) to the POTW. This report shall include but not be limited to
information on flows, pollutant concentrations, spills, etc. In addition,
other nonsignificant industrial users may also be required to submit
reports.
F. Hazardous waste notification.
(1) The industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director and state hazardous waste
authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW,
the notification shall also contain the following information to the
extent such information is known and readily available to the
industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged
during that calendar month and an estimation of that mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
§ 240-61 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-61
1:670
the following 12 months. All notifications must take place within
180 days of the effective date of this rule. Industrial users who
commence discharging after the effective date of this rule shall
provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge
of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification
under this subsection need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notification of changed
discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j). The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR
403.12(b), (d) and (e).
(2) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection F(1)
of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no
more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are
acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which
the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any
hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(3) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of the RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user
must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of
such regulations.
(4) In the case of any notification made under Subsection F(1) of this
section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in
place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes
generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
G. Notification of discharge. All users of the POTW shall immediately
notify the POTW of all discharges that could cause problems to the
POTW, including any slug loadings that would violate any of the specific
prohibition of 40 CFR 403.5(b).
H. Automatic resampling. If sampling performed by an industrial user
indicated a violation, the user shall notify the City within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to
the City within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except
that the industrial user is not required to resample if the City performs
sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month
or the City performs sampling at the user between the time when the
§ 240-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-61
1:671
§ 240-62. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to proper continuous
pretreatment prior to discharge into the WPC system and/or payment
therefor by the industrial concern. Federal or state pretreatment
requirements or standards cannot be waived.
user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives
the results of this sampling.
§ 240-61 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-62
1:672
ARTICLE VII
Rates and Contracts
§ 240-63. Charges for resident customers.
A. The charges and rates for the use and service of the public sanitary
sewer system of the City charged to the owners of every building,
dwelling house or other property connected with or using such system
within the corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown shall be based on
the amount of water delivered to the property from a public or private
water supply as determined by meter readings or established
minimums in accordance with the schedule of sewer rents, rates and
charges which the Mayor and Council of the City of Hagerstown shall
from time to time fix, establish and adjust.
B. The rate per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumption for those
customers located within Hagerstown's corporate boundaries shall be:
[Added 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-19; amended 5-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-15; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-28; 10-25-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-25; 6-20-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-17; 5-22-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-15; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-19; 9-22-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-13; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-02; 4-23-2019 by
Ord. No. O-19-0366]
Inside — Volume Fee per 1,000 Gallons
Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Cost per 1,000
gallons
$5.50 $5.61 $5.72 $5.83 $5.95 $6.07
(1) In addition, for customers billed quarterly, a fixed minimum charge
in dollars based on water meter size shall be assessed and shall be:
Inside - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Quarterly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
5/8 1 $22.55 $23.00 $23.46 $23.93 $24.41 $24.90
3/4 1 $22.55 $23.00 $23.46 $23.93 $24.41 $24.90
1 2.5 $56.38 $57.50 $58.65 $59.83 $61.03 $62.25
1.5 5 $112.76 $115.00 $117.30 $119.65 $122.05 $124.50
2 8 $180.42 $184.00 $187.68 $191.44 $195.28 $199.20
66.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 30 days after passage,
with the increases in rates effective for all bills rendered on or after July 1, 2019, and for
all bills rendered on or after July 1 of the subsequent four fiscal years.
§ 240-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-63
1:673
§ 240-64. Charges for nonresident customers.
Inside - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Quarterly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
3 16 $360.84 $368.00 $375.36 $382.88 $390.56 $398.40
4 25 $563.81 $575.00 $586.50 $598.25 $610.25 $622.50
6 50 $1,127.61$1,150.00 $1,173.00 $1,196.50$1,220.50 $1,245.00
8 80 $1,804.18$1,840.00 $1,876.80 $1,914.40$1,952.80 $1,992.00
10 138 $3,112.20$3,174.00 $3,237.48 $3,302.34$3,368.58 $3,436.20
(2) In addition, for customers billed monthly, the fixed minimum
charge in dollars shall be 1/3 the quarterly fixed minimum charge.
Inside - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Monthly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
5/8 1 $7.52 $7.67 $7.82 $7.98 $8.14 $8.30
3/4 1 $7.52 $7.67 $7.82 $7.98 $8.14 $8.30
1 2.5 $18.79 $19.18 $19.55 $19.95 $20.35 $20.75
1.5 5 $37.59 $38.35 $39.10 $39.90 $40.70 $41.50
2 8 $60.14 $61.36 $62.56 $63.84 $65.12 $66.40
3 16 $120.28 $122.72 $125.12 $127.68 $130.24 $132.80
4 25 $187.94 $191.75 $195.50 $199.50 $203.50 $207.50
6 50 $375.87 $383.50 $391.00 $399.00 $407.00 $415.00
8 80 $601.39 $613.60 $625.60 $638.40 $651.20 $664.00
10 138 $1,037.40$1,058.46 $1,079.16 $1,101.24$1,123.32 $1,145.40
A. The charges and rates for the use and service of the public sanitary
sewer system of the City charged to the owners of every building,
dwelling house or other property connected with or using such system
outside of the corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown shall be based
on the amount of water delivered to the property from a public or
private water supply as determined by meter readings or established
minimums, plus an additional surcharge for the utilization of the City-
§ 240-63 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-64
1:674
owned and -financed system, in accordance with the schedule of sewer
rents, rates and charges which the Mayor and Council of the City of
Hagerstown shall from time to time fix, establish and adjust.
B. The rate per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumption for those
customers that are not located within Hagerstown's corporate
boundaries and not located within an established area of joint sewer
service with the Washington County Department of Water Quality shall
be: [Added 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-19; amended 5-28-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-15; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-28; 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. O-05-25; 6-20-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-17; 5-22-2007
by Ord. No. O-07-15; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-19; 9-22-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-13; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-02; 4-23-2019
by Ord. No. O-19-0367]
Outside — Volume Fee per 1,000 Gallons
Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Cost per 1,000
gallons
$9.21 $9.39 $9.58 $9.77 $9.97 $10.17
(1) In addition, for customers billed quarterly, a fixed minimum charge
in dollars based on water meter size shall be assessed and shall be:
Outside - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Quarterly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
5/8 1 $37.47 $38.22 $38.98 $39.76 $40.56 $41.37
3/4 1 $37.47 $38.22 $38.98 $39.76 $40.56 $41.37
1 2.5 $93.69 $95.55 $97.45 $99.40 $101.40 $103.43
1.5 5 $187.37 $191.10 $194.90 $198.80 $202.80 $206.85
2 8 $299.80 $305.76 $311.84 $318.08 $324.48 $330.96
3 16 $599.60 $611.52 $623.68 $636.16 $648.96 $661.92
4 25 $936.87 $955.50 $974.50 $994.00 $1,014.00$1,034.25
6 50 $1,873.74 $1,911.00$1,949.00$1,988.00 $2,028.00$2,068.50
8 80 $2,997.98 $3,057.60$3,118.40$3,180.80 $3,244.80$3,309.60
10 138 $5,171.52 $5,274.36$5,379.24$5,486.88 $5,597.28$5,709.06
67.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 30 days after passage,
with the increases in rates effective for all bills rendered on or after July 1, 2019, and for
all bills rendered on or after July 1 of the subsequent four fiscal years.
§ 240-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-64
1:675
(2) In addition, for customers billed monthly, the fixed minimum
charge in dollars shall be 1/3 the quarterly fixed minimum charge.
Outside - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Monthly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
5/8 1 $12.49 $12.74 $12.99 $13.25 $13.52 $13.79
3/4 1 $12.49 $12.74 $12.99 $13.25 $13.52 $13.79
1 2.5 $31.23 $31.85 $32.48 $33.13 $33.80 $34.48
1.5 5 $62.46 $63.70 $64.95 $66.25 $67.60 $68.95
2 8 $99.93 $101.92 $103.92 $106.00 $108.16 $110.32
3 16 $199.87 $203.84 $207.84 $212.00 $216.32 $220.64
4 25 $312.29 $318.50 $324.75 $331.25 $338.00 $344.75
6 50 $624.58 $637.00 $649.50 $662.50 $676.00 $689.50
8 80 $999.33 $1,019.20$1,039.20$1,060.00 $1,081.60$1,103.20
10 138 $1,723.84 $1,758.12$1,792.62$1,828.50 $1,865.76$1,903.02
C. The rate per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumption for those
customers located within an established area of joint sewer service with
the Washington County Department of Water Quality shall be: [Added
5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-19; amended 5-28-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-15; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-28; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-25; 6-20-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-17; 5-22-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-15; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-19; 9-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-13; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-02; 4-23-2019 by Ord. No.
O-19-0368]
Joint/District -Volume Fee per 1,000 Gallons
Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Cost per 1,000
gallons
$8.00 $8.16 $8.32 $8.49 $8.66 $8.83
(1) In addition, for customers billed quarterly, a fixed minimum charge
based on water meter size shall be assessed and shall be:
68.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 30 days after passage,
with the increases in rates effective for all bills rendered on or after July 1, 2019, and for
all bills rendered on or after July 1 of the subsequent four fiscal years.
§ 240-64 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-64
1:676
Joint District - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Quarterly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
Fixed
Quarterly
5/8 1 $32.59 $33.24 $33.90 $34.58 $35.27 $35.98
3/4 1 $32.59 $33.24 $33.90 $34.58 $35.27 $35.98
1 2.5 $81.47 $83.10 $84.75 $86.45 $88.18 $89.95
1.5 5 $162.95 $166.20 $169.50 $172.90 $176.35 $179.90
2 8 $260.71 $265.92 $271.20 $276.64 $282.16 $287.84
3 16 $521.42 $531.84 $542.40 $553.28 $564.32 $575.68
4 25 $814.73 $831.00 $847.50 $864.50 $881.75 $899.50
6 50 $1,629.45$1,662.00 $1,695.00$1,729.00 $1,763.50$1,799.00
8 80 $2,607.12$2,659.20 $2,712.00$2,766.40 $2,821.60$2,878.40
10 138 $4,497.28$4,587.12 $4,678.20$4,772.04 $4,867.26$4,965.24
(2) In addition, for customers billed monthly, the fixed minimum
charge shall be 1/3 the quarterly fixed minimum charge.
Joint/District - Fixed Fee for Each Meter Size
(1 EDU Monthly)
Meter Current FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24
Size
(inches) EDUs
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
Fixed
Monthly
5/8 1 $10.86 $11.08 $11.30 $11.53 $11.76 $12.00
3/4 1 $10.86 $11.08 $11.30 $11.53 $11.76 $12.00
1 2.5 $27.16 $27.70 $28.25 $28.83 $29.40 $30.00
1.5 5 $54.32 $55.40 $56.50 $57.65 $58.80 $60.00
2 8 $86.90 $88.64 $90.40 $92.24 $94.08 $96.00
3 16 $173.81 $177.28 $180.80 $184.48 $188.16 $192.00
4 25 $271.58 $277.00 $282.50 $288.25 $294.00 $300.00
6 50 $543.15 $554.00 $565.00 $576.50 $588.00 $600.00
8 80 $869.04 $886.40 $904.00 $922.40 $940.80 $960.00
10 138 $1,499.09$1,529.04 $1,559.40$1,591.14 $1,622.88$1,656.00
D. Application fee. A charge of $15 shall be made for each application for
sanitary sewer service. [Added 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-15]
§ 240-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-65
1:677
§ 240-65. Availability of schedule and rates.
The approving authority shall maintain and make available to the public
the schedule of sewer rents and charges which the Mayor and Council of
the City of Hagerstown shall from time to time fix, establish and adjust.
Each customer shall be annually advised, in writing, of the rates for sanitary
sewer service with an indication of the portion of the charge attributable to
the treatment of wastewater.
§ 240-66. Water meters.
Whenever the water supply is unmetered, the property owner shall be
required to install water meters of a type and in the manner specified by
the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Hagerstown, and the cost
of such meter installation will be borne by the property owner. This shall be
applicable to customers who utilize a water supply from a private source.
§ 240-67. Basis for rates and charges.
The rates and charges established by this chapter are to be based on
an average weight and quality of sewage concentration, representing a
maximum expected concentration of 200 milligrams per liter of biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) and 200 milligrams per liter of suspended solids.
§ 240-68. Specific rates in lieu of general rates.
If, as a consequence of any tests the approving authority is hereby
authorized to make, it is determined that the actual concentration delivered
to the WPC system from any property exceeds the maximum as described
in this article, a specific rate may be established to compensate for such
excess concentration equal to the percentage whereby the actual strength
of sewage may exceed the maximum contemplated by the rates set forth in
this article, and the specific rate shall be chargeable to the property owner
in lieu of the general rates provided by this chapter until further tests which
the approving authority shall conduct annually as outlined in this chapter.
§ 240-69. Exemption of service charge.
Whenever it may be established that the entire amount of water delivered
to any property through a metered line from either a public or private water
supply does not and cannot enter the WPC system but is legally discharged
or consumed in such a manner as not to impose on the WPC system, an
exemption of the sanitary sewer service charge may be made on application
of the customer, within the absolute discretion of the Mayor and Council
as to such measurable water consumption which may be undelivered to the
WPC system, provided that it shall first be determined by the approving
authority that this is in fact existing.
§ 240-65 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-70
1:678
§ 240-70. Billing.
The charges provided for by this chapter shall be billed in accordance with
existing City accounting procedures and may be billed in conjunction with
water charges or separately but shall be chargeable against the owner of
the property to which the sanitary sewer service has been afforded and shall
constitute a lien upon the property and be collectible, at the expiration of
30 days from the date of rendition of the bill therefor, in accordance with
applicable existing legal remedies.
§ 240-71. Consistency of agreements or contracts with federal
standards.
All agreements or contracts affecting sanitary sewer service charges
thereof between the City of Hagerstown and customers or tentative
customers shall be consistent with the requirements of the Federal Clean
Water Act, P.L. 95-217, Section 204(b)(1)(A).
§ 240-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-71
1:679

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibited Acts
§ 240-72. Obstruction of sewers.
No person shall throw or deposit on or upon any public sanitary sewer or
public storm drain in the City or any trap, basin, inlet, grating, manhole or
other appurtenance of any public sanitary sewer or public storm drain any
sticks, stone, brick, earth, gravel, dirt, mud, hay, straw, manure, rubbish,
litter, sweepings, offal, vegetables, garbage, trees, shrubs, branches, twigs,
leaves, paper, cinders, refuse or matter of any kind.
§ 240-73. Tampering with manholes.
No person shall turn, lift, remove, raise or tamper with any cover of any
manhole, basin, inlet or other fixture or appurtenance of any public sanitary
sewer or public storm drain without a written permit from the approving
authority and the City Engineer.
§ 240-74. Breaking or damaging.
No person shall break or damage any fixture or appurtenance of a public
sanitary sewer, public storm drain or past thereof.
§ 240-75. Permit required for connections.
No person shall cut, break, pierce or tap any public sanitary sewer or public
storm drain or fixture or appurtenance thereof or introduce any tube, pipe,
trough or conduit into any public sanitary sewer, public storm drain or
appurtenance thereof without a written permit from the City Engineer and
the approving authority.
§ 240-76. Permit required for entrance into system.
No person, other than those employed in the WPC, Engineering and/or
Street Departments of the City of Hagerstown while on duty, shall enter any
public sanitary sewer, public storm drain or appurtenance thereof without a
written permit from the approving authority.
§ 240-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-76
1:681

ARTICLE IX
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 240-77. Right of entry on property.
The approving authority, inspectors and other duly authorized employees of
the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties at any reasonable time, to inspect users generally for
compliance, to inspect and copy records and to require the installation of
monitoring and sampling equipment.
§ 240-78. Observance of safety rules.
While performing the necessary work on any private property as referred to
in this article, the approving authority or duly authorized employees of the
City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the owner of said property.
§ 240-79. Right of entry on easements.
The approving authority, inspectors and other duly authorized employees of
the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purpose of but not limited to inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the WPC
system lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 240-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-79
1:683

ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties for Industrial Establishments
§ 240-80. Enforcement; administrative orders.
A. Notification of violation. Whenever the Water and Sewer Department
(WPC Department) finds that any industrial user has violated or is
violating this chapter or a wastewater permit or order issued
hereunder, the WPC Department or his agent may serve upon said user
written notice of the violation. Within 10 days of the receipt date of this
notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted to the WPC Department. Submission of this plan in
no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before
or after receipt of the notice of violation.
B. Consent orders. The WPC Department is hereby empowered to enter
into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user
responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific
action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall
have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant
to Subsection D below.
C. Show cause hearing. The WPC Department may order any industrial
user which causes or contributes to violation of this chapter or
wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the
proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action and a
request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
principal executive, general partner or corporate officer. Whether or
not a duly notified industrial user appears as noticed, immediate
enforcement action may be pursued.
D. Compliance order. When the WPC Department finds that an industrial
user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or
order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the industrial user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed
and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment
technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices.
§ 240-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-80
1:685
E. Cease and desist orders. When the WPC Department finds that an
industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, the Water and Sewer Department
may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct
those persons in noncompliance:
(1) To comply forthwith.
(2) To take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and terminating the discharge.
F. Public notification. The City shall publish annually in the largest local
daily paper a list of industrial users which at any time during the
previous 12 months were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment requirements. For the purpose of this provision, an
industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation(s) meets
one or more of the following criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily
maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter.
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and
grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer-term average) that the control authority determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public).
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority
under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction or attaining final compliance.
(6) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance
with compliance schedules.
§ 240-80 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-80
1:686
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(8) Any other violation or group of violations which the POTW
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
G. Injunctive relief.
(1) In general. The Water and Sewer Department may bring an action
for an injunction against any person who violates any provision of
this chapter or any rules, regulation, order or permit adopted or
issued under this chapter.
(2) Findings. In any action for an injunction under this subsection, any
finding of Water and Sewer Department after hearing is prima facie
evidence of each fact the Water and Sewer Department determines.
(3) Grounds. On a showing that any person is violating or is about to
violate this chapter or any rule, regulation, order or permit adopted
or issued by Water and Sewer Department, the court shall grant an
injunction without requiring a showing of a lack of an adequate
remedy at law.
(4) Emergency. If an emergency arises due to imminent danger to the
public health or welfare or imminent danger to the environment,
the Water and Sewer Department may sue for an immediate
injunction to stop any pollution or other activity that is causing the
danger.
H. Harmful contributions.
(1) The City may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or
wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary,
in the opinion of the City, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to
the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the
City to violate any condition of its NPDES permit or sludge
disposal.
(2) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop
or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City shall
immediately sever the sewer connection in order to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals. The City may reinstate the wastewater treatment
service and/or wastewater discharge permit upon proof of the
elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written
statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
§ 240-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-80
1:687
§ 240-81. Judicial enforcement.
occurrence shall be submitted to the City within 15 days of the date
of occurrence.
I. Any violation of an industrial waste discharge permit constitutes a
violation of this chapter of the Code of the City of Hagerstown and will
be subject to a fine of $1,000 per day for each day that an industrial
waste discharge limitation is violated. This penalty is in addition to any
surcharge rates assessed pursuant to § 240-47 of the Code of the City of
Hagerstown.
J. Administrative fines. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter,
any user who is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, or
permits and orders issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed $1,000 per violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall
occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer
service charge, and the WPC Department shall have such other
collection remedies as he has to collect other service charges. Unpaid
charges, fines and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual
user's property. Industrial users desiring to dispute such fines must file
a request for the WPC Department to reconsider the fine within 10 days
of being notified of the fine. Where the WPC Department believes a
request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within 15
days of receiving the request from the industrial user.
A. Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard
or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter,
wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment requirement, the City may petition the appropriate court
having jurisdiction through the City Attorney for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or
compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit,
order or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the
industrial user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief may also be sought by the City. A petition for injunctive
relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action
against a user.
B. Civil penalties.
(1) Any user which has violated or continues to violate this chapter,
any order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City for
a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 per violation per day. In the case
of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
(2) The City may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
§ 240-80 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-81
1:688
§ 240-82. Bypass.
An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provision of Subsections A and B and of this section.
sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the City.
(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user
and any other factor as justice requires.
(4) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking
any other action against a user.
C. Criminal prosecution.
(1) Any user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for
not more than six months.
(2) Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a
penalty of at least $1,000 per violation per day and/or be subject to
imprisonment for six months. This penalty shall be in addition to
any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under state law.
(3) Any user that knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certifications in any application, record, report,
plan or other documentation filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit or order or
who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000 per violation per day and/or
imprisonment for not more than six months.
(4) In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000 per violation per day and/or
imprisonment for not more than six months.
A. Notice.
§ 240-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-82
1:689
§ 240-83. Upset and notification.
An "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An
upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventative maintenance or careless or improper
operation. An upset can be used as an affirmative defense to an action
(1) If an industrial users knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the control authority, if possible at least
10 days before the date of the bypass.
(2) An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the
control authority within 24 hours from the time the industrial user
becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times and if the bypass has not been
corrected; the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of
the bypass. The control authority may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24
hours.
B. Prohibition of bypass.
(1) Bypass is prohibited and the control authority may take
enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass unless:
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
(b) There were not feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal period of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventative maintenance; and
(c) The industrial user submitted notices as required under
Subsection A of this section.
(2) The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines
that it will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection B(1) of
this section.
§ 240-82 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-83
1:690
brought for noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards,
provided that the industrial user meets certain conditions. An industrial
user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset must
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or
other relevant evidence, that:
§ 240-84. Confidential information.
Information and data about a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be made available to the public unless the user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When
requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available to the general public for inspection except upon written request.
Confidential portions of a report shall be made available for use by the
state or EPA in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
A. An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause or
causes.
B. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures.
C. The industrial user has submitted the following information to the City
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is
provided orally, a written submission must follow within five days): a
description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; the
period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or if not
corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Industrial users will have the opportunity for judicial determination on
any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced,
lost or fails.
§ 240-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-84
1:691
person or company furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics shall not be recognized as confidential.
§ 240-84 HAGERSTOWN CODE § 240-84
1:692
ARTICLE XI
Federal and State Pretreatment Requirements
§ 240-85. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter
I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated.
§ 240-86. State requirements.
The State of Maryland pretreatment standards and requirements found in
COMAR, Title 26, are hereby incorporated.
§ 240-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-86
1:693

ARTICLE XII
Other Enforcement and Penalties
§ 240-87. Notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
§ 240-88. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $500 for each violation.
Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 240-89. Effect on civil remedies.
Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the City from proceeding or
enforcing its civil remedies under this chapter versus any person. Said civil
remedies shall be in addition to the penalties provided herein. In the event
that any person shall be in noncompliance with any of the provisions of
this chapter, said person shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned to the City by reason of said noncompliance.
§ 240-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-89
1:695


ARTICLE 1 
General Provisions 

A. 	Title. This Chapter is known and may be cited as the “Land Management Code.” Individual Articles of this Chapter may be cited as the “Ordinance” it is crafted to govern, as described in each Article. This Chapter includes both the text of the regulations and the Zoning Map of the City of Hagerstown, as maintained by the Planning and Code Administration Department. 
B. 	Purpose. This Chapter is adopted as the revision and reorganization of several former land use and development regulatory ordinances in a single document. 
This Chapter is adopted with the intent that its provisions will: 
1. 	
Promote public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Hagerstown; 

2. 	
Implement the policies of the Comprehensive Plan; 

3. 	
Provide a system of land use and development regulations that provides for harmonious use and development of land; 

4. 	
Regulate and control the division and development of land that enables the City to effectively grow; 

5. 	
Provide adequate light and air; 

6. 	
Promote the conservation of natural and cultural resources; 

7. 	
Facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreation, soil conservation, landscaping, parks and other public facilities and services. 


This Chapter is made with reasonable consideration of, among other things, the character of the City, the suitability of its various areas for particular uses; the desire to protect the value of buildings and encourage orderly development; and the most appropriate use of land throughout the jurisdiction. 
C. 	Mayor and City Council. The Mayor and City Council have the following powers and duties pursuant to the Annotated Code of Maryland and the Charter of the City of Hagerstown: 
1. 	
Render final decisions pertaining to amendments to the Zoning Map of the City of Hagerstown and this Land Management Code. 

2. 	
Adopt the Comprehensive Plan and any amendment thereto. 

3. 	
Appoint members of the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, and Historic District Commission. 

4. 	
Accept and/or appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Historic District Commission, and the Planning and Code Administration Department. 

5. 	
Adopt a schedule of fees for plan reviews, permits, fee-in-lieu contributions, inspections, and other activities set forth in this Chapter. 

6. 	
Exercise all additional authority, power and duties granted by the City Charter and Maryland Law. 


D. 	Authority. This Chapter and its subsequent components are established in accordance with: 
1. 	
The applicable provisions of the Charter of the City of Hagerstown. 

2. 	
The applicable provisions of the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. 

3. 	
The applicable provisions of Section 5-1601 through 5-1612, Natural Resources Article, Annotated Code of Maryland, as pertaining to Forest Conservation Programs. 

4. 	
Federal Emergency Management Agency, 44 Code of Federal Regulations. 


E. 	Applicability. This Chapter applies to all properties within the Corporate Limits of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland. Except as hereafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises shall be used, subdivided or altered, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be located, erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or altered except in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
F. 	Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. This Chapter and its component parts have been prepared in accordance with, and is generally consistent with goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
G. 	Coordination with Other Chapters. The use of buildings and land within the City is subject to all other regulations, whether or not such other regulations are specifically referenced in this Chapter. References to other regulations or provisions of this Chapter and Code are for the convenience of the reader. Lack of a cross reference does not mean that other regulations do not apply. 
Where the provisions of this Chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other regulations, or ordinance, the provisions of this Code shall prevail. Where the provisions of any federal, state, or City statute, ordinance, or regulation impose greater restrictions than these Regulations, the provisions of such federal, state, or City statute, regulation, or ordinance shall prevail. 
H. 	Interpretation. Interpretation and application of the provisions of this Chapter shall be regarded as the basic and minimum requirements for the protection of public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. The meaning of any and all words, terms or phrases in this Chapter shall be construed in accordance with Article 3 of this Chapter. 
This Chapter contains numerous graphics, illustrations, and drawings in order to assist the reader in understanding and applying the law. However, to the extent that there is any inconsistency between the text of this Chapter and any such graphic, illustration or drawing, the text shall control unless otherwise provided in the specific section. 
I. 	Severability. Should any Article, Section, Subsection, or provision of this Chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of this Chapter as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
J. 	Permits and Certificates. No development shall occur on any property within the City until the applicable permits, approvals, and certificates for such activity or development have been issued and approved by the officials with the authority to approve the same. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to revoke an issued zoning certificate or zoning approval of a building permit in accordance with Article 4, Section S.1.g. 
K. 	Violations and Enforcement. Violations and enforcement of this Chapter shall be in accordance with Article 8, and any specific provision of individual Articles of this Chapter. 
L. 	Uses or Developments Rendered Nonconforming by the Adoption of this Chapter. This Chapter is the re-codification of four former chapters of the City Code (Zoning, Subdivision, Floodplain Management, and Forest Conservation) into a single, unified Chapter with minor content amendments effective on September 26, 2008. It is the intent that the original effective date of these ordinances shall continue in full force and effect. Should content changes adopted with this re-codification result in zoning, subdivision, floodplain management or forest conservation nonconformity on property, the effective date of this Chapter shall constitute dates of amendment of the affected former ordinance(s). Any zoning, subdivision, floodplain management, or forest conservation plan in process prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be allowed to proceed under the terms of the Ordinances in effect prior to the adoption of this Chapter. 
M. 	Liability. The Zoning Administrator or any other employee charged with the enforcement of this Chapter, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties or omissions thereof. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this Chapter shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Zoning Administrator or any subordinate or representative shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Chapter; and any officer of the City, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection herewith. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

Appendix 1 to Article 1: Amendments to the Land Management Code. 
The following chart summarizes the effective dates, affected sections, and a description of all amendments made to the Land Management Code. It is for reference and research purposes only and shall be administratively updated by the Planning and Code Administration Department each time the Mayor and Council adopts an amendment to the Code. When provisions of this chart conflict with the adopted text of a code amendment, the adopted text shall prevail. 
File Number and Effective Date  Description of Amendment(s)  
ZT-2008-01 (v.1.1) October 23, 2008  Parking space requirements for shopping centers. Create definition of “gross leasable area.”  
ZT-2008-03 (v.1.2) May 28, 2009  Expanded authority of the Board of Zoning Appeals to hear variances for lot area and lot area per dwelling unit requirements, but not solely for increasing unit yield.  
ZT-2008-02 (v.1.3) June 26, 2009  Add definitions of “mixed-use building,” “mansion apartment house,” “stacked apartment units,” and “master planned project”; and amend definition of “courtyard apartment.” Create N-MU and D-MU Districts. Repeal the C-3 District. Create the I-MU District.  
ZT-2009-01 (v.1.4) September 26, 2009  Create definition of “dormitory.” Comprehensive revision to commercial district regulations. Move site plan standards to Article 5.  
ZT-2009-03 (v.1.5) January 14, 2010  Create a Local Conversion District Overlay Zoning District. Renumber Subsection 3 (historic districts) to 4 in the section on overlays.  
ZT-2009-02 (v.1.6) February 25, 2010  Create definition of “home workstation.” Remove provision for special exception for home occupations, and allow them as accessory uses with performance standards.  
ZT-2009-04 (v.1.7) July 22, 2010  Create three definitions for residential care facilities. Enumerate the uses found in these definitions as permitted and special exception uses in the various districts.  
ZT-2010-01 (v.1.8) March 24, 2011  Add four definitions relating to wind and solar regulations. Create regulations pertaining to the installation of solar and wind energy collection systems.  
ZT-2011-01 (v.1.9) April 26, 2012  Add definitions of “light manufacturing” and “artist live-work space.” Add kennels as permitted uses in the C2 and C4 districts and create performance standards. Add day boarding to kennels in the industrial districts and create performance standards. Add new permitted uses to Conversion District, make several changes to development standards, and set minimum area for district.  
ZT-2012-01 and ZT-2012-02 (v.2.0) October 25, 2012  Comprehensive amendments to all articles of the Land Management Code.  
ZT-2012-03 (v.2.1) April 25, 2013  Amend definition of “minor subdivision.”  
ZT-2013-01 (v.2.2) October 23, 2013  Correction amendments resulting from the adoption of ZT-2012-02. Re-adoption of chapter as a two-page document, setting up the Land Management Code as a subordinate document by reference.  

File Number and Effective Date  Description of Amendment(s)  
(ZT-2013-01 Continued) Create parking regulations for drive-up restaurants. Adjust regulations for development of car sales facilities. Enumerate recycling operations and banquet facilities as a permitted use. Permit up to two dwelling units in a Local Conversion District. Add permitted uses to the Conversion District. Enact new sign regulations. Exempt two-family dwellings constructed as such from nonconforming provisions. Address inoperable motor vehicles at repair facilities. Address “cell on wheels” (COWS). Add a special exception for general retail in the IR zoning district. Adjust the Forest Conservation Ordinance for consistency with state law. Other minor structural and cross-referencing corrections resulting from the ZT-2012-02 amendments.  
ZT-2014-01 and ZT-2015-01 (v. 2.3) October 30, 2015  Permit two voting members of the HDC to be non-city residents. Revise definitions of "artist live work space," "building," "graphic," "livestock," "manufacturing, light" and add definition of "bakery, retail," "brewery," "brewpub," "confectionery, retail," "contributing resource," "correctional institution," "distillery," "graphic, temporary," "graphic, window," "hookah lounge," "indoor plant cultivation and processing facility," "major economic development opportunity," "professional and workmanlike manner," "priority funding area," "storefront space," "stream restoration project," "theater marquee," and "vapor lounge." Remove definition of "graphic, street." Add provision for measuring distances between uses. Amend design provisions in mixed use districts addressing pedestrian orientation. Remove locational limitations on pawn shops and renumber subsequent subsections. Create residential development bulk regulations in the CL Zoning District. Comprehensive revision of Article 4, Section I (Street Graphics). Specify when a proposed PUD expires if not developed. Amend height limitations for fences in residential districts when adjacent to commercial or industrial districts or commercial areas of mixed-use districts. Revise subsection on use of semi-trailers and remove subsection dealing with "pods." Require work to be done in a professional and workmanlike manner. Prohibit use of tarps as a building material. Require dumpster enclosures for all new trash dumpster installations. Differentiate the expansion of a nonconforming use regarding building vs. land area. Prohibiting changing a nonconforming use to nine specific uses. Remove recreational vehicle parking requirement from apartment parking requirement in the CC-MU District. Adjust plan review process for wireless communications facilities and add maximum tower height requirements for the POM, I-MU and N-MU Districts. Expand HDC authority to include all window graphics. Permit applicant to proceed directly to "certificate of hardship" for demolition with the approval of the zoning administrator. Creates provision for approving demolition of "B level" historic resources for the purpose of accommodating important economic development projects.  

File Number and Effective Date  Description of Amendment(s)  
(ZT-2014-01 and ZT-2015-01 Continued) Permit buildings to be demolished if ordered by the Chief Code Official if the building is an imminent threat to public safety, and renumber subsequent subsections. Multiple changes to the use chart in Section Z. Require the rear yard of interior townhouse units to abut an alley or open space area. Require a photometric plan for all site plans. Adjust parking lot lighting standards. Require site plans to include sidewalks to be installed along all public street frontages, with exceptions. Remove "parking lot design standards" from Article 5, Subsection I.5 (redundant to other provisions), and renumber subsequent sections. Correct residential district references in commercial development and multi-family design standards for open space and improvement amenities in multi-family developments. Require new multi-occupant buildings in the CC-MU to contain storefronts. Require minimum open space for multi-family developments, regardless if they are developed by subdivision or site plan. Correct residential district references for sketch plan standards and amenities for multi­family developments and shopping centers. Provide for exemptions to forest conservation article for stream restoration projects and redevelopment of previously impervious development.  
ZT-2016-01 (v.3.0)  Repeal obsolete provision referring to the Adequate Public Facilities Ordinance.  
November 24, 2016  Clarification of the rate a forest conservation fee-in-lieu is paid when remitted. Expand and clarify the process by which the zoning administrator may confirm a nonconforming use. Create requirement for a signature block for subdivision plats that refer to where homeowners’ association documents can be found in the land records. Define “flea market,” identify districts in which they can be located and performance standards for creating them. Amend residential accessory structure provision to limit them to 900 square feet total. Define “satellite simulcast betting facilities” and identify districts in which they may be located. Create standards that discourage the use of front yards of homes for large parking pads. Create buffer and setback requirements for outdoor storage of merchandise and business supplies. Create new side setback for apartment buildings in the section on residential districts. Create an enforcement prohibition for violations of the Chapter when the violation was created in accordance with a zoning or building permit issued in error, under certain conditions. Create setbacks for retaining walls over two feet in height. Amend the provisions for “home day care” to be more in line with State standards. Exempt gasoline price signage from the maximum sign area requirements, up to the minimum required to be posted by State law. Clarify the use of “bare bulbs” in signage regulations for artistic use. Permit automobile sales in the CL (Commercial Local) Zoning District, indoors only. Amend provision for “residential facilities with in-house professional care” to permit one such use per lot.  

File Number and Effective Date  Description of Amendment(s)  
(ZT-2016-01Continued) Implement the following non-content adjustments: Restructure the subsection on uses in the AT District to be consistent with the Residential and Commercial districts; correct errors in the Graphics section that limited the regulations to certain districts; clarify that the zoning administrator may approve adjustments to recorded plats; minor phrasing and reference corrections to Article 5, Subsections C.19, I.1.c., I.4.b, I.4.h.4, F.2.b and F.2.c, to the definitions of “accessory building or use” and “essential utility equipment” in Article 3, and to Subsections (as identified in the previously effective version of this Ordinance) K.9, M.11.c, O.1.b(2), and to the use “dwelling, multi­family, constructed for that purpose prior to October 1, 1956” found in Section Z (use chart). Change all references to the “Planning and Code Administration Division” to the “Planning and Code Administration Department”. Add a cross reference to the prohibition on signs in the subsection on “home work stations” in Article 4 to the section on “graphics.” Adjust the wording of Article 5, Subsection I.9.b to clarify intent. List gasoline and diesel fuel sale to the public as a separate line item in Article 4, Section Z, without content change. Correct missing reference to limitations on tanning and depilatory salons in the POM District. Cross reference the amortization of temporary signs and use of semi-trailers to Article 4, Section M. Permit the Zoning Administrator to halt review of site plans that have been submitted as a means of gaining compliance with the Land Management Code for violations on the subject property. Correct cross referencing disconnects when the implementation of these amendments create such disconnects. Repeal and replace entire Land Management Code with this version 3.0, removing the footnoting and reference table in Article 8 that was required in version 2.3 to implement the Mayor and Council’s permission given to staff with the adoption of that version to administratively correct cross referencing, punctuation and spelling errors.  
ZT-2017-03 (v.3.1)  Amend Article 6 (Floodplain Management Ordinance) to insert date of newly adopted  
August 15, 2017  FEMA floodplain maps, implement sixteen additional minor adjustments required by FEMA and Maryland Department of the Environment, including capping variances for accessory buildings in floodplains at a footprint of no more than 600 square feet, and amend Article 3 (Definitions) to make seven minor adjustments to definitions impacted by the same above process and add a definition of “mixed use structure” in Article 6.  
ZT-2017-01 and ZT- Amend Article 4 (Zoning) to permit auto repair in the I-MU Zoning District, under  
2017-02 (v. 3.2)  certain conditions, and amend Article 5 (Subdivision and Land Development), Section  
October 26, 2017  A.3.d to permit lands subdivided to accommodate nonconforming or noncomplying townhouse units via simplified plat, to be re-recorded to legal conditions prior to the creation of the simplified plat, under certain conditions.  
ZT-2017-04 (v. 3.3) January 18, 2018  Amend Article 4 (Zoning), to institute comprehensive revisions to the cluster development provisions for clustered residential development of land in the residential zoning districts.  
ZT-2018-01 (v.3.4) January 10, 2019  Add “hair, nail and skin care stores” as a permitted use in the IR District.  

File Number and 
Effective Date 

ZT-2018-01 (v.3.5) June 14, 2019 
Description of Amendment(s) 

Amend Articles 1, 2, 4 and 8 to create a process by which the Zoning Administrator may revoke a zoning certificate. Make consistent throughout the entire code the difference between a sketch plan and a concept plan. Amend Article 3 to define “campground,” “rooming house,” “group home, halfway house and alternative living unit,” “distillery pub,” “wine pub,” “assisted living facility,” “rehabilitation center,” “outpatient substance abuse center,” “continuing care retirement community,” “concept plan” and “street – private.” Delete references to “residential facilities with in-house professional care for up to three residents with mental and/or physical disabilities.” Amend definitions of “brew pub,” “earth tone,” “dwelling, triplex,” “dwelling, quadraplex,” ”master planned project,” “sketch plan,” and add theaters to the definition of “adult entertainment business” Change all use of “graphic” to “sign”. 
Amend Article 4 to set standards for the use of residential front yard parking pads, to adjust the minimum standards for “mansion house apartments,” to create a new dwelling types known as “mansion house over-under flats” and “boarding house,” set minimum standards for them and list districts in which they can be located, to create a special exception provision by which a nonconforming mixed use building may have a first floor storefront converted to a dwelling unit, to delete references to “residential facilities with in-house professional care…”, to add references to the use chart setting the districts in which “campgrounds,” “group homes,” “halfway houses” and “alternative living unit” are permitted, to permit photographers and artist studios in industrial districts, to list districts in the use chart where distillery pubs and wine pubs are be permitted, to amend the method of measuring distances between similar uses, to modify the performance standards required in the POM Zoning District, to change the minimum date by which a building had to be constructed to qualify for a Conversion district or a Local Conversion District to 1977, to include the term “wedding chapel” in the use chart, to set standards by which a PUD is “vested,” to adjust the period for which a site plan is approved to three years, add “multi-purpose arenas for sporting events, entertainment, and other assembly events” to the use chart and delete, “promoters of performing arts, sports or similar events…”, to clarify “Variance Exception for Public Improvements,” to make a minor adjustment to the description of “mansion house apartment and stacked apartment” in the use chart, to clarify that a nonconforming use may not be expanded onto adjacent property, to prohibit accessory buildings in the front yards of residential properties, to set height limitations on stealth facilities, to amend the use chart descriptions of several forms of residential buildings to limit them to one per lot, to set a minimum square foot requirement for all new dwelling units in the City based on the number of bedrooms they will contain, to create a new Institutional (INST) District, setting all requirements for that district, to adjust requirements for assisted living facilities, social and medical services, rehabilitation centers, adult day care and similar uses, add “continuing care retirement community” to the use chart, to require that the zoning map shall be filed with the City Clerk, amend all pronoun references to the Zoning Administrator to read “he or she,” etc., to change all references to “graphic” to “sign.” correct minor use chart errors, to clarify the use chart to include car rental with car sales and include them with their design standards, restructure the subsection on fences to be more “reader friendly” and permit vinyl materials for use in front yard fences, and update the name of State enabling legislation. 
File Number and Effective Date  Description of Amendment(s)  
(ZT-2018-01 Continued) Amend Article 5 to require a pedestrian sidewalk from front doors of buildings to public sidewalks, to add crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) design standards to Section I (Site Design Standards), to set design standards for residential parking in new subdivisions, to create criteria by which the Planning Commission may entertain requests for waivers, to require most commercial and institutional driveways and parking areas to be paved with asphalt, concrete or a similar surface, to make a minor correction to when landscaping is required of a minor subdivision, to clarify the intent of the use of the term “earth tone,” to clarify that the zoning ordinance’s limitation of one dwelling per lot does not preclude the creation of condominiums when applicable, to change remaining references to “preliminary development plan” to “development plan,” to adopt signature block templates for sketch plan approvals, development plan approvals and site plan approvals, to require PDFs of plans be provided after approval, to correct minor references in the landscaping provisions, to cross reference requirements for improvements between subdivision and site plan standards, and to provide guidance on how to apply landscaped buffer requirements on municipal boundaries. Amend Article 6 to clarify the intent of the term “subdivision access road” and to increase performance standards for construction of roads, streets and driveways in floodplains. Amend Article 7 to correct references to “preliminary development plan” and “preliminary site plan,” to increase the noncompliance penalty from 30 cents per square foot to 50 cents per square foot, to correct oversight that omitted “medium density residential areas” from the threshold ration charts, to require use of land within City jurisdiction for meeting the requirements of another jurisdiction’s forest conservation ordinance requirements to be approved by the Planning Commission.  
ZT-2019-01 (v.3.6)  Reserved.  

ARTICLE 2 
Authoritative Boards and Review Agencies 

A. 	General. 
1. 	
Compensation. All appointed members of the Planning Commission, Historic District Commission, and Board of Zoning Appeals shall serve without compensation, unless the Council shall by resolution determine that appropriate compensation should be made to the members. Such determination shall be made separately and severally for each board or commission, and shall include all members of that board of commission. 

2. 	
Appointment. All appointed members of the Planning Commission, Historic District Commission, and the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. 

3. 	
Vacancy and Removal. All appointed members of the Planning Commission, Historic District Commission, and Board of Zoning Appeals may, after a public hearing, be removed by the Council for neglect of duty, misconduct or malfeasance in office. The Council shall file a written statement among its records of reasons for such removal. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor with the confirmation of the City Council as herein set forth. In the case of expiration of terms, members may continue to serve until their successors are appointed and confirmed. 

4. 	
Officers and Rules. The Commissions and Boards shall appoint a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson annually, to be selected from among the voting members at a meeting in accordance with that body’s rules. The terms of the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall be for one year, with eligibility for reelection. In the absence of both the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson, the members shall select an acting chairperson to manage the meeting before addressing business. The bodies shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business and activities and the execution of its responsibilities, in accordance with this Chapter and all relevant City Policies and Ordinances. 


B. 	Planning Commission. Pursuant to the powers and authority vested in the City of Hagerstown, a Municipal Corporation, by and pursuant to the Land Use Article (known until October 1, 2012, as Article 66B), Section 2-101 of the Annotated Code of the Public General Laws of Maryland, as subsequently amended, there is hereby created a Planning Commission, to be known as the “Hagerstown Planning Commission.” 
1. 	Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the Hagerstown Planning Commission shall be those powers, duties, and responsibilities defined in: 
a. 	
The Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of the Public General Laws of Maryland, insofar as the same are applicable and pertain to Municipal Planning for the City of Hagerstown and as now set forth in the Land Use Article and as may be substantially amended. 

b. 	
The Natural Resources Article, Sections 5-1601 through 5-1613 of the Annotated Code of the Public General Laws of Maryland entitled “Forest Conservation Act,” as may be amended; and 

c. 	
The Environment Article, Title 5, Subtitle 8 (“Flood Control and Watershed Management”) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as may be amended. 


This Chapter shall not in any way affect the powers and duties vested in the Mayor and Council of the City of Hagerstown, as its legislative body, by any laws of the State of Maryland, nor shall it affect the powers and duties vested in the Board of Zoning Appeals by any laws of the State of Maryland or by an ordinance passed pursuant thereto. 
2. 	Composition and Term. 
a. 	
Composition. The Commission shall consist of seven members, one of whom may be a member of the Council to serve in an ex officio capacity concurrent with his or her official term of office. 

b. 	
Terms. The term of office of each appointed member shall be for five years from the date of the expiration of his or her predecessor’s appointment. In cases where the appointment of a successor is delayed beyond the expiration of a member’s term, that member shall continue to serve until his or her successor is appointed. 


C. 	Historic District Commission. 
1. 	
Authority. The preservation of sites, structures, and districts of historical, archaeological, or architectural significance together with their appurtenances and environmental settings is a public purpose in Hagerstown. The Mayor and City Council derives authority for this ordinance by virtue of its conformance with provisions of the State of Maryland Enabling Act for Historic Area Zoning as authorized in the Land Management Article, Sections 8-101 to 8-401 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended (formerly Article 66B, Zoning and Planning, Section 8.01-8.17). 

2. 	
Creation of Commission. There is hereby created a “Historic District Commission,” as the historic preservation commission of Hagerstown, Maryland, hereinafter to be known as the HDC. 

3. 	
Purpose. 

a. 	
It is the purpose of this Commission to provide for the identification, designation and regulation, for purposes of protection, preservation and continued use and enhancement, of those sites, structures, and districts which reflect elements of archaeological, political, cultural, social, economic or architectural history. 

b. 	
It is the further purpose of this Commission to preserve and enhance the quality of life and to safeguard the historical and cultural heritage of Hagerstown; to strengthen the local economy; to stabilize and improve property values of such sites, structures, or districts; to foster civic beauty; and to preserve and promote the preservation and appreciation of the sites, structures, and districts for the education and welfare of the citizens of the City of Hagerstown, the County of Washington, the state of Maryland, and the United States of America. 



4. 	
Powers and Duties. For the purposes of this Article, the powers and duties of the Historic District Commission shall include: 

a. 	
Studies. To direct studies, reports, and surveys to identify sites, structures, or districts which are deemed to be of historical, archaeological, or architectural significance; 

b. 	
Inventories. To inventory and recommend to the Planning Commission and to the Mayor and City Council the adoption of ordinances and amendments designating sites, structures, or districts 




deemed to be of historical, archaeological, or architectural significance, as “landmarks” or “historic districts”;  
c.  Staff. Staff to the HDC shall be provided by the Planning and Code Administration Department or other agency as set forth by the City Administrator. The HDC may contract the Maryland Historical Trust, other agencies and organizations and also contract with engineers and architects and other consultants for such services as it may require, consistent with the City’s policies and procedures. The expenditures of the Historic District Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be under such conditions and within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Mayor and City Council which shall provide the funds, equipment, and accommodations consistent with the intent of this article;  
d.  Permit and Plan Review. To review building permit applications and zoning permit applications for work in historic districts and at designated landmarks in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Section T, proposed zoning amendments, applications for special exception permits, interpretations, subdivisions and applications for zoning variances that affect landmarks and historic districts. The Zoning Administrator shall send such applications for permits, interpretations, subdivisions, special exceptions and ordinances to the Historic District Commission for comment at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing by the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals;  
e.  Public Testimony. To testify before all boards and commissions, including the Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals, on any matter affecting historically, archaeologically, and architecturally significant sites, structures, and districts;  
f.  Acceptance of Funds. To accept on behalf of the City of Hagerstown such gifts, grants, and money as may be appropriate for the purposes of this Subsection and Article 4, Section T. Such money may be expended for publishing maps and brochures or for hiring consultants or performing other appropriate functions for the purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the Historic District Commission and the purposes of this Subsection and Article 4, Section T, consistent with the City’s policies and procedures;  
g.  Interest in Real Property. To administer on behalf of the City of Hagerstown, in accordance with guidelines set forth by the legislative body of the City, historic preservation easements, that the City of Hagerstown may have or accept as a gift or otherwise, upon authorization and approval by the legislative body of the City. Such easements may grant to the Commission, the residents of the district, and the general public the right to ensure that any site or structure and surrounding property upon which it is applied is protected, in perpetuity, from changes which would affect its historical, archaeological, or architectural significance.  
h.  Design Guidelines. To create new and amend existing architectural and design guidelines and recommend same to the Mayor and Council for adoption which shall specify such characteristics as materials, signage, landscaping, and other design-related considerations that will be permitted, encouraged, limited, or excluded from landmarks and locally designated historic districts. The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation will stand as the basis for review.  
i.  Other Powers and Duties. To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the implementation of its powers and duties or to the implementation of the purpose of this Subsection and Article 4, Section T.  

5. 	Membership, Terms, Meetings, Standing and Interest. 
a. 	Membership. 
(1) 	
The HDC shall consist of seven voting members. Two additional nonvoting “ex-officio” members who need not be residents of the City may be appointed to the HDC. 

(2) 	
At least five of the seven voting members shall be a resident of the City. 

(3) 	
Each member shall possess a demonstrated special interest, specific knowledge or professional or academic training in such fields as history, architecture, architectural history, planning, archaeology, anthropology, curation, conservation, landscape architecture, historic preservation, urban design or related disciplines. 

(4) 	
At least two voting members of the HDC shall be appointed from the professional disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, or archaeology, in accordance with the minimum professional requirements of the United States Department of the Interior for certifying local governments under 36 C.F.R. Part 61, to the extent available in the city. 

(5) 	
At least three other voting members of the HDC shall have a specific knowledge or professional or academic training in such fields as history, architecture, architectural history, planning, archaeology, anthropology, curation, conservation, landscape architecture, historic preservation, urban design or related disciplines, such as American civilization or law. 

b. 	
Terms. The terms of the members of the HDC shall be for three-year periods with two or three positions expiring in any calendar year in order to prevent the simultaneous expiration of all terms. 

c. 	
Meetings; Standing; Minutes; Quorum; Deadline for Decisions. The HDC shall hold such regular meetings as, in its discretion, are necessary to discharge its duties. The HDC shall meet monthly and shall hold special meetings at the call of the Chairperson or of any four voting members of the HDC. Any interested person or a person’s representative is entitled to appear and be heard at any meeting conducted by the HDC. All minutes and records shall be filed with the Planning and Code Administration Department. Four voting members shall constitute a quorum. All decisions by the HDC shall be made within 15 days of the hearing and written notice thereof shall be given to the applicant. Failure by the Commission to comply with this requirement shall be deemed to constitute automatic approval of the proposed changes unless an extension of this 15-day period is agreed upon mutually by the applicant and the Commission or its staff. 

d. 	
Interest. No member of the HDC shall vote on any matter that may directly or indirectly affect the property, income, or business interest of that member. 


D. 	Board of Zoning Appeals. 
1. 	Establishment of Board. To provide for the competent interpretation and the full and equitable achievement of the purposes of the ordinance there is hereby established a Board of Zoning Appeals. 
2. 	Composition of Board. 
a. 	
Number of Members. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members and they shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council to serve for a term of three years. There shall be one alternate member designated by the Council who may sit on the Board when any other member of the Board is absent. When the alternate member is absent the Council may designate a temporary alternate member. 

b. 	
State Enabling Law. Board composition, appointment, terms, compensation, removal of members, vacancies, rules, meetings, administering oaths, summoning witnesses, records, general powers, appeals, stays, hearings and decisions shall be pursuant to and governed by the Land Use Article, Sections 1-206 and 4-301 to 4-306 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. 


3. 	Powers and Duties of the Board. 
a. 	
Administrative Appeal. To hear and decide appeals of the decisions of the Zoning Administrator or any other City Employee empowered with the administration of the Zoning Ordinance (Article 4), in accordance with the provisions of that Article. 

b. 	
Variances, Special Exceptions, Etc. To hear and decide applications for variances, special exceptions and other zoning approvals as authorized in the Zoning Ordinance (Article 4, Section U), pursuant to the standards, guides and limitations set forth in that Ordinance. 

c. 	
Floodplain Variances and Appeals. To hear and decide appeals of the decisions of the administrator and requests for variances to the provisions of the Flood Management Ordinance (Article 6), pursuant to the standards, guides and limitations set forth in that Article. 

d. 	
Nonconforming Uses. To hear and decide cases involving the confirmation, expansion, alteration and change of nonconforming uses (Article 4, Section M). 


4. 	Rules and Meetings. The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this ordinance. Meetings and hearings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson or, in his absence, the Acting Chairperson, who may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep recordings of its hearings and records of other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. 
E. 	Zoning Administrator and Administration of this Chapter. 
1. 	
Zoning Administrator. The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered by the Zoning 
Administrator as designated by the Mayor and City Council. 


2. 	
No Approval Unless in Conformance with this Chapter. All departments, divisions, officials and public employees of the City of Hagerstown which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue no permit or license for any use, building or purpose if the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority 

to revoke an issued zoning certificate or zoning approval of a building permit in accordance with Article 4, Section S.1.g. 

3. 	
Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator. References to the Zoning Administrator shall herein also include any agent acting on behalf of the Zoning Administrator through the delegation of duties, or in an acting capacity in the absence of the Zoning Administrator. 


Duties of the Zoning Administrator are: 
a. 	
Permit Examination. Receive and examine all applications for zoning permits and within 30 days of receipt either issue or deny such permit. 

b. 	
Permit Approval. Issue permits only where there is compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and with other City ordinances. 

c. 	
Board of Zoning Appeals. Receive applications for interpretations, special exceptions, variances, and other applications subject to review by the Board, and promptly forward these applications to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 

d. 	
Investigation of Noncompliance. Cause to be investigated alleged violations of this Chapter and gather evidence in support of the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. By virtue of this Chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to enter upon open land for the purpose of investigating possible noncompliance with or violation of this Chapter. 

e. 	
Enforcement. Among other actions, issue stop, cease and desist orders and orders in writing by certified mail for correction of all conditions found to be in violation with the provisions of this Chapter. Such written orders shall be served personally or by certified mail upon persons, firms or corporations deemed by the Zoning Administrator to be violating the terms of this Chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to seek and obtain administrative search warrants in the furtherance of the enforcement of this Chapter. See Article 8 of this Chapter pertaining to violations and penalties. The Zoning Administrator may adopt a policy for the assessment of reinspection fees in enforcement cases. 


When a site plan is approved in error by the responsible authority and/or a building permit or zoning certificate is approved in error by the Zoning Administrator or his or her agent, and the work is constructed in accordance with the permit, there shall be no violation of this Code and the Zoning Administrator is prohibited from initiating enforcement action, provided: 
(1) 	
No fraud or misrepresentation had been practiced in obtaining the permit; 

(2) 	
At the time of the permit’s issuance, no appeal or controversy regarding its issuance was pending before any body; 

(3) 	
The applicant has acted in good faith, expending funds or incurring obligations in reliance on the permit; 

(4) 	
Failure to enforce the violated provision is not contrary to the public interest; and 

(5) 	
Does not involve issues of compliance with the Floodplain Management Ordinance (Article 6 of this Code). 

f. 	
Right of Entry and Administrative Search Warrants. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to enter a structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures or with consent of the owner or tenant or occupant of the structure or premises. If entry is refused or not obtained, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to obtain an administrative search warrant subject to the following conditions: 

(1) 	
The Zoning Administrator may apply to a Judge of the District Court or Circuit Court for an administrative search warrant to enter any premises to conduct any inspection required or authorized by law to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 

(2) 	
The application for an administrative search warrant shall be in writing and sworn to by the applicant before the Judge issuing the warrant and shall particularly describe the place, structure, premises, etcetera, to be inspected and the nature, scope and purpose of the inspection to be performed by the applicant. 

(3) 	
A Judge of a court referred to in this subsection may issue the warrant on finding that: 

(a) 	
The applicant has sought access to the property for the purpose of making an inspection and has been unable to obtain consent for the search. 

(b) 	
The requirements of Subsection f.(2) of this subsection have been met. 

(c) 	
Probable cause for the issuance of the warrant has been demonstrated by the applicant by specific evidence of an existing violation of any provision of this Chapter or any rule or regulation adopted under this Chapter. 



(4) 	
An administrative search warrant issued under this subsection shall specify the place, structure, premise, vehicle, or records to be inspected. The inspection conducted may not exceed the limits specified in the warrant. 

(5) 	
An administrative search warrant issued under this subsection authorizes the applicant and other officials or employees of the City to enter specified property to perform the inspection or other functions authorized by law to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 

(6) 	
An administrative search warrant issued under this subsection shall be executed and returned to the Judge by whom it was issued, within: 

(a) 	
The time specified in the warrant, not to exceed ten days. 

(b) 	
If no time period is specified in the warrant, ten days from the date of its issuance. 



g. 	
Legal Proceedings. With the approval of the Mayor and City Council, or when directed by them, institute in the name of the City any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to 


restrain, correct or abate such violation as to prevent the occupancy of or use of any building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.  
h.  Records. Record and file all applications for zoning permits with accompanying plans and documents. All applications, plans and documents shall be a public record.  
i.  Zoning Map. Maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning classification of all land in the city.  
j.  Policies and Procedures. Establish and publish application procedures for permits, appeals and actions pursuant to this Chapter and forms implementing its requirements.  
k.  Review of Site Plans and Subdivisions. Review all development review plans and permits to assure that the requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied.  
l.  Interpretation of the Chapter. Interpret the applicability of the provisions of this Chapter in matters where the text does not clearly provide guidance.  
m.  Maintenance of Records. Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this Chapter in his office and make said records open to public inspection, consistent with City-wide public information policies.  
n.  Application Clearinghouse. Receive appeals and other applications described in this Chapter and forward cases to the appropriate Board of Commission.  

ARTICLE 3 

Definitions 

A. 	Rules of Construction. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and phrases shall have, for the purposes of this Chapter, the meanings in the following clauses: 
1. 	
Words used in the present tense include the future. 

2. 	
The singular includes the plural, the masculine includes the feminine or neuter gender. 

3. 	
The word “person” includes a corporation, firm, institution, partnership, association or any legal entity. 

4. 	
The word “shall” is mandatory and not directory. 

5. 	
The word “Commission” and the words “Planning Commission” shall always mean the City of Hagerstown Planning Commission. 

6. 	
The word “Office” and the words “Planning Office” shall always mean the Planning and Code Administration Department for the City of Hagerstown, Maryland. 

7. 	
The words “Mayor and Council” and the words “Mayor and City Council” or “Council” shall always mean the legislative body of Hagerstown, Maryland. 

8. 	
The word “county” shall always mean Washington County, Maryland. 

9. 	
The word “city” shall always mean the City of Hagerstown, Maryland. 

10. 	
Following each definition is a reference in parentheses to an article or section of an article of this Chapter. This reference is provided as a convenient reference to the place in this Chapter in which it is most frequently found and used. Regardless of the reference provided, however, all definitions as found herein apply to the entire Chapter unless specifically otherwise indicated or limited by reference to a particular article. 


B. 	When Terms Are Not Defined. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage. When multiple definitions of a single term exist, the term shall be given the meaning for each Article hereof as indicated. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

C. 	Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ACCESSORY BUILDING, USE OR STRUCTURE – 
1. 	
As pertains to Article 4, a use or structure on the same lot or adjacent lot under the same ownership with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure. Typically, an accessory use occupies not more than 25% of the space occupied by the principal use and its permitted accessory uses. (Zoning) 

2. 	
As pertains to Article 6, a building or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. For the purposes of these regulations, an accessory structure shall be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. (Floodplain) 


ADULT DAY CARE WITH VOCATIONAL CENTER – A facility providing day care for functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for periods of less than 24 hours per day which includes a vocational center for its clients. (Zoning) 

ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS – 
1. 	
An adult book store, being an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade devoted to the sale or rental of books, magazines, periodicals, motion pictures, films, videos, DVDs, or other similar images by any medium which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” (as defined in this Article), or products, devices or novelties designed or sold primarily for the purpose of stimulation of human genital or sexual gratification. (Zoning) 

2. 	
An adult motion picture theater or adult mini-motion picture theater, as defined in this Article. (Zoning) 

3. 	
A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment characterized by activities which involve “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas” (as defined by this Article) engaged in by performers in live performances. (Zoning) 


ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER – An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” for observation by patrons herein. (Zoning) 
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER – An enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” for observation by patrons herein. (Zoning) 
AFFORESTATION –(Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
Establishment of a forest on an area from which forest cover has been absent for a long period of time; 

2. 	
Planting of open areas which are not presently in forest cover; or 

3. 	
Establishment of a forest according to procedures set forth in the Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 


AGREEMENT TO SUBMIT AN ELEVATION CERTIFICATE – A form on which the applicant for a permit to construct a building or structure, to construct certain horizontal additions, to place or replace a manufactured home, to substantially improve a building, structure, or manufactured home, agrees to have an Elevation Certificate prepared by a licensed professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor, as specified by the Floodplain Administrator, and to submit the certificate: 
1. 	
Upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical construction; and 

2. 	
Prior to the final inspection and issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. (Floodplain) 


AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY – Farming activities including plowing, tillage, cropping, installation of best management practices, seeding, cultivating, and harvesting for production of food and fiber products (except commercial logging and timber harvesting operations), the grazing and raising of livestock, aquaculture, sod production, orchards, nursery, and other products cultivated as part of a recognized commercial enterprise. (Forest Conservation) 
AGRICULTURAL AND RESOURCE AREAS – Undeveloped areas zoned for densities of less than or equal to one dwelling unit per acre. (Forest Conservation) 
AGRI-TOURISM – Any activity carried out on a farm or ranch that allows members of the general public, for recreational, entertainment, or educational purposes, to view or enjoy rural activities, including farming, wineries, ranching, historical, cultural, harvest-your-own activities, or natural activities and attractions. An activity is an agri-tourism activity whether or not the participant paid to participate in the activity. (Zoning) 
ALLEY – A public or private way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or the side of properties otherwise abutting a street. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
ALTERATION – Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, relocation, or demolition of any structure. (Zoning – Historic) 
ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE – Includes, but is not limited to widening, deepening or relocating a channel, including excavation or filling of the channel. Alteration of a watercourse does not include construction of a road, bridge, culvert, dam, or in-stream pond unless the channel is proposed to be realigned or relocated as part of such construction. (Floodplain) 
APARTMENT BUILDING OR COMPLEX – See “dwelling, multi-family.” (Zoning) 
APPLICANT – The party applying for permits or other approvals required by this Code. (Subdivision and Land Development) 

APPROVED FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN – A document: (Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
Approved by the Department of Natural Resources forester assigned to the City in which the property is located; and 

2. 	
Which operates as a protective agreement for forest conservation as described in the Natural Resources Article, §5-1607(e) and (f), Annotated Code of Maryland. 


APPURTENANCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS – All that space of grounds and structures thereon which surrounds a site, structure, or district and to which it relates physically and/or visually. Appurtenances and environmental settings shall include, but not be limited to, walkways and driveways (whether paved or not), vegetation (including trees, gardens, lawns), rocks, pasture, cropland and waterways. This includes historical open spaces, i.e., setbacks, parks and public squares. (Zoning – Historic) 
AREA, GROSS – The total horizontal space within a lot or parcel of land before public streets, environmental features, or dedications are deducted from the lot or parcel. (Zoning) 
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING – A designated Zone AO on the Flood Insurance Rate Map with a 1% percent annual chance or greater of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident, such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. (Floodplain) 
ARTICULATION – Giving of emphasis to architectural elements (such as roof lines, windows, balconies, entries, etc.) that create a complementary pattern of rhythm, dividing large buildings into smaller, identifiable spaces. See illustrative example below. (Zoning) 

Figure 1. Note the articulation of the larger store to the left and the corresponding lack of articulation on the smaller store on the right. 
ARTIST LIVE-WORK SPACE – The use of all or a portion of a building for both artistic use and residential use. This use is particularly viewed as a desirable means of fostering and promoting the redevelopment of former commercial and industrial buildings for non-traditional residential/workspace. (Zoning) 
ARTISTIC USE – Artistic use shall be defined as: 
1. 	
The creation or assemblage of visual art or other fine art objects for the purpose of sale, display, commission, consignment, or trade by artists or artisans; and 

2. 	
Performance art by dancers, musicians, singers, actors, etc., that will be practiced or rehearsed in an “artist live-work space.” (Zoning) 


ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY – a residential care facility for 10 or more persons licensed by Maryland Department of Health that provides housing and supportive services, supervision, personalized assistance, and/or health-related services to meet the needs of residents who are unable to perform or need assistance in performing activities of daily living. (Zoning) 
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (ATTACHED WCF) – An antenna array that is attached to an existing building or structure, with any accompanying device which attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure, transmission cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside or outside the attachment structure. (Zoning – Wireless) 
BAKERY, RETAIL – A business engaged in making and selling on-premise flour-based baked goods, such as bread, cookies, cakes, pastries, and pies. (Zoning) 
BASE BUILDING – The building to which an addition is being added. This term is used in provisions relating to additions in Article 6. (Floodplain) 
BASE FLOOD – The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood also is referred to as the 1% annual chance 100-year flood. (Floodplain) 
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION – The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map. In areas of shallow flooding, the base flood elevation is the highest adjacent natural grade elevation plus the depth number specified in feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, or at least four feet if the depth number is not specified. (Floodplain) 
BASEMENT – Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. (Floodplain) 
BED AND BREAKFAST – A facility that serves the traveling public with sleeping rooms and at least one meal per day for overnight guests only in a setting reflecting a residential rather than a commercial character. (Zoning) 
BENCH MARK – A monument for which an accurate elevation has been established and shown on the plat or as defined by the United States Geological Survey, NAVD 88 or NGVD 29. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
BLACKSMITH/FARRIER – One that forges and shapes iron with anvil, hammer, and similar tools, for the purpose of creating artisan products and/or shaping and applying horseshoes to horses. (Zoning) 
BLOCK – Grouping of lots unseparated by streets, parks, main waterways, or other natural barriers, or subdivision boundary lines. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
BOARDING-OR ROOMING-HOUSE – A dwelling or part thereof where meals and/or lodging are provided, for compensation, for persons not transients. (Zoning) 
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS – The duly appointed Board of Zoning Appeals for the City of Hagerstown, Maryland. (Zoning) 
BREWERY – Establishments primarily engaged in brewing beer, ale, malt liquors, and nonalcoholic beer. (Zoning) BREWPUB – A pub or restaurant that brews beer on the premises. (Zoning) 
BUFFER YARD – A strip of land which is established to separate adjacent properties or zoning districts and which contains natural or planted vegetation, berms, walks, or fences. (Subdivision and Land Development – Landscaping) 

BUILDING – 
1. 	
As pertains to Article 4, any structure which is permanently affixed to or located permanently or semi-permanently on the land, has one or more floors and a roof and is bounded by either open area or the lot lines of a zoning lot. 

For the purposes of setback requirements, “building” shall include any feature such as a shed, garage, carport, breezeway, port cochere or similar feature that is attached to a building or located within three feet of a building, and carports regardless of whether it is attached to a building. Eaves and bay windows shall not be included as buildings or parts thereof for the purposes of setbacks. (Zoning) 

2. 	
As pertains to Article 5, a permanent structure having a roof which is used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. The word “building” shall include any part thereof. (Subdivision and Land Development) 


BUILDING, HEIGHT OF – The vertical distance from the grade to the top of the highest roof beams, surface of a flat roof, or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip roof. When a building faces on more than one street, the height shall be measured from the average of the grades at the center of each street front. For further explanation, refer to Article 4, Subsection K.2 and the following illustration. 
(Zoning) 
Figure 2. This illustration depicts the definition of "building height" 

BUILDING CODE(S) – The effective Building Construction Code of the City of Hagerstown (Chapter 64, Article I-VI, of Hagerstown’s City Code), including the building code, property maintenance code, electrical code, plumbing code, and mechanical code. This definition shall be applied only to Article 6. (Floodplain) 
BUILDING LINE – The line established beyond which a building shall not extend as determined by front, side, and rear yard requirements. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
BUTCHERING – Processing of animal meats and poultry products where meat processing is limited to making cuts of meat from pre-processed carcasses. (Zoning) 
CALIPER – The diameter measured at two inches above the transition zone between stem and root at the ground line of a tree or seedling. (Forest Conservation) 
CALIPER INCHES – Quantity in inches of the diameter of trees measured at six inches above the ground for trees four inches or less in trunk diameter and 12 inches above the ground for trees over four inches in trunk diameter. (Subdivision and Land Development – Landscaping) 
CAMPING/CAMPGROUND – An area used for transient occupancy by camping, usually but not always in tents, camp trailers, travel trailers, or similar movable or temporary sleeping quarters of any kind. 
(Zoning) 
CELL ON WHEELS (COW) – A mobile cell site that consists of a cellular antenna tower and electronic radio transceiver equipment on a truck or trailer, designed to be part of a cellular network for the purpose of providing additional coverage or capacity during special events, civil emergency, brief testing coverage at a particular location, or similar use for brief periods of time. (Zoning) 
CEMETERY – A tract of land managed as a business or by a not-for-profit entity for the purpose of interring human remains and ashes in the ground, in mausoleums or columbaria. (See related definition of “Human Burial Site”). (Zoning) 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS – A certificate issued by the Historic District Commission indicating its approval of plans for alteration, construction, reconstruction, relocation, or demolition of a landmark or of a site or structure within a historic district. (Zoning – Historic) 
CERTIFICATE OF HARDSHIP – A certificate issued by the Historic District Commission authorizing an alteration, construction, removal, or demolition, even though a Certificate of Appropriateness has previously been denied. (Zoning – Historic) 
CITY CENTER – That area within the boundaries of the CC-MU (City Center-Mixed use) Zoning District. (Zoning) 
CITY ENGINEER – The duly designated City Engineer of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
CITY FINANCE DIRECTOR – The duly designated Finance Director of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
CITY STANDARDS – Those improvements as defined herein which are necessary for development and which are approved and accepted by the City Engineer. See Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines. (Subdivision and Land Development) CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT – A method of developing land where the housing is built in groups. Cluster development allows a reduction in the size of the lots. The remaining undeveloped land is required to remain as common open space. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
CO-LOCATION – Use of a common wireless communication facility (WCF) or common site by two or more wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology and/or placement of a WCF on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity. (Zoning) 
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES – Manufacturing operations, office complexes, shopping centers, retail and wholesale sales facilities, and other similar uses and their associated storage areas, yarding, and parking areas for either a profit or on a non-profit basis. (Forest Conservation) 
COMMERCIAL FARMING – Crops and livestock grown for distribution to wholesalers and retail outlets or direct retail sale and not primarily intended for household consumption by the producer. Commercial farming also includes crops grown to be fed to the producer’s own livestock in a commercial farming operation. (Zoning) 
COMMERCIAL LOGGING OR TIMBER HARVESTING OPERATIONS – The cutting and removing of tree stems from a site for commercial purposes, leaving the root mass intact. (Forest Conservation) 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE – Any self-propelled or towed vehicle used or designed to be used in commerce to transport passengers (other than the driver) or cargo. (Zoning) 
COMMUNITY GARDEN – The sole principal permitted use of land managed by a public or non-profit organization or a group of individuals, and is used to grow plants and harvest food or ornamental crops for use by those cultivating the land and their households. The crops grown are not for sale or redistribution. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by group members. All uses shall comply with the accessory structure use setbacks for the district in which it is located. (Zoning) 
COMMUNITY – As pertains to Article 6, a political subdivision of the state of Maryland (county, city or town) that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations within its jurisdictional boundaries. (Floodplain) 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN – The policies, statements, goals and interrelated plans for private and public land use, transportation, and community facilities documented in texts and maps which constitute the guide for the City’s future development, including all amendments thereto and all related general plans, master plans, and community plans adopted by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.(Subdivision and Land Development) 
CONCEPT PLAN – A preliminary concept plan of the proposed development or use showing the developer’s desires in regard to the future development or use of land for consideration during review of a proposed rezoning, overlay district, or special exception. (Zoning) 
CONDOMINIUM – A system of separate ownership of individual units in multi-unit projects on land in common ownership as defined in the Annotated Code of Maryland.(Zoning) CONFECTIONERY, RETAIL – A business engaged in making and selling on-premise candy, chocolates, and other confections that are made primarily of sugar. (Zoning) 
CONTINUING CARE RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY – A retirement community with accommodations for independent living, assisted living and nursing home care, offering residents a continuum of care. All of the dwelling units and care facilities are typically owned by the provider. As a campus environment of varying levels of “step up” care or living, dwelling units for independent living within the campus shall not be required to be on individual fee-simple lots. (Zoning) 
CONTRIBUTING RESOURCE – An historic building or open space which contributes to the significance of the historic district, but does not appear to be eligible for individual listing on the National Register of Historic Places. In the historic resource ranking system, this is generally known as those resources ranked B and C. (Zoning – Historic) 
CONVENIENCE STORE – An establishment which sells snack foods, packaged or prepared food and beverages, and other food and convenience items for consumption off premises, and, under the terms of this Chapter, may also sell gasoline in specified zoning districts. (Zoning) 
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION – Government facilities, quasi-government facilities and facilities privately run on government contract for the purpose of confinement, correction and rehabilitation of adult and/or juvenile offenders sentenced by a court. (Zoning) 
CRITICAL AND ESSENTIAL FACILITIES – Buildings and other structures that are intended to remain operational in the event of extreme environmental loading from flood, wind, snow or earthquakes. Critical and essential facilities typically include hospitals, fire stations, police stations, storage of critical records, facilities that handle or store hazardous materials, and similar facilities. (Floodplain) 
CRITICAL HABITAT AREA – A critical habitat for an endangered species and its surrounding protection area. A critical habitat area shall: (Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
Be likely to contribute to the long-term survival of the species; 

2. 	
Be likely to be occupied by the species for the foreseeable future; and 

3. 	
Constitute habitat of the species which is considered critical under Natural Resources Article, §4-2A­04 and 10-2A-04, Annotated Code of Maryland. 


CRITICAL HABITAT FOR ENDANGERED SPECIES – A habitat occupied by an endangered species as determined or listed under Natural Resources Article, §4-2A-04 and 10-2A-04, Annotated Code of Maryland.(Forest Conservation) 
CUL-DE-SAC – A street with a single common ingress and egress and with a turnaround at the end. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
DAY-CARE, ADULT – A facility providing care for the elderly and/or functionally impaired adults, not the relatives of the provider, in a protective setting for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other than the care recipient’s own dwelling unit. (Zoning) DAY-CARE, CHILD – The care of five or more children, not the children or relatives of the provider, on a regular basis for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other than the child’s own dwelling unit. (Zoning) 
DECLARATION OF INTENT – A signed and notarized statement by a landowner or the landowner’s agent certifying that the activity on the landowner’s property is exempted and complies with Article 7, Subsection A.3.c of this Chapter. (Forest Conservation) 
DECLARATION OF LAND RESTRICTION (NONCONVERSION AGREEMENT) – A form signed by the owner to agree not to convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the permit and these regulations, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of elevated buildings and certain accessory structures. The form requires the owner to record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the restrictions. (Floodplain) 
DEDICATION – The dedication of land by the developer for any general and public uses, in accordance with the provisions herein. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT – The failure to provide ordinary and necessary maintenance and repair to a landmark or site or structure within an historic district, whether by negligence or willful neglect, purpose or design, by the owner or any party in possession of such a site, which results in any of the following conditions: 
1. 	
The deterioration of the foundations, exterior walls, roofs, chimneys, doors, or windows, so as to create or permit a hazardous or unsafe condition to exist; or 

2. 	
The deterioration of the foundations, exterior walls, roofs, chimneys, doors, windows, the lack of adequate waterproofing, or the deterioration of interior features which will or could result in permanent damage, injury, or loss of or loss to foundations, exterior walls, roofs, chimneys, doors, or windows. (Zoning – Historic) 


DENSITY, GROSS – The number of dwelling units within the gross area of a development divided by the total gross area. (Zoning) 
DESTINATION RETAIL USE – Any development containing one or more retail units occupying more than 75,000 square feet of gross floor area, including outdoor seasonal display areas. (Zoning) 
DEVELOPER – Any person commencing proceedings under these Regulations to effect a subdivision or development of land as defined herein. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
DEVELOPER AGREEMENT – A written document between the Developer and the City which may limit, condition, or further define the process for a particular development. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
DEVELOPMENT – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, placement of manufactured homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. (Floodplain) 
DEVELOPMENT PLAN – A set of plans indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision or site showing lots, roads, water, sewer, engineering data, utilities, and other requirements prepared in accordance with these Regulations, which is presented for construction approval, prior to preparation of the Final Plat. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT – The grading or construction activities occurring on a specific tract that is 40,000 square feet or greater. “Development project” includes redevelopment. (Forest Conservation) 
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT COMPLETION – For the purposes of afforestation, reforestation, or payment into a fund: (Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
The release of the performance bond, or surety, if required by Article 7 of this Chapter; or 

2. 	
Designation by the Planning and Code Administration Department that a: 

a. 	
Development project has been completed, or 

b. 	
Particular stage of a staged development project, including a planned unit development, has been completed. 



3. 	
The release of any bond or surety not required under Article 7 of this Chapter shall not be construed to mean the completion of afforestation, reforestation, or payment into a fund, as required by this Chapter. 


DISTILLERY – Establishments primarily engaged in distilling potable liquors, distilling and blending liquors, and/or blending and mixing liquors and other ingredients. (Zoning) 
DISTILLERY PUB – A pub or restaurant that manufactures alcoholic spirits, such as rum, vodka, gin, etc., on the premises. (Zoning) 
DISTRICT, HISTORIC – A district designated by the Mayor and City Council for its historical, archaeological, or architectural significance to Hagerstown, the preservation of which is deemed to be for the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the citizens of Hagerstown. An historic district includes all property within its boundaries, whether publicly or privately owned. (Zoning – Historic) 
DISTRICT, ZONING – A portion of territory designated on the Official Zoning Map within which certain uniform regulations and requirements of various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Chapter. (Zoning) 
DORMITORY – A structure specifically designed and used for a long-term stay by students of a college, university, or other academic or trade school for the purpose of providing rooms for sleeping purposes. Eating facilities may be permitted either in-unit or in a common kitchen/dining room. A dormitory shall include common gathering rooms for social purposes, and shall not be used for year-round uninterrupted use. (Zoning) 
DWELLING – A building containing one or more dwelling units. The term “dwelling,” or any combination thereof shall not be deemed to include hotel, rooming house, motel, clubhouse, hospital, or other accommodations used for more or less transient occupancy. A dwelling may be constructed in the traditional stick-built open-frame construction process or assembled from industrialized building components (modular homes). (Zoning) DWELLING, COURTYARD APARTMENTS – A multi-family building containing three or more dwelling units arranged around an internal parking court, or an open space designed as an aesthetic benefit, each with its own outside entrance, each separated by a party wall or walls extending vertically from the ground to the roof, on land in common ownership without subdivided lot lines, with at least one side of the structure fronting on a public street. (Zoning) 
DWELLING, MANSION APARTMENT HOUSE – Three or more dwelling units arranged in a flat-over-flat configuration in a single building with an exterior design of a large single-family, attached or detached house fronting a public street. (Zoning) 
DWELLING, MOBILE (MANUFACTURED) – A dwelling structure that is transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home or mobile home shall not include a recreational vehicle. (Zoning and Floodplain) 
DWELLING, MODULAR (INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING) – A building assembly or system of building subassemblies manufactured in its entirety, or in substantial part, off site and transported to a site for installation or erection, with or without other specified components, as a building or as part of a finished building that comprises two or more industrial building units, and includes the electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, insulation and other service systems necessary for residential occupancy. This definition shall not be interpreted to include mobile (“manufactured”) homes. (Zoning) 
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY – A building containing three or more dwelling units (an apartment house), including triplex and quadraplex. (Zoning) 
DWELLING, QUADRAPLEX – A building containing four dwelling units, each with its own outside entrance and each separated by a party wall or walls extending vertically from the ground to the roof. Unlike townhouses, which also permit structures with as few as four units, quadraplex dwellings may be arranged in quadrants, dividing a rectangular or square shaped building, whereas townhouses are arranged side-by­side. Quadraplexes are referred to only in provisions for cluster subdivisions. Blocks of four-unit townhouse buildings shall not be interpreted as quadraplex dwellings in zoning districts where townhouses are permitted. (Zoning) 
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED – One of two buildings arranged or designed as single-family dwellings located on abutting lots and attached by a wall, without openings, extending from the cellar floor to the highest point of the roof along the common lot line and separated from any other building or structures by space on all sides. (Zoning) 
3­13 



DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY – A detached building containing not more than one dwelling unit and not occupied by more than one family, constructed on a fully enclosed masonry foundation. (Zoning) 
DWELLING, STACKED APARTMENT UNITS – Three or more dwelling units arranged along a corridor, in a single building with multiple stories and fronting a public street. (Zoning) 
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE – One of a series of three or more attached dwelling units separated from one another by continuous vertical party walls without openings from basement floor to roof. (Zoning) 
DWELLING, TRIPLEX – A building containing three dwelling units arranged or designed each with its own outside entrance and each separated by a party wall or walls extending vertically from the ground to the roof. Unlike townhouses, which also permit structures with as few as three units, triplex dwellings may be arranged in quadrants, dividing a rectangular or square shaped building, whereas townhouses are arranged side-by­side. Triplexes are referred to only in provisions for cluster subdivisions. Blocks of three-unit townhouses shall not be interpreted as triplex dwellings in zoning districts where townhouses are permitted. (Zoning) 
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY – A building located on one zoning lot containing not more than two dwelling units, arranged one above the other or side by side, sharing a common wall or floor and not occupied by more than two families. (Zoning) 


DWELLING UNIT – One or more rooms in a residential building or in a mixed-use building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one or more persons living together and maintaining a common household and which include lawful cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants therefor. (Zoning) 
EARTH TONE – A color scheme of muted tones of natural colors found in soil, sand, moss, trees and rocks, such as shades of umber, ochre, sienna, cream, olive and slate. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
EASEMENT – An interest in real property generally established in a real estate document or on a recorded plat to reserve, convey or dedicate the use of land for a specialized or limited purpose without the transfer of fee title. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE – FEMA form on which surveyed elevations and other data pertinent to a property and a building are identified and which shall be completed by a licensed professional land surveyor or a licensed professional engineer, as specified by the Floodplain (Zoning) Administrator. When used to document the height above grade of buildings in special flood hazard areas for which base flood elevation data are not available, the Elevation Certificate shall be completed in accordance with the instructions issued by FEMA. (Floodplain) 
ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR – An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure that is located below an elevated building, is surrounded by walls on all sides, and is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in Article 6. Also see “lowest floor.” (Floodplain) 
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE FEATURES – Those features contained in areas defined in the Comprehensive Plan, including such features as excessive slopes, flooding, high water tables, shallow depth to bedrock, unique natural features, desirable natural growths, water courses and other water areas, and scenic points. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
EQUIPMENT FACILITY – Any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a wireless communication facility which includes cabinets, shelters, a build out of an existing structure, pedestals and other similar structures. (Zoning – Wireless) 
ESSENTIAL UTILITY EQUIPMENT – Underground or overhead electrical, gas, communications, water or sewerage systems, including poles, towers or pole structures, wires, lines, mains, drains, sewers, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, public telephone stations, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, regulating and measuring devices, water pumping stations, elevated storage tanks, ground storage tanks and the structures in which they are housed, substations and associated equipment and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith. It does not include: 
1. 	
Buildings, yards or stations used for storage, repair or processing of equipment or material; 

2. 	
Buildings, yards, stations or substations for transforming, boosting, switching or pumping purposes where such facilities are constructed on the ground; 

3. 	
Wireless telecommunications facilities, as regulated in Article 4, Section Q of this Chapter; 

4. 	
Communications towers, unless otherwise pre-empted by law, or a project of the state or federal government; or 

5. 	
Solar collection and wind energy systems. (Zoning) 


EXTERIOR FEATURES – The architectural style, design and general arrangement of the exterior of a site or structure, including the nature and texture of building materials, and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs or other similar items found on or related to the exterior of a site or structure. (Zoning – Historic) 
FAÇADE – The side of a building below the eaves. (Zoning) 
FAMILY – 
1. 	A single person occupying a dwelling and maintaining a household, or 
2. 	Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, cohabitation or adoption, occupying a dwelling, living together, and maintaining a common household. 
The term “family” shall not be construed to include a fraternity or sorority, club, rooming house, residential care facility or similar use. (Zoning) 
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) – The federal agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. (Floodplain) 
FENCE – A barrier constructed of any allowable material including concrete, stone, brick, tile, wood, metal or similar type of material for the purpose of providing a boundary, separating lots or enclosing space. A fence shall be made of materials made for that purpose. This definition shall not be construed to include shrubs or hedges. (Zoning) 
FLEA MARKET – An outdoor commercial activity, not including shopping centers, individual retail operations, or sales that is open to the general public and composed of five or more semi-enclosed or outdoor stalls, rooms, stands, or spaces used for the purpose of display and sale, exchange, or barter of merchandise. The regulation of flea markets in Article 4 shall not apply to such activities conducted no more than three times per year by a nonprofit or charitable organization on their property. (Zoning) 
FLOOD OR FLOODING – A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1. 	
The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or 

2. 	
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. (Floodplain) 


FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTENT MATERIALS – Any construction material that is capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. For more information, consult NFIP Technical Bulletin #2, “Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements.” (Floodplain) 
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) – An official map of which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated special flood hazard areas to indicate the magnitude and nature of flood hazards, to designate applicable flood zones, and to delineate floodways, if applicable. FIRMs that have been prepared in digital format or converted to digital forma are referred to as Digital FIRMs (DFIRMs). (Floodplain) 
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) –The official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway information, and the water surface elevations. (Floodplain) 
FLOOD, 100-YEAR – A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Except for Class III waters (natural trout streams), a body of water with a watershed less than 400 acres is excluded. (Forest Conservation) 
FLOODPLAIN, 100 YEAR – An area along or adjacent to a stream or body of water, except tidal waters, that is capable of storing or conveying floodwaters during a 100-year frequency storm event, or a 100­year flood as shown on FEMA 100-year floodplain maps and regulated by Article 6 of this Chapter. 
(Forest Conservation) 
FLOOD OPENING – A flood opening (non-engineered) is an opening that is used to meet the prescriptive requirement of one square inch of net open area for every square foot of enclosed area. An engineered flood opening is an opening that is designed and certified by a licensed professional engineer, or licensed architect, as meeting certain performance characteristics, including providing automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; this certification requirement may be satisfied by an individual certification or issuance of an Evaluation Report by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. (Floodplain) 
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE) – The base flood elevation plus one foot freeboard. Freeboard is a factor of safety that compensates for uncertainty in factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, climate change and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed. (Floodplain) 
FLOOD PROTECTION SETBACK – A distance measured perpendicular to the top of bank of a watercourse that delineates an area to be left undisturbed to minimize future flood damage and to recognize the potential for bank erosion. Along non-tidal waters of the state, the flood protection setback is: 
1. 	
100 feet, if the watercourse has special flood hazard areas shown on the FIRM, except where the setback extends beyond the boundary of the flood hazard area; or 

2. 	
50 feet, if the watercourse does not have special flood hazard areas shown on the FIRM. (Floodplain) 


FLOODPLAIN – Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “Flood” or “Flooding”). (Floodplain) 
FLOODWAY – The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. When shown on a FIRM, the floodway is referred to as the “designated floodway.” (Floodplain) 
FLOOD PROOFING OR FLOOD PROOFED – Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to buildings or structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents, such that the buildings or structures are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Maryland state regulations do not allow new non-residential buildings in non-tidal waters of the state to be flood proofed. (Floodplain) 
FLOOD PROOFING CERTIFICATE – FEMA form that is to be completed, signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect to certify that the design of flood proofing and proposed methods of construction are in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article 6 of this Chapter. (Floodplain) 
FLOOD ZONE – A designation for areas that are shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps: 
1. 	
Zone A: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance 100-year flood; base flood elevations are not determined. 

2. 	
Zone AE and Zone A1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined; floodways may or may not be determined. 

3. 	
Zone AH and Zone AO: Areas of shallow flooding, with flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding or sheet flow on sloping terrain), with or without BFEs or designated flood depths. 

4. 	
Zone B and Zone X (shaded): Areas subject to inundation by the 0.2-percent annual chance 500-year flood; areas subject to the 1% annual chance 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected from the base flood by levees. 

5. 	
Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas outside of Zones designated A, AE, A1-30, AO, VE, V1-30, B, and X (shaded). 

6. 	
Zone VE and Zone V1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance 100-year flood and subject to high velocity wave action (also see coastal high hazard area). 


(Floodplain) 
FOREST – (Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
"Forest" means a biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants covering a land area of 10,000 square feet or greater. 

2. 	
"Forest" includes: 

a. 	
Areas that have at least 100 live trees per acre with at least 50% of those trees having a two-inch or greater diameter at four-and-a-half feet above the ground and larger; and 

b. 	
Areas that have been cut but not cleared. 



3. 	
"Forest" does not include orchards. 


FOREST CONSERVATION DISTRICT BOARD – The forestry board created for each state forestry conservancy district under Natural Resources Article, §§5-601 through 5-610, Annotated Code of Maryland. (Forest Conservation) 
FOREST CONSERVATION – The retention of existing forest or the creation of new forest at the levels set by this Article 7 of this Chapter. (Forest Conservation) 
FOREST CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT – An agreement as applicable and described in COMAR 08.19.05.01. (Forest Conservation) 
FOREST CONSERVATION PLAN – A plan prepared pursuant to Article 7 of this Chapter. 
(Forest Conservation) 
FOREST CONSERVATION TECHNICAL MANUAL – The technical manual incorporated by reference, used to establish standards of performance required in preparing forest stand delineations and forest conservation plans. (Forest Conservation) FOREST COVER – The area of a site meeting the definition of forest. (Forest Conservation) 
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN – A plan establishing best conservation and management practices for a landowner in assessment of the resource values of forested property. (Forest Conservation) 
FOREST STAND DELINEATION – The methodology for evaluating the existing vegetation on a site proposed for development, as provided in the City of Hagerstown Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 
(Forest Conservation) 
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE – A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. This definition shall be applied only to Article 6. (Floodplain) 
GRADING – Any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified, filled or any combination thereof. (Forest Conservation) 
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA) – The total floor area of a commercial building designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, and exterior spaces designated for the display and sale of outdoor-oriented merchandise, expressed in square feet as measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. For purposes of calculating parking requirements, parking and loading areas as well as the floor area occupied by HVAC, mechanical, electrical, communications, and security equipment are all deducted from gross leasable area. (Zoning) 
GROUP HOME, HALFWAY HOUSE AND ALTERNATIVE LIVING UNIT -A dwelling unit licensed, certified or approved by a Federal, State or local government agency, or administered by a provider which is licensed, certified or approved by a government agency, in which individuals with disabilities may be provided care or treatment in a homelike environment. The Health Article of the Code of the State of Maryland provides specific parameters for these different types of congregate housing which may result in smaller numbers of residents for specific facilities and those requirements will supersede this ordinance. For the purposes of administering the Land Management Code and consistent with State code provisions, the following maximums shall apply: 
1. 	
An alternative living unit accommodates up to 3 residents and is deemed a single-family residence and is allowed where single-family homes are allowed. 

2. 	
A small group home or halfway house accommodates up to 9 residents and is deemed to be a single-family residence and is allowed where single-family homes are allowed. 

3. 	
A large group home or halfway house accommodates 10-16 residents and is deemed to be a multi-family residence and is allowed where multi-family residences are allowed. (Zoning) 


GROWING SEASON – The period of consecutive frost-free days as stated in the current soil survey for this county published by the National Cooperative Soil Survey Program, 16 U.S.C. §590 (a) through (f). 
(Forest Conservation) 
HEALTH DEPARTMENT – The Washington County Health Department, Environmental Services Division. (Subdivision and Land Development) HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL AREAS – Areas zoned for densities greater than one dwelling unit per acre, including both existing and planned development and their associated infrastructure, such as roads, utilities, and water and sewer service. In the City of Hagerstown, residential development in the RMOD, RMED, RH, RO, CC-MU, N-MU Districts and the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay, qualifies as high density residential areas. (Forest Conservation) 
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE – The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed foundation of a structure. (Floodplain) 
HOME WORKSTATION – A customary and incidental accessory use of a dwelling consisting of an office or workstation used for business or employment purposes within a dwelling or accessory structure where that dwelling is permitted by right, special exception or bona fide nonconforming use, used by a resident living in the dwelling unit, subject to the provisions of Article 4, Subsection K.10. (Zoning) 
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION – A community association organized within a development in which individual owners share common interests, expenses, and responsibilities for the organization’s activities, such as maintenance, open space, landscaping, or facilities. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
HOOKAH LOUNGE – Any facility, establishment, or location whose business operation, whether as its primary use or as an accessory use, includes the smoking of tobacco or other substances through one or more hookah pipes (also commonly referred to as a hookah, waterpipe, shisha, or nareghile), including but not limited to establishments known variously as hookah bars, hookah lounges, or hookah cafes. (Zoning) 
HUMAN BURIAL SITE – Any land or structure used for the interment of human remains. The sprinkling of ashes or their burial in a biodegradable container or their placement in a columbarium, shall not constitute the creation of a human burial site. This term shall include the terms graveyard and burial grounds. (Zoning and Subdivision and Land Development) 
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS – Analyses performed by a licensed professional engineer, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) and FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles. (Floodplain) 
ILLUMINATION OR ILLUMINATED – A source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly from a source of light incorporated in, or indirectly from an artificial source, so shielded that no direct illumination from it is visible elsewhere than on and in the immediate vicinity of the street sign. (Zoning) 
ILLUMINATION, EXTERNAL – Illumination of a sign that is affected by an artificial source of light not contained within the sign itself. (Zoning) 
ILLUMINATION, FLASHING – Illumination in which the artificial source of light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when a street sign is illuminated, including illuminated lighting. Such illumination could consist of flashing bulb, LCD/LED electronic lighting or other artificial lighting source. (Zoning) 
ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL – A light source that is concealed or contained within the street sign and becomes visible in darkness through a translucent surface. (Zoning) 
ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT – A source of external illumination, located away from the sign that 
lights the sign, but which is itself not visible to persons viewing the sign from any street, sidewalk or 
adjacent property. (Zoning) 

ILLUMINATION, NEON TUBE – A source of light for externally lit street sign supplied by a neon tube 
that is bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes. (Zoning) 

INDOOR PLANT CULTIVATION AND PROCESSING FACILITY – Indoor cultivation of plants for 
wholesale distribution of plant and/or fruit, seeds, or flowers of the plant. This use may include 
refinement of plant materials into end products for human consumption or personal use, including canned, 
preserved or frozen fruits and vegetables, dried culinary and medicinal herbs, other medicinal products, 
essential and infused oils, spices, teas, dried flowers, potpourri, sauces and salsas, etc. This use shall not 
include refinement of plant materials with other manufactured components into lotions, creams, gels, or 
other cosmetic products. This use shall not include refinement of plant materials into industrial products, 
such as paper, textiles, rubber, etc. (Zoning) 

INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT AREA – Schools, colleges and universities, military installations, 
transportation facilities, utility and sewer projects, government offices and facilities, golf courses, 
recreation areas, parks, and cemeteries. (Forest Conservation) 

JURISDICTION – The geographical area within which the powers of the City of Hagerstown may be 
exercised. (Subdivision and Land Development) 

JUNKYARD – A parcel of land on which waste materials, such as metals, glass, paper, plastics, rags and 
rubber tires, also including discarded or inoperable motor vehicles, are collected, stored, processed, 
sorted, salvaged or sold. A lot on which three or more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be deemed a 
junkyard. This does not include hazardous waste materials or spent nuclear fuels. (Zoning) 

KENNEL – Any building or structure and/or land used, designed, or arranged for housing or boarding of 
more than five adult dogs, over the age of four months, including household pets. Kennels shall not be 
used for breeding operations that result in the housing of puppies on the premises. (Zoning) 

LANDMARK – Any site or structure on publicly or privately owned land outside of the historic districts 
designated by the Mayor and City Council for its exceptional individual historical, archaeological or 
architectural significance, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration and preservation, and any alteration 
shall be reviewed in the same manner by the Historic District Commission as a site or structure within the 
historic district. (Zoning -Historic) 

LANDSCAPING – The installation and maintenance, usually of a combination of trees, shrubs, plant 
materials, or other ground cover, including grass, mulch, decorative stone and similar materials, but 
excluding bare soil, uncultivated vegetation, impervious pavement materials, and gravel. (Subdivision and 
Land Development -Landscaping) 


LANDSCAPING PLAN FOR FOREST CONSERVATION – A plan: (Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
Drawn to scale, showing dimensions and details for reforesting an area at least 35 feet wide and covering 2,500 square feet or greater in size; 

2. 	
Using native or indigenous plants when appropriate; and 

3. 	
Which is made part of an approved forest conservation plan. 


LARGE ANIMAL VETERINARY CLINIC – A veterinary clinic or hospital that is equipped and staffed to treat animals that include large species such as horses and cattle. (Zoning) 
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC) – A Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
1. 	
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 

2. 	
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community’s floodplain management regulations. 

3. 	
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A Conditional Letter of Map Revision on Fill (CLOMR-F) is a determination that a parcel of land or proposed structure that will be elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood if fill is placed on the parcel as proposed or the structure is built as proposed. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA, to revise the effective FIRM. (Floodplain) 


LICENSED – As used in these regulations, licensed refers to professionals who are authorized to practice in the state of Maryland by issuance of licenses by the Maryland Board of Architects, Maryland Board of Professional Engineers, Maryland Board of Professional Land Surveyors, and the Maryland Real Estate Appraisers and Home Inspectors Commission. (Floodplain) 
LINEAR PROJECT – A project which: (Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
Is elongated with nearly parallel sides; 

2. 	
Is used to transport a utility product or public service not otherwise contained in an application for subdivision, such as electricity, gas, water, sewer, communications, trains, and vehicles; and 

3. 	
May traverse fee simple properties through defined boundaries, or established easement rights. 


LIVESTOCK – Animals typically grown for the purpose of production of animal byproducts (e.g., eggs, milk, meat, wool, leather, etc.) for household consumption or sale or grown for purposes of labor for the owner (e.g., transportation, plowing, etc.). For the purposes of this provision, livestock does not include animals typically owned as pets (e.g. cats, dogs, goldfish, etc.) or for service to people with disabilities (e.g., “seeing eye” dogs). All hoofed animals and fowl (chickens, turkeys, etc.) shall be considered livestock. The keeping of more than five adult rabbits and/or similar animals for any purpose (including household pets) outside of a dwelling shall be considered livestock. The keeping of livestock is only permitted in the AT district as part of a permissible land use. (See Article 4, Subsection K.11). (Zoning) 
LOCAL AGENCY – Each unit in the executive, legislative or judicial branch of a county or municipal government, including an office or department of public works. (Forest Conservation) 
LOOP LANE – Cul-de-sac design in which a broad median planted with shade trees runs the entire length of the street, bounded by travel lanes on both sides (typically one way). (Subdivision and Land Development) 

LOT – 
1. 	
A parcel of land either vacant or occupied by one principal building structure, or use and its accessory buildings, uses or structures, or a group of principal buildings as allowed by Article 4 and including open spaces and landscaped areas as required. (Subdivision and Land Development) 

2. 	
For the purposes of Article 7, a unit of land, the boundaries of which have been established as a result of a deed or previous subdivision of a larger parcel, and which will not be the subject of further subdivision without an approved forest stand delineation and forest conservation plan. (Forest Conservation) 


LOT AREA – The total area in square feet circumscribed by the lot lines of a lot, except that when the legal instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot extending into a public street right-of-way, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the street right-of-way line. 
(Subdivision and Land Development.) 
LOT, CORNER – A lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection, where the interior angle of the intersection does not exceed 135 degrees. (Zoning) 
LOT FRONTAGE – The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as required herein, except that not more than one rear yard shall be required. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
LOT, INTERIOR – An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
LOT LINE, REAR – A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, and in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line 10 feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
LOT LINE, SIDE -Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
LOT LINE, ZERO -The location of a building on a lot such that one of the building’s sides rests directly on a lot line, but not attached to another building along that lot line. (Zoning) 
LOT LINES -The lines bounding a lot. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
LOT MEASUREMENTS -(Subdivision and Land Development and Zoning) 
1. 	
Depth is the average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line. 

2. 	
Width shall mean the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the midpoint of the side lot lines. 


LOT, NONCONFORMING -See nonconforming lot. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
LOT OF RECORD -A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the Office of the Land Records of Washington County, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE -A lot where the rear yard fronts on a City street and where there is typically no access. (Subdivision and Land Development -Landscaping) 
LOT, THROUGH -A lot having its front and rear lot lines abutting street right-of-way. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
LOWEST FLOOR -The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a building or structure. The floor of an enclosure below the lowest floor is not the lowest floor provided the enclosure is constructed in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of this Chapter. The lowest floor of a manufactured home is the bottom of the lowest horizontal supporting member (longitudinal chassis frame beam). (Floodplain) 
MAIN STREET DESIGN SHOPPING CENTER -A shopping center designed so that stores are arranged facing a center drive aisle which may be lined with parking and streetscape features, with the majority of parking found behind the buildings. Destination retail use stores may be found at the end of the driveway or located as part of the streetscape. (Zoning) 
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT – The short-term management agreement associated with afforestation or reforestation plans required under Article 7, Sections D and E of this Chapter. (Forest Conservation) 
MAJOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITY – A proposal for new construction in the Downtown Historic District that involves the demolition of a contributing resource to accommodate development that is a significant pedestrian traffic generator. This traffic could be generated via the creation of a significant number of employment positions, entertainment and tourism visitors, and/or residential units in a mixed-use building. Existing and proposed residential units shall meet or be improved to meet the City’s Partners in Economic Progress (PEP) program standards which are designed to implement Comprehensive Plan goals for the revitalization of the downtown area and diversification of the income levels of downtown residents. Standards required for residential units include: 
1. 	
Central HVAC system; 

2. 	
Washer, dryer and dishwasher; 

3. 	
Wood veneer or solid wood kitchen and bathroom cabinets; 

4. 	
Approved solid surface counter tops in kitchen and bathrooms; 

5. 	
Refinished or new hardwood floors or wall-to-wall carpeting in areas other than kitchens and bathrooms; and 

6. 	
Where possible, outdoor amenities (e.g., balconies, roof top decks, back porches, sunrooms, etc.). (Zoning -Historic). 


MANUFACTURING, GENERAL – Manufacturing processes that create finished and semi-finished products from already manufactured components and materials or from raw materials which do not need refining, including assembly of finished components, refinement of semi-finished materials or components into finished products, production of parts to be assembled into finished products, production of items through biological processes, and production of items requiring the mixing of chemicals. General manufacturing activities have the potential of creating moderate noise, odors, smoke, dust, vibration or other environmental impacts. (Zoning) 
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY – Manufacturing processes that process or refine raw materials, including milling of grains, milling and preserving wood, milling of thread and cloth, production of masonry products, production of chemicals, soaps, detergents and ink, conversion of solid waste into useful products and preparation of solid waste for disposal at another location by changing its physical form or chemical composition. For the purpose of this Chapter, heavy manufacturing shall not include paper mills, smelting plants, asphalt plants, animal slaughterhouses, tanneries and steel mills. Heavy manufacturing activities have potential for creating moderate to substantial noise, odors, smoke, dust, vibration or other environmental impacts. (Zoning) 
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT – Manufacturing processes that create finished products from already manufactured components and materials or from raw materials which do not need refining, including assembly of finished components and refinement of semi-finished materials or components into finished products. All activities related to this use are conducted entirely indoors, including storage of materials. Light manufacturing activities have little or no potential for creating noise, smoke, odors, dust, vibration or other environmental impacts. (Zoning) 
MARKET VALUE – The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. For the purposes of Article 6, the market value of a building is determined by a licensed real estate appraiser or the most recent, full phased-in assessment value of the building (improvement) determined by the Maryland Department of Assessments and Taxation. (Floodplain) 
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT (MDE) – A principal department of the state of Maryland that is charged with, among other responsibilities, the coordination of the National Flood Insurance Program in Maryland (NFIP State Coordinator) and the administration of regulatory programs for development and construction that occur within the waters of the state, including non-tidal wetlands, non-tidal waters and floodplains, and state and private tidal wetlands (Tidal Wetlands). Unless otherwise specified, “MDE” refers to the Department’s Wetlands and Waterways Program. (Floodplain) 
MASTER PLANNED PROJECT – In the Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts, a master planned project shall include multiple buildings and/or properties. A sketch plan must be submitted which is filed jointly by all owners of the property or properties included in the master planned project. (Zoning) 
MINI WAREHOUSES – A structure containing separate cubicles which are rented to the public for storage purposes. (Zoning) 
MINOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT – A project on less than five acres of land containing not more than four lots per acre. (Forest Conservation) MIXED USE BUILDING – A building that contains at least one floor devoted to permitted non­residential uses and at least one developed to allowed residential uses. (Zoning) 
MIXED USE STRUCTURE – An structure that is used or intended for use for a mixture of nonresidential and residential uses in the same structure. (Floodplain) 
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT – A single, relatively high-density development project, usually commercial in nature which includes two or more types of uses. (Forest Conservation) 
MOBILE HOME PARK – Any area or tract of land designed for the parking or other type of installation of mobile homes on spaces or lots offered for lease or rent, including all improvements, buildings, structures, recreation areas, or other facilities for the use of the residents of such development, for non-transient use. (Zoning) 
MULTI-USE BUILDING – A building consisting of two or more separate commercial uses. 
(Zoning) 
MULTI-BUILDING COMPLEX – A grouping of two or more business establishments that either share common parking on the lot where they are located, or that occupy a single structure or separate structures that are physically or functionally related or attached. (Zoning) 
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP) – The program authorized by the United States Congress in 42 U.S.C, Sections 4001-4129. The NFIP makes flood insurance coverage available in communities that agree to adopt and enforce minimum regulatory requirements for development in areas prone to flooding (see definition of “Special Flood Hazard Area”). (Floodplain) 
NATURAL REGENERATION – The natural establishment of trees and other vegetation with at least 400 woody, free-to-grow seedlings per acre, which are capable of reaching a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. (Forest Conservation) 
NET FLOOR AREA – That portion of any building, improvements, or use of land which is included in rental areas or normally used as a part of the quarters of any owner or tenant of such premises. Areas commonly excluded in the calculation of Net Floor Area may include entry halls or foyers; elevator shafts; stairways; janitor, electrical, or maintenance rooms; public restrooms, etc. Common areas open to the public shall be included in the calculation of parking space requirements. (Zoning) 
NET TRACT AREA –(Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
Except in agriculture and resource areas or as modified by the Express Procedures in Article 7, Section E, the total area of a site, including both forested and non-forested areas, to the nearest one-tenth acre; 

2. 	
In agriculture and resource areas, the part of the total tract for which land use will be changed or will no longer be used for primarily agricultural activities; and 

3. 	
For a linear project, the area of a right-of-way width, new access roads and storage; or the limits of disturbance as shown on an application for sediment and erosion control approval or in a capital improvements program project description. 



NEW CONSTRUCTION – 
1. 	
As pertains to Article 4, the erection, alteration, repair or renovation of any building or structure requiring a footing and/or foundation or change to the exterior dimensions and the excavation, filling and grading of lots in connection therewith. (Zoning) 

2. 	
As pertains to Article 6, structures, including additions and improvements, and the placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced on or after April 17, 1978, the initial effective date of the City of Hagerstown Flood Insurance Rate Map, including any subsequent improvements, alterations, modifications, and additions to such structures. (Floodplain) 


NFIP STATE COORDINATOR – See Maryland Department of the Environment. (Floodplain) 
NIGHTCLUB – An establishment operated as a place of entertainment, characterized by any or all of the following as a principal use: (1) live, recorded or televised entertainment, including but not limited to performance by magicians, musicians or comedians; (2) dancing. This use shall not be interpreted to include uses regulated in Article 4 as Adult Entertainment Uses. (Zoning) 
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, LOT, PARCEL OR TRACT OF LAND – A structure or lot that does not conform to a dimensional, lot area or density regulation prescribed by Article 4 for the district in which it is located or off-street parking, off-street loading or accessory buildings, but which structure or lot was in existence at the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance. (Zoning) 
NONCONFORMING USE – A use of a building or lot that does not conform to use regulations prescribed by Article 4 for the district in which it is located but which was lawfully in existence at the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance. (Zoning) 
NONCOMPLIANT STRUCTURE – A building or structure that does not conform to bulk regulations found in Article 4 of this Chapter, including but not limited to setback and height requirements, but which was lawfully in existence at the effective date of this Chapter, or a subsequent amendment to this Chapter that rendered the structure noncompliant. (Zoning) 
NON-TIDAL WATERS OF THE STATE – As used in Article 6, any stream or body of water within the State that is subject to State regulation, including the “100 year frequency floodplain of free-flowing waters.” Per COMAR 26.17.04, the landward boundaries of any tidal waters shall be deemed coterminous with the wetlands boundary maps adopted pursuant to Environment Article, Section 16-301, Annotated Code of Maryland. Therefore, the boundary between the tidal and non-tidal waters of the State is the tidal wetlands boundary. (Floodplain) 

OFFICES FOR BONDING OF DEFENDANTS IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM – 
Establishments involved in all or a portion of the bond origination and enforcement process that: (1) gain release of criminal defendants from jail by pledging money or property as a guarantee that the defendant will appear in court; and/or (2) seek and recover bonded defendants who attempt to avoid court appearance. (Zoning) 
OFFICES FOR PAROLING AND THE PROBATION OF DEFENDANTS IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM – Establishments involved in the supervision of criminal defendants and convicts who have been released from confinement or granted an alternative to confinement, but are still under court supervision for a period of time. Such establishments may also be involved in the apprehension of defendants and convicts who violate the terms of their release or probation. (Zoning) 
OFFSITE – Outside of the limits of the area encompassed by the tract. (Forest Conservation) 
ONSITE -Within the limits of the area encompassed by the tract, including an area classified as a 100­year floodplain. (Forest Conservation) 
OPEN SPACE – That portion of a tract that is set aside during development for the protection of sensitive natural areas, farmland, scenic views, unique features; or the creation of active, improved recreational areas; or passive, unimproved natural areas. The land is not individually owned. It is understood that this term is broad and can include land that is accessible to the residents of the development and/or the community, or it may contain areas of conservancy lots that are not accessible to the public. Paved areas other than recreational courts and paths, and stormwater management facilities that are not designed as natural features shall not constitute open space. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE – Work that does not alter the exterior features of a site or structure and has no material effect on the historical, archaeological, or architectural significance of the site or structure. This includes repair or replacement in-kind of roofs, gutters, siding, trim, external doors and windows, awnings, porch floors and ceilings, lights, fences, and other appurtenance fixtures with like materials of like design; landscaping; paving repair using like materials of like design; and repainting of surfaces. (Zoning -Historic) 
OUTPATIENT SUBSTANCE ABUSE CENTER, INCLUDING DISBURSEMENT OF ADDICTION TREATMENT DRUGS – An outpatient medical office for counselling and treatment of substance abuse, which may include disbursement of addiction treatment drugs. (Zoning) 
PAD SITE – An outparcel in a subdivision of land in a commercial district, intended for use of a freestanding building on a fee simple lot, however, developed as part of a larger, multi-structure commercial development. (Zoning) 
PANHANDLE LOT – An irregularly shaped lot where the buildable portion of the lot is connected to its street frontage by an arm of the lot, designed to be utilized as a means of ingress and egress that does not meet the minimum lot width and street frontage standards specified for the zoning district in which the lot is located. This portion of the lot designed as an area of access shall not be calculated into the lot area requirements. Also referred to as a Flag Lot or a Pipestem Lot. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
PARCEL – For the purposes of Article 7, a parcel is an area of land that legally existed as a distinct entity in a deed or on an approved subdivision plat on or before the date of adoption of Article 7 and will not be the subject of further subdivision without an approved forest stand delineation and forest conservation plan. The term, parcel, may be used interchangeably with lot or tract. (Forest Conservation) 
PARKING LOT – An area, not within a building, outside any street right-of-way, where motor vehicles may be stored for the purposes of temporary, daily, or overnight off-street parking. (Subdivision and Land Development -Landscaping) PARKING LOT AISLES – That portion of the parking lot consisting of lanes providing access from a street to or through off-street spaces and/or loading areas. (Subdivision and Land Development ­Landscaping) 
PARKING, PRIVATE – A designated off-street parking area for the exclusive use of the owners or their customers, tenants, lessees, employees, or occupants of the lot on which the parking area is located. 
(Zoning) 
PARKING, PUBLIC – A designated off-street parking area which is available to the general public, whether for free or payment of a fee. Ownership may be a public or private entity. (Zoning) 
PARKING ROW – One line of vehicle spaces, or two parallel lines of adjoining vehicle spaces, adjacent to and served by at least one parking lot aisle. (Subdivision and Land Development -Landscaping) 
PARKING VEHICLE SPACE – That portion of the parking lot designated for the parking of one vehicle. (Subdivision and Land Development -Landscaping) 
PERFORMANCE SECURITY – Any security which may be accepted by the City of Hagerstown in lieu of a requirement that improvements be made before the Planning Commission approves a plat, including, but not limited to performance bonds, surety agreement, escrow agreements, irrevocable letter of credit, or any other similar collateral or surety agreements, with surety to be approved by the City Engineer and/or the Utilities Director. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
PERSON – As pertains to Article 6, an individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including State and local governments and agencies. (Floodplain) 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT – A development comprised of a combination of land uses or varying intensities of the same land use in accordance with an integrated plan that provides flexibility in land use design approved by the City of Hagerstown with at least 20% of the land permanently dedicated to open space. (Forest Conservation) 
PLAT, FINAL – The final map or plan which legally describes the subdivision of land (including the creation of a condominium regime in accordance with the requirements of the Annotated Code of Maryland), containing a detailed plan of the property, giving all dimensions, angles and bearings, together with such information, statements and certificates as required by these Regulations, and presented to the Commission for approval, and which if approved will be submitted to the Clerk of Circuit Court for recording among the Land Records of Washington County. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
PLAT, SIMPLIFIED – The creation of a subdivision as defined herein not for development purposes. 
(Subdivision and Land Development) 
PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION – A procedure for the presentation of a proposed subdivision to the Planning Commission for informal review prior to formal application and preparation of a Development Plan. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
PRESERVATION – The maintenance of a site or structure in its present condition or as originally constructed. Preservation aims at halting further deterioration and providing structural safety, but does not contemplate significant rebuilding. Preservation includes techniques of arresting or slowing deterioration; improvement of structural conditions to make a structure safe, habitable, or otherwise useful; normal maintenance and minor repairs that do not change or adversely affect the fabric or appearance of a structure. (Zoning -Historic) 
PRESERVATION RESERVE – A site or structure that is retained or set aside until a future time when proper research or financial feasibility allows for its rehabilitation, restoration and preservation. This mothballing or protective storage condition shall include: a plan; the stabilization of the structure; adequate protection from poachers and vandals; and all consideration to the health, safety and welfare of the neighboring community. The time limit for this Preservation Reserve status shall be 90 days, unless a mutually agreed upon time limit is set between the owner and the Historic District Commission. (Zoning ­Historic) 
PRIORITY FUNDING AREA – An area designated as a Priority Funding Area under Article 5-7B-02 of the state Finance and Procurement Article. (Forest Conservation) 
PROFESSIONAL AND WORKMAN LIKE MANNER – The quality of work performed by a person who has the knowledge, training, or experience necessary for the successful practice of a trade or occupation and performed in a manner generally considered proficient by those capable of judging such work. (Zoning) 
PROJECT PLAN – A construction, grading, or sediment control activity on an area of 40,000 square feet or greater. (Forest Conservation) 
PUBLIC UTILITY – For the purposes of Article 7, any: (Forest Conservation) 
1. 
transmission line or electric generating station; or 

2. 
Water, sewer, electric, gas, telephone, and television cable service line. 


PUBLIC WAYS CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS & ENGINEERING GUIDELINES – The formally adopted document of construction standard details, templates, and guidelines that governs development of public rights-of-way and construction within the City of Hagerstown. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
RECONSTRUCTION – The process of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a vanished structure, or part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time. “Reconstruction” should be undertaken only when the structure to be reconstructed is essential for understanding and interpreting the value of an entire site or district and sufficient documentation exists to ensure an exact reproduction of the original. (Zoning -Historic) 
RECREATION AREA – An area requiring some constructed facilities and/or organized activities. Active recreational areas may include facilities such as swimming pools, play equipment, ball fields, court games, and picnic tables. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – A vehicle that is built on a single chassis which is 400 square feet or less at the longest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as for temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. (Floodplain) RECYCLING – An operation conducted entirely indoors which accepts recyclable materials and processes or sorts these materials for distribution back into an off-site re-manufacturing operation. This does not include operations which undertake curbside collection of recyclable materials nor the storage of a fleet of vehicles for such operations. (Zoning) 
REDEVELOPMENT – Any construction, alteration, or improvement exceeding 2,500 square feet of land disturbance performed on sites where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential, including the demolition and reconstruction of a building or a portion of a building. (Subdivision and Land Development -Landscaping) 
REFORESTATION – (Forest Conservation) 
1. 	"Reforestation" or "reforested" means the: 
a. 	
creation of a forest within seven years; or 

b. 	
establishment of a forest according to procedures set forth in the Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 


2. 	
“Reforestation” or “reforested” includes landscaping of areas under an approved landscaping plan establishing a forest at least 35 feet wide and covering 2,500 square feet or more of area. 

3. 	
“Reforestation” or “reforested” for a linear project which involves overhead transmission lines may consist of a biological community dominated by trees and woody shrubs with no minimum height or diameter criteria. 


REGULATED ACTIVITY – Any of the following activities, when that activity occurs on a unit of land which is 40,000 square feet or greater: (Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
Subdivision; 

2. 	
Grading; 

3. 	
An activity that requires a sediment control permit; 

4. 	
An activity that requires a site plan; 

5. 	
Project plan of a local agency; or 

6. 	
Development project. 


REHABILITIATION CENTER – an in-patient rehabilitation center with specialized therapeutic programs to assist patients achieve the necessary functional independence to return home, usually following an acute medical or surgical hospitalization, including detox for substance addiction. (Zoning) 
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS – Improvements shall mean storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewerage facilities, water supply facilities, streets, curbs, street lights, street signs, gutters, gas lines, electricity lines, walks and/or other accessory works and appurtenances. (Subdivision and Land Development) RESTORATION – The process of accurately recovering the form and details of a site or structure as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of removal of later work and the replacement of missing original work. (Zoning -Historic) 
RETENTION – The deliberate holding and protecting of existing trees, shrubs or plants on the site according to established standards as provided in the City of Hagerstown Forest Conservation Technical Manual. (Forest Conservation) 
RIGHT-OF-WAY – An area of land dedicated for use as a public way, typically for pedestrian and vehicular movement. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting, and drainage features. It may include special features required by topography or treatment such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts, and bridges. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
ROOMING HOUSE – a facility with sleeping rooms to rent which contains shared bathroom and kitchen facilities in common areas of the facility for use of the residents. (Zoning) 
SAFETY SERVICES – Safety services shall include such services as police, fire, and rescue operations. 
(Zoning) 
SATELLITE SIMULCAST BETTING FACILITY -A facility owned or leased by a person with a permit granted by the State Racing Commission to conduct satellite simulcast betting, as that term is defined in Maryland Business Regulation Code Ann §11-815, as amended from time to time, and which conforms to all requirements of Maryland Business Regulation Code Ann §11-815, et seq., as amended from time to time. (Zoning) 
SECURITY – Valuable consideration pledged or deposited for the purpose of assuring performance of the obligations imposed under this and other City policies in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, including an irrevocable letter of credit, performance bond, or certified check. Sureties must be of AM Best Rating, listed as US Treasury approved, licensed and certified to conduct business in the State of Maryland. The City may also require the surety to produce A Summary Balance Sheet prior to acceptance of a bond. Letters of Credit shall be drawn on a Maryland bank branch and subject to automatic renewal. Performance bonds shall also be subject to automatic renewal. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
SEDIMENT CONTROL – The activity regulated under an approved sediment control plan pursuant to Chapter 209 (Sediment Control) of the City Code. (Forest Conservation) 
SEEDLINGS – An unbranched woody plant, less than 24 inches in height and having a diameter of less than one-half inch measured at two inches above the root collar. (Forest Conservation) 
SELECTIVE CLEARING – The careful and planned removal of trees, shrubs, and plants using specific standards and protection measures under an approved forest conservation plan. (Forest Conservation) 
SETBACK – The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line, as defined herein, and the related front, side or rear property line. (Zoning) 
SEWER CAPACITY ALLOCATION PROGRAM – A Capacity Allocation Plan to provide for the management of existing and future wastewater commitments of the Hagerstown Wastewater Treatment Plant, as adopted by the City, and as may be amended from time to time. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
SHRUB – A woody, branching plant of relatively low height, which are of a species which can be expected to reach a maximum height of 36 inches and a minimum spread of 30 inches within three years of planting. (Subdivision and Land Development -Landscaping) 
SIGN – Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof, or any device attached, painted or represented directly or indirectly on a structure or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word, insignia, flag or representation used as, or which is the nature of, an advertisement, announcement, visual communication, direction or is designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention of the public. Flags of any governmental unit or branch are excluded. (Zoning) 
SIGN, ANIMATION OR ANIMATED – The movement or the optical illusion of movement of any part of the street sign structure, design, or pictorial segment, including the movement of any illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity; the automatic changing of all or any part of the facing of a street sign. (Zoning) 
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY – Copy that changes at intervals including through the use of LCD, LED or other electronic technology. (Zoning) 
SIGN, GROUND – A street sign supported by one or more uprights, posts, or bases placed upon or affixed in the ground and not attached to any part of a building. It includes a pole sign and a monument sign. (Zoning) 
SIGN, MONUMENT – A ground sign permanently affixed to the ground at its base, supported entirely by a base structure, and not mounted on a pole. (Zoning) 
SIGN, PORTABLE – A street sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building or not designed to be permanently attached to the ground or a building. (Zoning) 
SIGN, PROJECTING – Any sign attached to a building or structure that is not oriented parallel to the building frontage or structure. Marquees, awnings, canopies, banners, and freestanding signs are not considered projecting signs. (Zoning) 
SIGN, ROOF – A sign painted, erected, constructed, or maintained on the roof of a building. (Zoning) 
SIGN, TEMPORARY – A sign, banner, pennant, poster, or advertising display constructed of cloth, plastic or vinyl sheet, cardboard, wallboard or other like materials that, by its design or use, is temporary in nature and not permanently attached to a building or the ground. (Zoning) 
SIGN, WALL – A sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a building or dependent upon a building for support, with the exposed face of the sign located in a place substantially parallel to the exterior building wall to which the sign is attached or which supports the sign. (Zoning) 
SIGN, WINDOW – A sign established on the exterior or interior of a window or within 12 inches of a window pane intended to be viewed from outside of the building, or any illuminated sign within a building intended to be viewed from outside. Merchandise displays located in a window are not considered a window sign. (Zoning) SITE – The location of an event of historical significance or a structure, whether standing or ruined, which possesses historical, archaeological, or cultural significance. (Zoning -Historic) 
SITE PLAN – A plan of development required pursuant to Article 4, Subsection S.2, of this Chapter. 
(Zoning, Subdivision and Land Development, and Forest Conservation) 
SITE(S), HISTORIC – One or more parcels, structures, or buildings that are either: designated as an Historic Landmark, included within a Historic District, included on the County Register of Historic Properties, or designated on the National Register of Historic Places. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
SKETCH PLAN – A preliminary sketch plan of the proposed subdivision showing the developer’s desires in regard to the future development of land for informal consideration by the Commission at the Preliminary Consultation. (Zoning and Subdivision and Land Development) 
SMART GROWTH ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT – An area designated by the state of Maryland within a jurisdiction intended to promote economic development through the promotion and attraction of businesses and organizations focused on the arts and entertainment industries. (Zoning) 
SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEM – A panel or other solar energy device, the primary purpose of which is to provide for the collection, inversion, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating. (Zoning) 
SPECIAL EXCEPTION – A grant of a specific use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction and shall be based upon a finding that certain conditions governing special exceptions as detailed in Article 4 exist, that the use conforms to the plan and is compatible with the existing neighborhood. (Zoning) 
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) – The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by FEMA in Flood Insurance Studies and on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30 and A99. The term includes areas shown on other flood maps that are identified in Article 6. (Floodplain) 

SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS – (Zoning) 
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a. 
Human genitals, pubic region; 

b. 
Buttock; and 

c. 
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 


2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES – (Zoning) 
1. 
Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 


2. 
Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 


3. 	
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 


SPECIMEN TREE – A particularly impressive or unusual example of a species due to its size, shape, age, or any other trait that epitomizes the character of the species (Subdivision and Land Development ­Landscaping) 
START OF CONSTRUCTION – As pertains to Article 6, the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets, and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For substantial improvements, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(Floodplain) 
STOREFRONT SPACE – Space for occupation in a commercial or mixed-use building which has display windows on the street. (Zoning) 
STORMWATER DETENTION STRUCTURE – A permanent structure for the temporary storage of runoff, which is designed so as not to create a permanent pool of water. (Zoning) 
STORMWATER RETENTION STRUCTURE – A permanent structure that provides for the storage of runoff by means of a permanent pool of water. (Zoning) 
STREAM BUFFER – All lands lying within 50 feet, measured from the top of each normal bank of a perennial or intermittent stream. (Forest Conservation) 
STREAM, INTERMITTENT – A stream in which surface water is absent during a part of the year as shown on the most recent 7.5 minute topographic quadrangle published by the United States Geologic Survey as confirmed by field verification. (Forest Conservation) 
STREAM, PERENNIAL – A stream containing surface water throughout an average rainfall year, as shown on the most recent 7.5 minute topographic quadrangle published by the United States Geologic Survey, as confirmed by field verification. (Forest Conservation) 

STREAM RESTORATION PROJECT – An activity that: 
1. 	
Is designed to stabilize stream banks or enhance stream function or habitat located within an existing stream, waterway, or floodplain; 

2. 	
Avoids and minimizes impacts to forests and provides for replanting on-site an equivalent number of trees to the number removed by the project; 

3. 	
May be performed under a municipal separate storm sewer system permit, a watershed implementation plan growth offset, or another plan administered by the state or local government to achieve or maintain water quality standards; and 

4. 	
Is not performed to satisfy stormwater management, wetlands mitigation, or any other regulatory requirement associated with proposed development activity. (Forest Conservation) 


STREET AND/OR ROAD – A public right-of-way or thoroughfare, intended for vehicular traffic, accepted and approved by official action of the appropriate authority. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS – Functional classifications are defined in Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines, published by the City of Hagerstown Engineering Division. This document is to be utilized for the purpose of providing for the development of the streets, highways, roads and rights-of-way in the City, and for the future improvement, reconstruction, realignment, and necessary widening, including provision for curbs and sidewalks. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
STREET, PRIVATE – A street privately owned and maintained that is used as the principal means of access to abutting lot or lots or more than two dwellings on a lot which a private way is exclusively located. The driveway network within a commercial development (including those traversing multiple properties with shared access and maintenance responsibilities), driveways through parking lots and driveways through multiple family dwelling developments shall not be considered a private street. 
(Zoning and Floodplain) 
STREET TREE – A tree located between the curb and sidewalk in the public right-of-way or a tree located in a tree well within the sidewalk in the public right-of-way or a tree located within the street yard. (Subdivision and Land Development -Landscaping) 
STREET YARD – The area of land along the front property line parallel to a right-of-way reserved for tree planting and landscaping. Also referred to as a tree planting easement. (Subdivision and Land Development -Landscaping) 

STRUCTURE – 
1. 	
As pertains to all but Article 6, a combination of material to form a construction that is stable, including among other things, buildings, tanks and towers, trestles, piers, bridges, bulkheads, loading docks, smokestacks, cranes, booms, sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences, walls and display signs visible or intended to be visible from a public way; the term “structure” shall be construed as if followed by the words, “or part thereof.” Structures shall comply with building setbacks as required by the various provisions of Article 4. (Zoning) 

2. 	
As pertains to Article 6, that which is built or constructed; specifically, a walled or roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. (Floodplain) 


STRUCTURE, HISTORIC – As pertains to Article 6, any structure that is: 
1. 	
Individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listings on the National Register; 

2. 	
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 

3. 	
Individually listed on the Maryland Register of Historic Places; or 

4. 	
Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained by the City of Hagerstown whose historic preservation program has been certified by the Maryland Historical Trust or the Secretary of the Interior. (Floodplain) 


STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY – For the purposes of Article 6, a structure installed, used, or erected for a period of less than 180 days. (Floodplain) 

SUBDIVISION – 
1. 	
The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into lots, plats, sites, condominium units or spaces, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of re-subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. (Subdivision and Land Development) 

2. 	
For the purposes of Article 7, any division of a unit of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, sale, lease, or development pursuant to the City of Hagerstown Subdivision Regulations. (Forest Conservation) 


SUBDIVISION, MINOR – The division of a residential parcel that has not been part of a previously recorded subdivision, into seven or fewer residential lots, fronting on an existing, approved public road and not requiring any new public or private access, nor the extension of a public wastewater or water line, nor requiring a waiver or variance from any requirement of this Chapter. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
SUBDIVISION PROCESS – The process whereby a proposed subdivision is officially approved and thereby recorded. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE – As pertains to Article 6, damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. Also used as “substantially damaged” structures. (Floodplain) 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT – As pertains to Article 6, any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which exceeds 50% percent of the market value of the building or structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1. 	
A project for improvement of a building or structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official prior to the submission of an application for a permit and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or 

2. 	
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure. (Floodplain) 


SUBSTANTIALLY REHABILITATED – For the purposes of Article 4, the alteration or repair of an existing structure, the cost of which exceeds two times the full cash value of the structure as determined by the State of Maryland Tax Assessor. The entire structure so rehabilitated must satisfy the requirements of all applicable local codes, including but not limited to the Plumbing, Electrical, Housing, Fire and Property Maintenance Codes. (Zoning) 
TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (WCF) – A WCF which is to be placed in use for a limited period of time, is not deployed in a permanent manner, and does not have a permanent foundation. (Zoning-Wireless) 
TERMINAL VISTA – The building or landscape element that is visible at the end of a street, or along the outside edge of a curve. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
THEATER MARQUEE – A canopy structure projecting over the entrance to a theater that contains signs to identify the name of the theater and may include a changeable message area to promote upcoming on-site events. (Zoning) 
TIMBER HARVESTING – (Forest Conservation) 
1. 	
“Timber harvesting” means a tree cutting operation affecting one or more acres of forest or developed woodland within a one-year interval that disturbs 5,000 square feet or more of forest floor. 

2. 	
“Timber harvesting” does not include grubbing and clearing of root mass. 


TRACT – Property or unit of land subject to an application for a grading or sediment control permit, subdivision approval, project plan approval, or areas subject to a regulated activity. (Forest Conservation) 
TRACT FOR A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT – The entire property subject to a planned unit development. (Forest Conservation) 
TRANSPORTATION PLAN – The plan for streets and highways included in the transportation plan element of the City’s officially adopted Comprehensive Plan. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
TREE – A large, branched woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks that reach a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. (Forest Conservation) 
TREE, CANOPY (SHADE) – A species of tree which normally grows to a mature height of 40 feet or more with a minimum of mature crown width of 30 feet. Such trees shall be at least 1.75 inches to 2.5 inches in diameter, measured at five feet, when planted. (Subdivision and Land Development ­Landscaping) TREE, CHAMPION – The largest tree of its species within the United States, the state, county, or municipality. (Forest Conservation) 
TREE, CHAMPION OF THE STATE – A tree designated by the Department of Natural Resources to be a state champion tree. (Forest Conservation) 
UNDERSTORY TREE – A species of tree which normally grows to a mature height of 15 to 35 feet in height. Understory trees shall be a minimum of four feet high and one inch in caliper (measured six inches above grade) when planted. (Zoning -Landscaping) 
UNDUE FINANCIAL HARDSHIP – A condition, demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Historic District Commission, showing that the retention of a building, structure or feature in a historic district denies the property owner all reasonable use of a property, or the cost of necessary or required improvements outweigh the anticipated fair market value of a property after completion of repairs or rehabilitation. Undue financial hardship is not an analysis of the individual financial capacity of the owner or applicant to implement rehabilitation or improvements. (Zoning -Historic). 
USE – Any activity, occupation, business or operation conducted or intended to be conducted in a building or other structure or on a tract of land. (Zoning) 
UTILITIES – For the purposes of Articles 4 and 5, Municipal utilities of the City of Hagerstown and other private utilities. (Zoning and Subdivision and Land Development) 
VAPOR LOUNGE – Any facility, establishment, or location, whether fixed or mobile, whose business operation, whether as its primary use or as an ancillary use, includes the utilization of a heating element that vaporizes a substance that releases nicotine, tobacco, flavored vapor or other substances through one or more electronic or battery operated delivery devices, including any device known as an electronic cigarette (also commonly referred to as E-Cig, E-cigarette, E-pipe, Electronic cigarillo, hookah pen, E-hookah, vape pen, vape pipe or any other electronic cigarette product), including but not limited to establishments known variously as vape bars, vape lounges, e-cigarette bars, or vape cafes. (Zoning) 
VARIANCE, FLOODPLAIN – The grant of relief from the strict application of one or more requirements of Article 6 of this Chapter. (Floodplain) 
VARIANCE, FOREST CONSERVATION – Relief from Article 7 of this Chapter and does not mean a zoning variance. (Forest Conservation) 
VARIANCE, ZONING – A modification only of density, bulk or area requirements in Article 4 where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the results of any action taken by the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship or practical difficulties. (Zoning) 
VIOLATION – As pertains to Article 6, any construction or development in a special flood hazard area that is being performed without an issued permit. The failure of a building, structure, or other development for which a permit is issued to be fully compliant with these regulations and the conditions of the issued permit. A building, structure or other development without the required design certifications, the elevation certificate, or other evidence of compliance required is presumed to be a violation until such time as the required documentation is provided. (Floodplain) WALL – A constructed solid barrier of concrete, stone, brick, tile, wood, or similar type of material that restricts the flow of air and light for the purposes of providing a boundary, separating lots or enclosing space. (Zoning) 
WAREHOUSE – A building and/or open area that is used for the temporary storage of materials or merchandise in an organized manner before their export or distribution for sale, or for the long-term storage of personal property with no definite plans for the future disposition of that property. A warehouse shall not include the processing or sorting of recyclables, scrap, or rubbish for distribution back into the chain of re-manufacture, or the bulk storage of fuels or junked automobiles and their parts. 
(Zoning) 
WATERCOURSE – The channel, including channel banks and bed, of non-tidal waters of the State. 
(Floodplain) 
WATERS OF THE STATE – Waters of the state include: 
1. 	
Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of the state subject to its jurisdiction; 

2. 	
That portion of the Atlantic Ocean within the boundaries of the state; 

3. 	
The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries; 

4. 	
All ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems within the state, other than those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage; and 

5. 	
The floodplain of free-flowing waters determined by MDE on the basis of the 100-year flood frequency. (Floodplain) 


WATERSHED – All land lying within an area described as a sub-basin in water quality regulations adopted by the Department of the Environment under COMAR 26.08.02.08. (Forest Conservation) 
WETLANDS – As pertains to Article 5, those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. (Subdivision and Land Development) 
WETLANDS, NON-TIDAL – As pertains to Article 7 of this Chapter, 
1. 	An area that is: 
a. 	
Inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation; and 

b. 	
Considered a non-tidal wetland in accordance with the publication known as the “Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands,” published in 1989 and as may be amended and interpreted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 


2. 	“Non-tidal wetlands” does not include tidal wetlands regulated under Natural Resources Article, Title 9, Annotated Code of Maryland. (Forest Conservation) WHIP – An unbranched woody plant greater than 24 inches in height and having a diameter of less than one inch measured at two inches above the transition zone between stem and root at the ground line of a tree or seedling. (Forest Conservation) 
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-MOUNTED – An exterior, building-mounted, accessory device or devices and essential supporting structure to a permitted principal use specifically designed to convert kinetic wind energy to electric power and having a rated maximum output of no more than 15 kilowatts of electricity for direct consumption on the subject property or for connection to the electric power grid to offset the cost of electric service consumed on the subject property. (Zoning) 
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE – An exterior accessory device and essential supporting structure specifically designed to convert kinetic wind energy to electric power and having a rated maximum output of more than 15 kilowatts of electricity for direct consumption on the subject property or for connection to the electric power grid to offset the cost of electric service consumed on the subject property. (Zoning) 
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL – An exterior, ground-mounted, accessory device or devices and essential supporting structure to a permitted principal use specifically designed to convert kinetic wind energy to electric power and having a rated maximum output of not more than 15 kilowatts of electricity for direct consumption on the subject property or for connection to the electric power grid to offset the cost of electric service consumed on the subject property. Any wind energy system that exceeds these parameters shall be classified as a Large Wind Energy System. (Zoning) 
WINE PUB – A pub or restaurant that manufactures wine on the premises. (Zoning) 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS – Any personal wireless services as defined by the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 which includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. This does not include: (1) radio antennas operated by federally licensed amateur radio operators which are exempt from local zoning restrictions; (2) antennas and towers operated by safety services, such as police, fire, and rescue operations; or (3) essential utility equipment. 
(Zoning -Wireless) 
(MICRO) WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA ARRAY – An antenna array for the reception of wireless communications services, less than two meters in height and diameter, which is either ground-mounted or attached to an existing building or structure. (Zoning -Wireless) 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA ARRAY (ANTENNA ARRAY) – One or more whips, panels, discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals, which may include omni-directional antenna (whip), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (disc or dish). (Zoning -Wireless) 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (WCF) – Any unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless communications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, transmission cables, and equipment facility, and a support structure used to achieve the necessary elevation. (Zoning -Wireless) 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURE (SUPPORT STRUCTURE) – A structure designed and constructed specifically to support an antenna array, and may include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower, guy-wire support tower and other similar structures. Any device which is used to attach an attached WCF to an existing building or structure shall be excluded from the definition of and regulations applicable to support structures. (Zoning -Wireless) 
YARD SALE – All general sales open to the public, conducted by a resident from or on residential premises in any zoning district, as regulated in Article 4, Subsection K.7., for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including but not limited to all sales entitled “garage,” “lawn,” “yard,” “attic,” “porch,” “room,” “backyard,” “patio,” or “rummage” sale. A yard sale shall not include the sale of inventory purchased or acquired by the resident for the purpose of resale. (Zoning) 
YARD TYPES: (Note: For methods of calculation, please refer to Article 4, Subsection K.6 of this Chapter). (Zoning) 
1. 	
FRONT YARD – A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot. 

2. 	
REAR YARD – A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard lines. In the case of through lot and reversed frontage corner lots with normal frontage, the rear yard shall extend from the inner side yard line of the side yard adjacent to the interior lot to the rear line of the half-depth front yard. 

3. 	
SIDE YARD – A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line. 


ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT – A method of developing land where single-family detached dwellings are built on a side lot line. This form of development is not currently permitted by this Chapter, however, any such existing development in existence as of September 26, 2008, is a legal non-conforming use. (Zoning) 

Figure 8 – Left: Semi-Detached Dwelling Units Right: Zero Lot Line Dwelling Units 
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR – The administrative officer appointed by the City Council of Hagerstown to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. For the purposes of the administration of this Chapter, this definition shall include the Zoning Administrator’s staff or authorized representative acting on the Zoning Administrator’s behalf. (Zoning) 
ZONING MAP – The Zoning District Map of the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, and adjacent areas, adopted as part of the Zoning Ordinance, together with all amendments and revisions thereto subsequently adopted. (Zoning) ZONING ORDINANCE – The officially adopted Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map for the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, and all amendments thereto. [Editor’s Note: Article 4 of this Chapter] (Subdivision and Land Development) 
ZONING PERMIT – A written statement issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing buildings, structures or uses consistent with the terms of the Zoning Ordinance and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions. (Zoning) 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

ARTICLE 4 
Zoning Ordinance 

Table of Contents 
Section 	Page 
A. 	General Provisions 4 – 3 
B. 	AT (Agricultural Transition) Zoning District 4 – 9 
C. 	Reserved 4 – 11 
D. 	Residential Zoning Districts 4 – 13 
E. 	Mixed-Use Zoning Districts 4 – 25 
F. 	Commercial Zoning Districts 4 – 33 
G. 	Reserved 4 – 41 
H. 	Industrial Zoning Districts 4 – 43 
I. 	Signs 4–49 
J. 	Overlay Zoning Districts 4 – 57 
K. 	Supplementary Regulations 4 – 71 
L. 	Reserved 4 – 85 Maintenance, Expansion, Expiration, Confirmation and Change 
M. 	4–87 
of Nonconforming Uses 
N. 	Noncomplying Structures and Uses 4 – 93 
O. 	Off-Street Parking Requirements 4 – 95 
P. 	Reserved 4 – 99 
Q. 	Wireless Communications Facilities (WCF) 4 – 101 
R. 	Temporary Uses 4 – 107 
S. 	Zoning Permit and Site Plan Requirements 4 – 109 
T. 	Historic District Review 4 – 115 
U. 	Board of Zoning Appeals – Applications, Notice, Powers and Duties 4 – 123 
V. –Y. 	Reserved 4 -131 
Z. 	Chart of Permitted and Special Exception Uses 4 – 133 Use Chart A: Agricultural Transition District and Residential Districts 4 -135 Use Chart B: Mixed-Use, Commercial, Industrial and Overlay Districts 4 -138 



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

ARTICLE 4 
Zoning Ordinance 

A. 	General Provisions 
1. 	
Title. This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance, City of Hagerstown." 

2. 	
Interpretation. In interpreting and applying this Article, its provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for promoting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, except that when the provisions imposed by any statute, other ordinance, article, rule, regulation or permit or by any easement, covenant or agreement are more restrictive than the provision of this Article, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, article, rule, regulation, permit, easement, covenant or agreement shall be applicable. 


In interpreting the appropriateness of proposed uses, the North American Industry Classification System 
(U.S. 2002) (NAICS) will be considered along with other factors to determine similarity to delineated uses in the zoning districts. It is to be used as a guide, and not a default interpretation of the intent and purpose of this Article and is non-binding upon the Zoning Administrator. 
The regulations set forth herein are designed to be uniform for each class or kind of use throughout an entire district. In any case where it is not clear from the provisions of this Article that a proposed use is intended to be prohibited in a district, the provision of that Section setting forth the uses permitted in that district shall prevail, and if the proposed use is not one in the list of those permitted, it shall be prohibited as though it were included in the prohibitions. 
3. 	
Essential Utility Equipment. Essential utility services, public and private, including but not limited to water, wastewater, electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable television utilities shall be permitted in any district as authorized and regulated by law and ordinances of the City of Hagerstown. This provision shall not apply to the construction of wind turbines and solar arrays. Regulations pertaining to the erection or installation of wireless communications antennas, poles and towers are specified in Article 4, Section Q. 

4. 	
Definitions. Article 3 of the Land Management Code shall govern all definitions as they apply to this Article. 

5. 	
Applicability. All departments, officials and public employees of the City of Hagerstown vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue no permit or license for any use, building or purpose if the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this Article. 

6. 	
Compliance With This Article. Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be located, erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 

However, in any residential district, for existing dwellings and new construction of single-family dwellings, any lot recorded among the land records of Washington County prior to the effective date of this Article shall be deemed to meet the lot area and width requirements of the district. 

7. 	
Variances Not Required When Subdividing Existing Dwellings. When a lot is subdivided which contains more than one dwelling legally created at the time of their construction, and the sole purpose of the subdivision is for transferring ownership of individual units, no bulk regulation variance will be required when the new lots will not comply with current lot area, lot width and/or building setback requirements. 

8. 	
Establishment of Districts, Filing of Map and Ordinance. 

a. 	
Districts. The city is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. 

b. 	
Map and Ordinance. The official Zoning Ordinance and Map shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk for the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, among the official records of the City. 



9. 	
Amendment of the Zoning Ordinance and/or Map. The Mayor and City Council may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this Article including the Zoning Map. 

a. 	
Generally; Findings for Reclassification. Such regulations, restrictions and boundaries may from time to time be amended, supplemented, modified or repealed. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification, the Mayor and City Council shall make findings of fact in each specific case, including but not limited to the following matters: population change, availability of public facilities, present and future transportation patterns, compatibility with existing and proposed development for the area, the recommendation of the Planning Commission and the relationship of such proposed amendment to the jurisdiction's plan; and may grant the amendment based upon a finding that there was a substantial change in the character of the neighborhood where the property is located or that there was a mistake in the existing zoning classification. A complete record of the hearing and the votes of all members of the Council shall be kept. 

b. 	
Restriction Upon Acceptance of Application for Reclassification. An application for a reclassification shall not be accepted for filing by the Mayor and City Council if the application is for the reclassification of the whole or any part of land the reclassification of which has been denied by the Council on the merits within twelve months from the date of the Council's decision. 

c. 	
Source of Proposals. Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal may be initiated by the Mayor and City Council on its own motion, by the Planning Commission or by petition of one or more owners of property to be affected by the proposed amendment. Forms available from the Planning and Code Administration Department shall be used for this purpose. 

d. 	
Effective Date and Notice. No such amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall become effective until at least ten days after one review and one public hearing are held. One review shall be held by the Planning Commission within 45 days of receipt of application and recommendation of findings forwarded to the Mayor and City Council. One public hearing shall be held by the Mayor and City Council who shall determine if the amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall be granted at which time the parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice for the public hearing shall be given as follows: 


(1) 	
Legal Notice. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, together with a summary of the proposed regulation, restriction or boundary, shall be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city once each week for two successive weeks, with the first such publication of notice appearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing. 

(2) 	
Written Notice. Send written notices of hearing to other interested persons, organizations or agencies at the Council's discretion. 

(3) 	
Additional Notice. Except for a Historic District or Landmark, when the proposed hearing concerns a Zoning Map change altering the classification of fewer than 25 lots of record, the following additional notice is required: 

(a) 	
Posting in a conspicuous place on the property involved a notice of pending action containing the same information as in Subsection d(1) above, such posting to take place at least 15 days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing. 

(b) 	
Giving written notice of the time and place of such hearing sent by certified mail to the applicant and to the owners of property contiguous to or opposite the property affected. 





10. 	
Rules of Interpretation of District Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 

a. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines. 

b. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 

c. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 

d. 	
Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the right-of-way lines. 

e. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 



11. 	
Measuring distances Between Land Uses. Unless otherwise stated in this Article, when measuring required minimum distances between certain uses, that distance shall be measured on a straight line from the nearest points of the units of land on which the uses occupy. For single-use properties, the distance is measured on a straight line from the nearest point of the property boundaries between the uses. For multi-use properties, such as shopping centers, the distance shall be measured on a straight line from the nearest point of the land or building unit occupied by the use on the multi-use property. If any part of the land or building units are less than the required distance, the proposed new use will not comply with the distance requirement between uses. [ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: See illustrations on page 4-6.] 


X = Measurement of required distance Examples of measurement of required 


12. Zoning Districts. 
a. 
For the purpose of this Article, zoning districts are hereby established as follows: 

b. 	
For the purposes of this Article, the zoning districts established by Subsection a. above shall be shown on the City Zoning Map adopted and incorporated herein in its entirety as a part of this Chapter. 

c. 	
The regulations as set forth in this Article within each district shall be minimum regulations except as hereinafter provided. 


AT District  (Agricultural Transition)  
RMOD District  (Residential -Moderate Density)  
RMED District  (Residential -Medium Density)  
RH District  (Residential -High Density)  
RO District  (Residential – Office)  
N-MU District  (Neighborhood – Mixed Use)  
CC-MU District  (City Center – Mixed Use)  
CL District  (Commercial – Local)  
CG District  (Commercial – General)  
CR District  (Commercial – Regional)  
POM District  (Professional Office -Mixed)  
INST District  (Institutional)  
I-MU District  (Industrial – Mixed Use)  
IR District  (Industrial Restricted)  
IG District  (Industrial General)  
PUD District  (Planned Unit Development)  (An Overlay District)  
Conversion District  (An Overlay District)  
Local Conversion District  (An Overlay District)  
Historic District  (An Overlay District)  
Landmark  (An Overlay District)  

13. Newly Annexed Areas. 
a. 	
Shall Be Assigned Zoning Classification. All areas annexed to the City of Hagerstown after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be zoned in accordance with the applicable resolution pertaining thereto as duly adopted by the Mayor and Council in accordance with the then applicable provisions of the Annotated Code of the Public General Laws of Maryland, Local Government Article, Subsection 4-401 through 4-416 (Annexation). 

b. 	
Annexation of Inventoried Historic Properties. When County-designated historic districts and County inventory properties are annexed into the City, they will be annexed with a landmark overlay or be considered City Potential Landmarks. If demolition is proposed for any such Potential Landmarks, the review process in Subsection T.6 must be followed. Landmarks are subject to Section T of this Article. 


14. 	
Effective Date of Adoption. This Article was adopted as Chapter 68 (Zoning) by the Mayor and City Council, effective March 7, 1977, and subsequently amended. Effective September 26, 2008, this Article was reformatted for structural purposes with minor amendments and incorporated into this Chapter. It shall be interpreted to be the Ordinance as adopted on March 7, 1977 and subsequently amended. The Comprehensive Zoning plan implementing the policies of the 2008 Comprehensive Plan was implemented in several stages. This Article shall be interpreted that any use made nonconforming by any of the several map amendments part of this Comprehensive Zoning Plan shall have an effective date of nonconformity of the last amending the map for this process, being November 10, 2010. 

15. 	
Violations and Penalties. The treatment of violations of this article, and penalties for those violations shall be in accordance with Article 8 of this Chapter. 




T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

B. AT (Agricultural Transition) District. 
1. Purpose. 
The purpose of the AT District is to enable agricultural uses to continue on newly annexed land, if desired by the property owner, as a temporary use until such time that the land is re-zoned for development. 
All lands within this district proposed for development shall be rezoned to another district to accommodate that development, in accordance with the policies and procedures set forth in this Article. 
The Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council shall consider the policies and recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan when re-assigning zoning classification for AT land for development. 
When the property is to be given another classification, whether there was a mistake in assigning the AT classification and/or whether changes in the character of the neighborhood have occurred may be taken into consideration. However, a finding of mistake or change in character of the neighborhood shall not be required. 
2. Uses. 
a. 	Permitted and Special Exception Uses. 
Uses in this district shall be permitted, permitted by special exception in accordance with the general and specific performance criteria found in Subsection U.8 of this Article, or not permitted, as enumerated in Section Z of this Article. 
b. 	Special Exception Use Conditions. 
No special exception use shall be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless the use is found to be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1) 	
The off-street parking requirements of Section O. 

(2) 	
The specific performance criteria of individual special exception uses (if applicable) as found in Subsection U.8.a(7) of this Article. 

(3) 	
The site plan requirements of Subsection S.2, if applicable, following the Board’s granting of the special exception. 


3. Accessory Uses. 
a. 	
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any principal permitted use or authorized special exception use. 

b. 	
Living quarters for persons employed on the premises in connection with farming operations. 

c. 	
The parking and storage of commercial vehicles directly and regularly used in the furtherance of farming or other permitted commercial activities on the property. In addition, one commercial 


vehicle used in the furtherance of off-site employment by a resident of the property may be parked or stored on the property. 
d. 	Home workstations, subject to the requirements of Subsection K.10 of this Article. The requirements shall not be relaxed for residences in zoning districts where commercial uses may be enumerated as a permitted use in that district. 
4. 	
Maximum Building or Structure Height. Thirty-five (35) feet. Agricultural silos shall not be subject to this maximum height requirement. 

5. 	
Minimum Lot Area, Lot Width and Yard Requirements. 

6. 	
Subdivision Prohibited. No lot or parcel in the AT District shall be subdivided. 

7. 	
Minimum Size of Dwelling Units. All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 


AT District Dimensional Requirements (Minimum)  
Lot Area (square feet)  Lot Width (feet)  Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (square feet)  Front Yard Depth (feet)  Rear Yard Depth (feet)  Minimum Aggregate Width of Side Yards (feet)  Minimum Width of Side Yards (feet)  Number of Side Yards Required  
Dwellings, Single-family detached  Existing  Existing  n/a  40  50  20  10  2  
Other principal-permitted or conditional uses  3 acres  Existing  n/a  50  50  100  40  2  

C. Reserved. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

D. 	Residential Zoning Districts. 
1. 	Purpose. 
The purposes of the various residential zoning districts are as follows: 

a. 	
RMOD District. To provide areas for moderate-density residential development. 

b. 	
RMED District. To provide areas for medium-density residential development. 

c. 	
RH District. To provide for areas of high-density residential development. Also permitted are businesses of a type which serve nearby residents. 

d. 	
RO District. To provide for office uses in residential neighborhood containing large houses to make continued use of these properties feasible; and to provide a buffer between residential and commercial areas. 


2. 	Uses. 
a. 	Permitted and Special Exception Uses. 
Uses in these districts shall be permitted, permitted by special exception in accordance with the general and specific performance criteria found in Subsection U.8 of this Article, or not permitted, as enumerated in Section Z of this Article. 
b. 	Special Exception Use Conditions. 
No special exception use shall be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless the use is found to be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1) 	
The off-street parking requirements of Section O. 

(2) 	
The specific performance criteria of individual special exception uses (if applicable) as found in Subsection U.8.a(7) of this Article. 

(3) 	
The site plan requirements of Subsection S.2 if applicable, following the Board's granting of the special exception. 


c. 	Accessory Uses. The following accessory structures and uses shall be permitted in residential zoning districts: 
(1) 	
Private detached garages and accessory buildings subject to limitations in Subsections 

D.4 and D.5.b, below. 

(2) 	
Uses and structures customarily and incidental to any principal-permitted use or authorized special exception use. 

(3) 	
Home day-care of up to eight (8) children, as licensed by the State of Maryland. The number of children cared for in an apartment unit that are not members of the household shall not exceed two (2). A home day-care may utilize non-resident employees only for occasional back up staff for the purpose of covering on-site operations for the resident staff during vacations, personal emergencies, appointments, etc. when the resident provider will not be present, as required by their State license. Otherwise, a home day­care shall not employ persons who do not reside on the property. [Ed. Note: State licensure counts those children under age 6 living in a dwelling among those being cared for under the license. This requirement prohibits a home day-care operator’s ability to care for five or more children under the age of two unless a second care giver (as required by State licensure) is also a resident of the dwelling.] 

(4) 	
Use of detached accessory residential garages by non-residents of the property, provided: 

(a) 	
The use shall be limited to parking of vehicles and personal storage that does not involve generation of noise from the garage, and shall not be used for storage for any commercial or institutional purpose, and 

(b) 	
Two off-street parking spaces are provided for each dwelling on the subject property for each non-owner-occupied dwelling on the property. 



(5) 	
Home workstations, subject to the requirements of Subsection K.10 of this Article. The requirements shall not be relaxed for residences in zoning districts where commercial uses may be enumerated as a permitted use in that district. 

(6) 	
See Subsection K.11 of this Article regarding fowl and farm animals (livestock). 


3. Parking Requirements. 
a. 	When New Parking is Required. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section O of this Article. However, in the RO District, existing residential buildings shall not be altered or modified for the purpose of creating additional residential units unless two parking spaces per unit for all the units in the building can be provided or created in the rear yard of the property or in the rear yard of contiguous property under perpetual easement. 
b. 	Parking and Storage of Unregistered Vehicles. 
Motor vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any property in a residential or mixed-use district used for residential purposes other than in completely enclosed buildings. This provision shall also apply to residential elements of PUD Developments. 
c. 	Parking and Storage of Commercial Vehicles. 
One commercial vehicle shall be permitted to be parked on a transient basis on a residential lot or parcel, provided: 
(1) 	
The vehicle is currently registered, displays valid license plates, and is regularly used by a resident of the property to commute to and from and used in the course of their employment, and 

(2) 	
The vehicle may be an automobile, pick-up truck, sport utility vehicle or van up to 3/4 ton, and 

(3) 	
The vehicle does not exceed 20 feet in length. Tow trucks (including "rollback" trucks) are not permitted. 

(4) 	
In the parking lots of multi-family developments, commercial vehicles shall be permitted to be parked in accordance with Subsections 3.c.(1) through (3) above, provided that only those spaces that are available after providing two parking spaces for each dwelling unit on the property are used. 

(5) 	
Vehicles used by publicly supported emergency responders (fire, police, EMS) shall not be subject to the limitations of this provision. 


4. Height Limitations. 
No principal permitted structure shall exceed the following: 
Zoning District  RMOD  RMED  RH  RO  
Maximum Height  3 stories or 35 feet  3 stories or 35 feet  5 stories or 60 feet  3 stories or 40 feet  

No accessory structure shall exceed one story in height. 
5. Minimum Lot area, Locational, Lot Width and Yard (Setback) Requirements. 
The minimum lot area, lot width and yard (setbacks) requirements for residential districts shall be as stated in the following chart. Yards shall be measured and determined in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection K.6 of this Article. 
a. 	
Bulk Requirements Chart and Regulations. 
See chart on page 4-17. 


b. 	
Detached Garages and Accessory Buildings. 


Private detached accessory buildings are permitted cumulatively totaling not over 900 square feet. Minimum setbacks for accessory buildings shall be as follows: 
Front Yard Depth (feet) (or to established line on same side of street for infill)  Rear Yard Depth (feet)  Minimum Aggregate Width of Side Yards (feet)  Minimum Width of Side Yards (feet)  Number of Side Yards Required  
Accessory Building  25  5  8  4  2  

No detached accessory building shall be located forward of the primary front façade of any dwelling. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant a variance to this requirement. 
4­15 
c. 	Lot Averaging on Residential Infill Lots. Where at least 66% percent of all lots on the same side of the same street block as the subject lot have been developed: 
(1) 	
The front yard setbacks of the subject lot shall conform to the average established front yard setbacks, and 

(2) 	
The side yard setbacks of the subject lot shall not be less than the average side yard setbacks, and 

(3) 	
For single-family residences, the lot area and width requirements shall be not less than the average lot area and width of all lots on that side of the same street block. 


Lot averaging is not to be used for lot area and width on two-family and semi-detached dwellings. Regardless of whether sixty-six (66%) of the block has been developed, for the construction of two-family and semi-detached residences, the lot area and widths of the subject lot shall conform to the minimum lot area and width requirements established for the zoning district. 
Notes for chart on following page: 
For the minimum width of a side yard for a new construction courtyard, mansion house and stacked apartment building, when the property line is adjacent to the rear of a building, the 20 foot side setback shall be increased one additional foot for each foot of building height over 20 feet. 
Accessory buildings located within three feet of a principal structure shall be considered part of the principal structure for setback purposes. Accessory buildings on the same lot located within three feet of another accessory buildings shall be considered cumulatively as if they were attached for bulk regulations purposes. 
Setbacks for mobile home parks are found in Subsection D.5.h. 
City of Hagerstown Land Management Code v3.5 

Residential District Dimensional Requirements (Minimum)  

 Lot Area (square feet)  Lot Width (feet)  Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (square feet)  Front Yard Depth (feet) (or to established line on same side of street for infill)  Rear Yard Depth (feet)  Minimum Aggregate Width of Side Yards (feet)  Minimum Width of Side Yards (feet)  Number of Side Yards Required  
Single-family dwellings RMOD District  7,500  50  7,500  25  35  15  4  2  
Single-family dwellings RMED and RO Districts  5,000  40  5,000  15  30  N/A  5  2  
Single-family dwellings, RH District  4,000  40  4,000  15  30  N/A  5  2  
Two-family dwellings, RMOD District  10,000  75  5,000  25  35  20  10  2  
Two-family dwellings, RMED, RH and RO Districts  8,000  50  4,000  15  30  N/A  5  2  
Single-family semi-detached dwellings, RMOD District  5,000  37.5  5,000  25  35  N/A  10  1  
Single-family semi-detached dwellings, RMED, RH and RO Districts  3,000  25  3,000  15  30  N/A  5  1  
Townhomes * or to established in neighborhood if less  7,500  20  2,500  15  30  N/A  8* (see note at left)  
Mansion Apartments in Existing Buildings (with 1 unit per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area of the building) and Mansion Over-Under Flats in Existing Buildings ** or existing building  Existing  Existing  N/A (see building area require­ment at left)  Existing  30** (see note at left)  20** (see note at left)  10** (see note at left)  2** (see note at left)  
Courtyard, New Construction Mansion House and Stacked Apartment Units ***35 when adjacent to RMOD or RMED Zoning  20,000  100  2,700  0  20*** (note at left)  N/A  20 (see note on next page)  2  
Hospitals  5 acres  N/A  N/A  150  50  200  75  2  
Nursing homes, Assisted Living Facilities and Rehabilitation Centers  1 acre  N/A  N/A  25  50  20  10  2  
Schools, Churches, Nursery Schools, Day-Care Centers and Funeral Homes  20,000  75  N/A  25  50  20 School -50  10 School -25  2  
Other permitted or special exception uses in RMOD and RH Districts  20,000  100  N/A  25  40  20  10  2  
Other permitted or special exception uses in RMED and RO Districts  15,000  80  N/A  25  20  20  10  2  

4­17 

d. 	Projections into Yards on All Dwellings and Additions to the Rear of Semi-Detached Dwellings and Townhouses. 
(1) 	
If attached to the main building, a one-story open porch, with or without a roof, may extend into a front yard not more than 30% of the existing front yard depth. 

(2) 	
Projections such as bay windows, chimneys, entrances, vestibules, balconies, eaves and leaders may extend into any required yard not more than four feet, provided that such projections (excepting eaves) are not over ten feet in length and no closer than four feet to any property line. 

(3) 	
If attached to the dwelling, a one-story open deck without a roof may extend into the required rear yard not more than 35% of the required setback. 

(4) 	
No addition shall be made to the rear of an existing semi-detached dwelling or townhouse unless a three foot setback is provided along the interior lot line (in the case of a semi­detached dwelling or end unit townhouse) or each side lot line (in the case of an interior townhouse) adjacent to the addition. 


This provision may be waived by the Zoning Administrator provided that the applicant obtains a non-exclusive perpetual access and maintenance easement from the adjacent property owner along the interior property line that is at least three feet wide and running the full length of the proposed addition. The easement may be written in such a way where it specifically reserves the adjacent owner's right to build their own addition within the easement area. 
e. 	All Public Street Frontages Are Front Yards. On corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered front yards, but only the side of the lot opposite the frontage of the building shall be considered the rear yard. 
f. 	
Townhouse Developments. 

(1) 	
Streets, storm water management facilities and parking lots shall be excluded from the required lot area. 

(2) 	
The minimum horizontal distance between facing walls of any two buildings on one lot shall be 25 feet. 

(3) 	
Where common open space is provided for a townhouse development in the RO District, the minimum lot size may be reduced to 2,000 square feet provided the gross density does not exceed 15 dwelling units per acre. 



g. 	
Stacked and Mansion Apartment Developments and Over-Under Flats. 

(1) 	
Mansion house apartments in existing buildings in locally designated historic districts in the RMED, RO and CC-MU Districts shall be permitted only under the following conditions: 

(a) 	
The building was constructed prior to October 1, 1956; 

(b) 	
The building shall be at least 4,000 square feet in area; and 

(c) 	
The number of units is limited to one per 1,000 square feet of floor area as reflected on Department of Assessments and Taxation assessment records. 

(d) 	
Except in the CC-MU Zoning District, the property shall be located in a locally designated historic district or in a designated landmark. 

(e) 	
All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 

(f) 	
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section O of this Article. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant a variance to this requirement. 



(2) 	
Mansion House over-under flats in existing residential buildings in the RMED, RO and CC-MU District shall be permitted only under the following conditions: 

(a) 	
The building was constructed prior to October 1, 1956; and 

(b) 	
The building shall be at least three stories above grade in height, not including attics; and 

(c) 	
The area of the building shall be at least 2,500 square feet of floor area as reflected on Department of Assessments and Taxation assessment records, and 

(d) 	
The interior space of the building shall be so configured that the entirety of each floor shall be used for one dwelling unit (except for interior stair towers and landings); and 

(e) 	
One dwelling unit is permitted for each floor of the building (not to include basements); and 

(f) 	
All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 

(g) 	
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section O of this Article. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant a variance to this requirement. 

(h) 	
Over-under flats shall only be permitted in the RMED District when the property is also located in a locally-designated historic district. 





h. 	
Mobile Homes. 


Mobile homes shall be permitted outside of a mobile home park only when the dwelling is placed on and secured to a fully enclosed masonry foundation as set forth in the building code. The following minimum requirements shall be observed for mobile home parks: 
(1) 	
Minimum Area of Park: 10 acres 

(2) 	
Building Setbacks: 

(a) 	
From external public street right of way and property lines: 50 feet 

(b) 	
Rear of unit to rear of unit: 60 feet 

(c) 	
Between structures: 20 feet 

(d) 	
From surface of internal access roads fronting pad: 10 feet 

(e) 	
Across an internal access road between structures: 40 feet 

(f) 	
Minimum lease area on which a home can be located: 1,000 sq. feet 




Covered entryway steps may project not more than five feet from the unit. Decks without roofs may be added to a unit provided that a distance of at least 10 feet is maintained between the deck and other mobile homes and decks thereof. 
(3) 	
Individual accessory buildings (sheds) are not permitted on individual dwelling pads. Common storage facilities for use by residents may be designed into an overall park site plan. 

(4) 	
A heavy landscape buffer, dominated by evergreen plantings, shall be installed in an area not less than 20 feet in width in all areas subject to the setback requirement in (2)(a) above. 

(5) 	
Parking shall be prohibited on driveways unless designed to a width that allows two vehicles to pass in addition to the designated parking lane. 

(6) 	
Parking of boats, campers, trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles shall be prohibited on the individual unit lease area. The developer may design and designate a common parking area within the mobile home park for such vehicle parking and storage. 

(7) 	
No camper, recreational vehicle or similar vehicle shall be interpreted as a mobile home for the purposes of this Subsection. 


i. 	Construction On Lots That Do Not Front Public Streets. 
On lots in residential zoning districts that do not front a public street, one garage, residential in size and scale, shall be permitted as a principal use, provided: 
(1) 	
The lot shall front on an existing paved alley; 

(2) 	
The garage shall not exceed 900 square feet in area; 

(3) 	
The garage shall not exceed one story in height; 

(4) 	
The garage shall be designed architecturally and so located as to appear to be an accessory structure in the neighborhood in which it is located; 

(5) 	
The garage may be used by an owner or lessee for parking and personal use storage only. The garage shall not be used for business or institutional purposes and shall not generate activity other than the delivery or retrieval of vehicles or personal materials stored on the garage; 

(6) 	
No outdoor storage of any kind is permitted; and 

(7) 	
The garage shall not be constructed closer than five feet to any property line or alley right of way. 


j. 	Distance Requirements On Commercial and Private Membership Outdoor Swimming Pools. 
The following setback requirements for the pool shall be required: 
(1) 	
Distance of pool to property lines: 75 feet. 

(2) 	
Distance of pool to any existing dwelling: 125 feet. 


6. Minimum Size of Dwelling Units. 
All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 
7. Cluster Developments. 
a. 	
Description. Clustering is an alternative type of development which provides for reduction in minimum lot size for residential development. It permits a reduction in the size of individual lots while maintaining the maximum gross density allowed in the district in which it is located. This land development technique involves siting clusters of home sites on smaller lots than those permitted under conventional development regulations with the remaining “saved” land being retained as common open space. 

b. 	
Use of Open Space. The permanent, common open space, legally dedicated through subdivision plat recordation and deed restriction, can be used for natural conservation and/or recreational facilities for benefit of the residents of the development. Such open space may also be made available for the use and enjoyment of the general population if public dedication of the open space is accepted by the Mayor and City Council. 


c. 	Site Design Criteria. 
(1) 	
Subdivision Approval for Cluster Development. 

(a) 	
No cluster development may be constructed except in accordance with a Development Plan and Final Subdivision Plat approved by the Planning Commission under the Subdivision Regulations. 

(b) 	
Wherever the yard and lot dimensional requirements are less than those required in non-cluster developments, they shall be shown and identified on the Development Plan and Final Subdivision Plats. 



(2) 	
Open Space. 

(a) 	
Lot reduction shall be compensated for by the provision of one square foot of open space for each square foot of area that each lot in the subdivision is reduced below non-cluster lot area requirements, providing such minimum open space is configured for the use and enjoyment of the residents of the subdivision as the Planning Commission determines to be suitable to meet the intent of this Article. Such open space shall not be comprised of accumulations of leftover remnants of land on the site, but shall constitute meaningful contiguous areas of land which provide for the preservation of significant natural features on the land, and/or provide recreational amenities for the use of the residents of the development. The Planning Commission must be furnished satisfactory evidence as a condition of approval that such open space area will be continued and that perpetual maintenance is provided for. 

(b) 	
Up to 25% of this area may be designated forest retention areas intended to meet the requirements of the Forest Conservation Ordinance, provided that at least 75% of the forest conservation requirement is being met within the development (retention, afforestation and street trees). The Planning Commission may consider a deviation from this forest conservation standard to allow up to 50% of open space area designated for forest retention areas intended to meet the requirements of the Forest Conservation Ordinance, provided that 100% of the Forest Conservation requirement is being met within the proposed development. 

(c) 	
"Open space" does not include public or private streets, rights-of-way, or off-street parking. 

(d) 	
The open space shall be either publicly or privately owned. A deed with covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of the cluster open space; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance; maintenance taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and compulsory assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain cluster open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the Planning Commission and any other specifications deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. Unless specifically agreed to by the Mayor and Council, approval of the cluster open space does not commit the City to maintenance of the cluster open space. 



(3) 	
Buffer Zones. 


Buffer zones shall, where appropriate, be included to prevent or minimize adverse impacts from adjoining areas having different types or densities of development by providing separation and barriers to objectionable views, glare, and noise. Several types of buffers may be required by the Planning Commission. 
(a) 	
Landscaping and buffer strips may be required to reduce noise or visual impacts between developments. 

(b) 	
Common open space, if appropriately located, may be used in satisfying buffer requirements, provided that the open space is adequately landscaped to prevent or minimize the adverse effects of the proposed development. 


(4) 	Cluster dimensional requirements. 
(a) 	
Lot area requirements shall be based on the average for the entire development. 

(b) 	
Maximum number of townhouse units per building: Eight. 

(c) 	
The minimum lot area, lot width and yard requirements for dwellings in cluster subdivisions shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in the following chart. 

(d) 	
Each single-family detached dwelling, semi-detached dwelling, two-family dwelling (as defined in Article 3), triplex dwelling unit, quadraplex dwelling unit and townhouse dwelling in a cluster subdivision shall be located on a separate fee-simple lot when constructed in a subdivision created in accordance with this subsection. 


Cluster Subdivision Minimum Dimensional Requirements Schedule  
Type of Building  Minimum Lot Area (square feet)  Lot Width (minimum feet)  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (square feet)  Front Yard Depth (feet) (C)  Rear Yard Depth (feet) (C) (D)  Minimum Aggregate Width of Side Yards (feet)  Minimum Width of Side Yards (feet)  Number of Side Yards Required  
Single-family  5,000  40  5,000  5  20  10  4  2  
Single-family semi-detached  2,500  25  2,500  5  20  5  5  1  
Two-family  5,000  65  2,500  5  20  10  4  2  
Triplex (A)  4,500  65  1,500  5  20  10  5  2  
Quadraplex (A)  6,000  65  1,500  5  20  10  5  2  
Townhouse (B)  1,000  15  1,000  5  20  10 between buildings  5  1 (end unit)  
Accessory Building (E)  N/A  N/A  N/A  15  5  N/A  4  N/A  

NOTES: 
(A) 	
Triplexes and quadraplexes are permitted in cluster developments only. This shall be applied as if they were permitted in other districts, and in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 7.c above. Due to their design, a triplex or quadraplex unit may not front on a public street per provisions elsewhere in this Chapter, but since fee-simple subdivision is required in cluster developments, such lots may be accessed through dedicated open space areas. 

(B) 	
Townhouses are not a permitted use in the RMOD Zoning District. They are permitted in the RMED, RH and RO Districts. 

(C) 	
All elements of the front and rear facades, including porches, decks or stoops, shall comply with this setback, and development shall not benefit from the provisions found elsewhere in this Section that permit such features to extend into front and rear setbacks for developments created under the standard lot area and setback provisions. 

(D) 	
Rear yards shall have a minimum 20 foot deep area un-encumbered by sheds, detached garages or other detached buildings of any size. 

(E) 	
Accessory structure side setback shall not apply on lots containing attached dwellings, along the lot line containing a party wall if the accessory structure is a garage attached to another garage on the adjacent property or a storage shed attached to another storage shed on the adjacent property. 


7. 	Zero Lot Line Development. Zero lot line development as defined in this Chapter, is not permitted within the limits of the City of Hagerstown. 
E. Mixed-Use Districts. 
1. Purposes. 
The purposes of the mixed-use districts are as follows: 
a. 	
CC-MU (City Center -Mixed Use) 

(1) 	
Promote development of a compact, pedestrian-oriented city center consisting of a diverse mix of residential, business, commercial, office, institutional, educational, and cultural and entertainment activities for workers, visitors, and residents; 

(2) 	
Encourage pedestrian-oriented development within walking distance of transit opportunities at densities and intensities that will help to support transit usage and city center businesses; 

(3) 	
Promote the health and well-being of residents by encouraging physical activity, alternative transportation, and greater social interaction; 

(4) 	
Create a place that represents a unique, attractive, and memorable destination for visitors and residents; and 

(5) 	
Enhance the community’s character through the promotion of high-quality urban design. 



b. 	
N-MU (Neighborhood – Mixed Use). 

(1) 	
Accommodate mixed-use buildings serving retail, service, and other uses on the ground floor and residential units above the nonresidential space; 

(2) 	
Allow for commercial uses of a scale and intensity compatible with a residential neighborhood. 

(3) 	
Allow for exclusively residential buildings of a scale and intensity compatible with the City’s traditional neighborhood building design. 

(4) 	
Encourage development that exhibits the physical design characteristics of pedestrian-oriented, storefront-style shopping streets; 

(5) 	
Provide flexibility for adaptive re-use of old, non-residential buildings in these areas; and 

(6) 	
Promote the health and well-being of residents by encouraging physical activity, allowing for transportation alternatives, and providing for interaction of uses during day and evening hours. 




2.  Uses.  
a.  Permitted and Special Exception Uses.  
Uses in these districts shall be permitted, permitted by special exception in accordance with general and specific performance criteria found in Subsection U.8, or not permitted, as enumerated in Section Z of this Article.  
b.  Special Exception Uses.  
Compliance with use and development requirements. Any special exception use granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall only be approved when the use is found to be in accordance with the following requirements:  
(1)  The off-street parking requirements of Section O of this Article.  
(2)  The specific performance criteria of individual special exception uses (if applicable) as found in Subsection U.8.a.(7).  
(3)  The site plan requirements of Subsection S.2, if applicable, following the Board’s granting of the special exception.  
c.  Accessory Uses.  
(1)  Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any principal permitted use or authorized special exception.  
(2)  Home day-care of up to eight (8) children, as licensed by the State of Maryland. The number of children cared for in an apartment unit that are not members of the household shall not exceed two (2). A home day-care may utilize non-resident employees only for occasional back up staff for the purpose of covering on-site operations for the resident staff during vacations, personal emergencies, appointments, etc. when the resident provider will not be present, as required by their State license. Otherwise, a home day­care shall not employ persons who do not reside on the property. [Ed. Note: State licensure counts those children under age 6 living in a dwelling among those being cared for under the license. This requirement prohibits a home day-care operator’s ability to care for five or more children under the age of two unless a second care giver (as required by State licensure) is also a resident of the dwelling.]  
(3)  Home workstations, subject to the requirements of Subsection K.10 of this Article. The requirements shall not be relaxed for residences in zoning districts where commercial uses may be enumerated as a permitted use in that district.  
(4)  The outdoor storage of inventory, merchandise and supplies accessory to a principal use, subject to the requirements of Subsection K.17.  

3. Parking Requirements. As applicable under Section O of this Article. 
a. 	
Location. Off-street parking spaces must be located to the rear of the principal building. 

b. 	
Reduction. A development can reduce the required off-street parking spaces up to 50% when it can be demonstrated, in a parking-traffic study, prepared by a traffic engineer, that use of transit or demand management programs, special characteristics or customer, client, employee or resident population will reduce expected vehicle use and parking space demand for their development, as compared to standard Institute of Transportation Engineers vehicle trip generation rates and city parking requirements. Approval of such reduction would be by the Planning Commission in the review and approval of the site plan for a development. 

c. 	
Small Commercial Exception. No off-street parking is required for nonresidential uses in this district unless such uses exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area. 


4. Minimum and Maximum Height Requirements. 
a. 	
Height Limitation Chart. 

b. 	
Special Exceptions for Height. 



 N-MU  CC-MU  
Maximum Height  4 stories  7 stories  

The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a special exception to increase the height of a building, pursuant to the general criteria for special exceptions found in Subsection U.8.a(2), as follows: 

 N-MU  CC-MU  
Maximum Permitted Height by Special Exception  6 stories  12 stories  

c. 	Minimum Height Requirements. 
All new principal structures shall be at least two stories in height. The maximum permitted height of an accessory structure shall be two stories or 25 feet. 
5. Minimum and Maximum Lot Width and Yard (Setback) Requirements. 
a. 	Minimum Bulk Requirements Chart. 
The minimum lot width and yard (setback) requirements for mixed-use districts shall be as stated in the following chart: 
Mixed Use District Minimum Yard Requirements for All Buildings  
Zoning District  Front Yard Depth (feet)  Rear Yard Depth (feet)  Minimum Aggregate Width of Side Yards (feet)  Minimum Width of Side Yards (feet)  Number of Side Yards Required  
N-MU  0  5  0  0  0  
CC-MU  0  0  0  0  0  

Yards shall be measured and determined in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection 
K.6 of this Article. 
b. 	Maximum Setback Requirements. 
(1) 	
The maximum front and street side building setback may not exceed the average front yard depth of the nearest two lots on either side of the subject lot or 15 feet, whichever is less. 

(2) 	
If one or more of the lots required to be included in the averaging calculation are vacant, such vacant lots will be deemed to have a yard depth of zero feet. 

(3) 	
Lots fronting a different street than the subject lot or separated from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used in computing the average. 

(4) 	
When the subject lot is a corner lot, the average setback will be computed on the basis of the two adjacent lots that front on the same street as the subject lot. 

(5) 	
When the subject lot abuts a corner lot fronting on the same street, the average setback will be computed on the basis of the abutting corner lot and the nearest two lots that front on the same street as the subject lot. 

Calculating Setbacks Example: (12 ft. + 8 ft.+12 ft.+ 0 ft. )/4 = 8 ft. 

(6) 	
A portion of the building may be set back from the maximum setback line in order to provide an articulated facade or accommodate a building entrance feature, provided that the total area of the space created must not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of building frontage. 

(7) 	
In order to accommodate an outdoor eating area, a building may exceed the average front yard depth. However, in order to preserve the continuity of the streetwall, the building may be set back no more than 15 feet from the front or street side property line. The total square footage of an outdoor eating area that is located between a public sidewalk and the building facade may not exceed 12 times the building’s street frontage in linear feet. 


6. Residential Uses. 
a. Minimum Unit Area Requirements. 
All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 
b. Minimum Facilities. 
Each newly created unit shall contain a complete kitchen and bathroom facility. A complete kitchen includes a room with a utility connection suitable for servicing a range or oven, food preparation, refrigeration, and dishwashing area. A bathroom facility contains a sink, toilet, and a tub or shower. 
c. Densities. 
Residential densities in the mixed-use districts will vary based on the planning process, but it is anticipated that the average density in the City Center Mixed Use District will be between ten and 22 units per acre and the average density in the Neighborhood Mixed-Use District will be between six and ten units per acre. Individual sites within the mixed-use districts may have much higher densities; however, the average for all properties in a single district is anticipated to be as stated above. 
7. Commercial Establishments in the Neighborhood Mixed Use District. 
a. Maximum Size. 
The gross floor area of an individual commercial establishment in a building built after February 25, 2010, shall not exceed 15,000 square feet. 
b. Commercial Appearance. 
For new construction, a minimum of 70% of the street-facing building façade between two feet and eight feet in height above grade must be comprised of clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas. For old, non-residential buildings which are adapted for mixed-use, the exterior of the building need not be modified to provide for the previously cited 70% window coverage requirement if such modifications would detract from the historic character of the building. 
c. Ground Floor Restriction. 
For new construction, commercial uses are restricted to the ground floor. This restriction does not apply to bed and breakfast inns. 
d. Commercial Uses in Upper Floors of Existing Buildings. 
For master planned projects containing multiple buildings, existing non-residential buildings may be adapted to include upper floor commercial uses; however, the total amount of commercial space in such master planned projects shall not exceed 20% of the total square footage for the entire development. 
8. Signs. 
Regulation of signs shall be per Section I of this Article. 
9. Projecting Signs in the CC-MU Zoning District. 
Regulation of projecting signs shall be per Section I of this Article. 
10. Development and Design Standards. 
a. Facade Orientation. 
The facade of a building shall present a public view to the street or pedestrian corridor. It is preferred that new buildings and additions be architecturally compatible with the existing structures and that the exterior wall surfaces of each individual building be similar in architectural treatment and materials. For large new buildings, modulation should be incorporated in building designs to reduce overall bulk and mass. All rooftop equipment shall be located, screened or shielded so that its visibility is minimized from public view. 
b. Amenity Areas. 
Amenity areas are encouraged and should be considered as an integral component of site design. Amenity areas include, but are not limited to public plazas, courtyards, squares or small parks on the site. Examples of design elements that could be included in the amenity areas are seating walls, benches, outdoor dining/gathering areas, decorative fountains or water features, clock towers and/or garden areas. 
c. Pedestrian Orientation. 
Building design concepts should respond to the site plan by forming street edges and by encouraging active, safe street life. Buildings should recognize site patterns and help define entries to interior courtyards, building entrances, and public spaces. In the CC-MU District, storefronts shall be retained on existing buildings – in full or to a minimum of 40 feet in depth. Window glazing openings on existing storefronts in the CC-MU District shall not be reduced in area but may be expanded in size with approval of the Historic District Commission. 
d.  Traditional Neighborhood Design.  
Use architectural styles that are associated with traditional neighborhood design and multi-family design that delineates separation of the units. Commercial architectural styles should mimic the Main Street concept and take architectural styles from the City’s traditional building designs.  
e.  Parking and Pedestrian Lighting.  
Lights illuminating off-street parking, pedestrian or loading areas shall be arranged and installed so that no material glare or direct light shall spill over into adjacent parcels or shine upwards. Light standards for off-street parking and loading areas shall not exceed 20 feet in height and shall be of a directional type capable of shielding the light source from direct view.  
f.  Outside Storage.  
There shall be no outside storage of any equipment, materials or supplies.  
g.  Drive-Through Facilities.  
Drive-through facilities and driveways for non-governmental activities are prohibited when directly accessed from public streets. No street curb cuts are allowed for lots that abut alleys.  
h.  Parking Access.  
The preferred access for parking facilities is off of a public alley. Street curb cuts are prohibited unless the applicant can demonstrate the necessity for any proposed curb cut. Visible facades of parking structures shall be designed to be compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures. The sidewalk level should contain commercial and/or retail space. Where commercial/ retail uses are not feasible, other architectural features are encouraged along the street wall, such as murals, display panels, bas-relief, and masonry patterning.  
i.  Preliminary Consultation Required.  
The developer shall submit a sketch plan for the development for the Planning Commission’s review and approval before submitting a site plan or subdivision plan. The Planning Commission may grant modifications of the design provisions of this subsection, if requested in writing by the developer, when the Planning Commission is satisfied that the alternative proposed meets the intent of this subsection. The sketch plan shall include a layout of the proposed development of the entire site and preliminary sketches of the exterior treatment of the buildings. Thorough documentation of and justification for any requested deviation from these standards shall be provided. The site plan for the proposed development and the buildings as constructed shall substantially conform with the sketch plan approved by the Planning Commission.  



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

F. Commercial Zoning Districts. 

1. Purpose. 
The purposes of the various commercial zoning districts are as follows: 
a. 	
CL (Commercial -Local). To provide for the daily shopping and business needs of nearby residents and workers by permitting retail and service uses which are compatible in use and scale with the adjacent residential neighborhood. 

b. 	
CG (Commercial -General). To provide locations for businesses of a general nature to serve the community. 

c. 	
CR (Commercial -Regional). To provide for commercial uses customarily found in a regional shopping center. 

d. 	
POM (Professional Office -Mixed). To provide locations for offices, medical offices, research and development, institutional uses, certain industrial uses, and limited support retail. Retail and service uses are secondary and should generally serve the businesses and employees in the office area including personal services, restaurants, day-care and other similar support services. These uses should be met in ways that do not substantially increase peak-hour traffic. It is anticipated that projects within this zoning classification will be planned and designed as a unified development. 

e. 	
INST (Institutional). To provide locations for institutional uses to serve the community. Examples of existing large-scale institutional uses include public school campuses, hospital and nursing home properties, recreational facilities with fields, parks, professional ball stadiums, cemeteries, etc. 


2. Uses. 
a. 	Permitted and Special Exception Uses and Performance Standards. 
Uses in these districts shall be permitted, permitted by special exception in accordance with general and specific performance criteria found in Subsection U.8 or not permitted, as enumerated in Section Z of this Article. 
b. 	Performance Standards. 
(1) 	
Size limitation on retail trade in the CL and CG Districts and restaurants in the CL District. 

(a) 	
In the CL District, retail trade shall not exceed 5,000 gross square feet in area per establishment, and restaurants shall not exceed 3,000 gross square feet per establishment. 

(b) 	
Retail trade in the CG district shall not exceed the following: 

(i) 
Maximum floor area for freestanding building: 	75,000 square feet. 

(ii) 	
Maximum floor area for a shopping center: 150,000 square feet with a 75,000 square foot maximum floor area for any individual unit. 





(2) 	
Development of Destination Retail Uses. 

In the CR District, any development containing a “destination retail use” shall be subject to design and maintenance standards cited in Article 5, Subsection I.6. 

(3) 	
Maintenance of Abandoned Destination Retail Use Buildings. 


Any freestanding building over 75,000 square feet in area which is vacated by its owner shall be maintained during its period of vacancy to the following minimum standards: 
(a) 	
The property shall be kept clear of trash; 

(b) 	
Parking lot lights shall be illuminated during the evening business hours of the surrounding commercial area; 

(c) 	
Commercial identification signs shall be removed and the space behind them repainted; 

(d) 	
Landscaped areas and parking lots shall be kept clear of weeds and be properly maintained; 

(e) 	
Buildings shall be kept in good condition (painted areas kept in good condition, windows kept in good and clean condition, walls and other surfaces kept clear of graffiti and other staining elements, destruction caused by vandals repaired, etc.); 

(f) 	
Leasing information shall be posted. 


(4) 	Adult Entertainment Businesses in the CG Zoning District. 
Adult entertainment businesses as defined in Article 3 are permitted in the CG Zoning district, provided no such use may be permitted within 1,000 feet of the boundary of property upon which exists any: 
(a) 	
Church; 

(b) 
School; 


(c) 
Hospital; 


(d) 	
Nursing home; 

(e) 	
Park, or 

(f) 	
Any multiple-family dwelling owned by public or quasi-public authority and intended primarily for use by senior citizens or other similar land uses for human care and needs. 


Adult entertainment businesses, as described above and defined in Article 3 shall not be construed as also being included in other references in this Article to retail trade, movie theaters or performing arts centers. 
(5) 	
Uses identified in the POM District in the Use Chart cited in Section Z as a permitted use, but marked with reference to this subsection shall: 

(a) 	
Not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the building (except restaurants), or 

(b) 	
Not exceed in the aggregate 20% of the gross floor area of a group of adjacent buildings under common ownership or a group of buildings designed and approved as a unified development or business park, as designated on the approved Site Plan(s) or subdivision development plan. 

(c) 	
Gasoline service stations (4471) are not permitted in the POM District, including incidental sales associated with a convenience store. 

(d) 	
Retail uses shall not be the sole occupant of a structure. 

(e) 	
See Article 5, Subsection I.9 regarding nonconforming commercial subdivisions. 



(6) 	
Temporary outdoor principal use sales facilities, whether in the open or enclosed in a tent, established for the sole purpose of engaging in sales commerce are prohibited unless they are accessory to a civic special event, not to exceed ten days in duration or are accessory to an otherwise permanent business operation conducted from buildings. 

(7) 	
Conditions for Kennels in CG and CR Zoning Districts. 

(a) 	
Use area must be set back at least 100 feet from any nearby property containing a residential dwelling unit, religious organization’s place of worship, educational service facility, residential care facility, hospital, assisted living facility or nursing home. 

(b) 	
Exterior exercise/play areas must be enclosed with solid fencing, at a minimum of six feet in height. 

(c) 	
The total number of dogs permitted at any one time shall not exceed one dog per 100 square feet of combined interior/exterior lease area. 



(8) 	
An automobile and/or truck sales and/or rental facility shall: 

(a) 	
Provide landscaped buffers for all parking and inventory display or storage areas in accordance with the requirements of Article 5 of this Code, both in required minimum buffer widths and required landscape plantings; and 

(b) 	
Provide sufficient employee and customer parking and install signage identifying parking for customers and employees, and provide adequate on-site traffic circulation for safe and orderly egress from and ingress to the site; and 

(c) 	
All on-premise business identification signs shall be professionally designed and constructed for long-term use; and 

(d) 	
The developer shall submit a site plan for review and approval in accordance with the provisions of Article 5. The type of site plan shall be consistent with the requirements of that Article based on the amount of land disturbance that is proposed. The Planning Commission may reduce or waive provisions of the landscaping and design requirements based on unique site conditions, practical difficulties, or presentation of an alternate plan that achieves the intent of the Ordinance requirements. Such use shall not commence until the site plan is approved and the improvements are completed. Vehicles will not be stored or displayed in buffer areas. 

(e) 	
Automobile sales shall be permitted in the CL Zoning District only when all for-sale inventory and all vehicles on site for repair or preparation for sale shall be stored inside of fully enclosed buildings at all times. At no time will for-sale inventory, vehicles awaiting preparation for sale, or on-site for service be stored outdoors. Nothing in this provision shall be interpreted to permit warehousing of automobiles as a principal use. Automobile and/or truck rental, and the sale of recreational vehicles and/or boats shall not be permitted in the CL District. 

(f) 	
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any facility that is proposed for a location where the most recent use of the area to be used was a motor vehicle sales facility, however, all other requirements of the Land Management Code shall be met. 



(9) 	
A flea market shall: 

(a) 	
Comply with current requirements for vendor (employee) and customer parking, calculated based on retail use parking requirements; and 

(b) 	
All elements of the use are setback at least the required structure setback for the district, and 

(c) 	
The use area meets current landscaping requirements from adjacent commercial and residentially used properties and zoning districts. 




c. 	Special Exception Uses. 
Compliance with Use and Development Requirements. Any special exception use granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall only be approved when the use is found to be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1) 	
The off-street parking requirements of Section O. 

(2) 	
The specific performance criteria of individual special exception uses (if applicable) as found in Subsection U.8.a.(7) of this Article. 

(3) 	
The site plan requirements of Subsection S.2 if applicable, following the Board’s granting of the special exception. 


d. 	Accessory Uses. 
(1) 	
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any principal permitted use or authorized special exception, including but not limited to garages used to store vehicles associated with a use permitted by right or special exception. 

(2) 	
Home workstations, subject to the requirements of Subsection K.10 of this Article. The requirements shall not be relaxed for residences in zoning districts where commercial uses may be enumerated as a permitted use in that district. 

(3) 	
Home day-care of up to eight (8) children, as licensed by the State of Maryland. The number of children cared for in an apartment unit that are not members of the household shall not exceed two (2). A home day-care may utilize non-resident employees only for occasional back up staff for the purpose of covering on-site operations for the resident staff during vacations, personal emergencies, appointments, etc. when the resident provider will not be present, as required by their State license. Otherwise, a home day­care shall not employ persons who do not reside on the property. [Ed. Note: State licensure counts those children under age 6 living in a dwelling among those being cared for under the license. This requirement prohibits a home day-care operator’s ability to care for five or more children under the age of two unless a second care giver (as required by State licensure) is also a resident of the dwelling.] 

(4) 	
The outdoor storage of inventory, merchandise and supplies accessory to a principal use, subject to the requirements of Subsection K.17. 


3. Parking Requirements. 
As applicable under Section O of this Article. 
4. Height Limitations. 
No structure shall exceed the following: 
a. 
Height Limitation Chart. 

b. 
Special Exceptions for Height. 



 CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  
Height  2 stories or 35 feet  60 feet  60 feet  100 feet  60 feet  

The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a special exception to increase the height of a building, pursuant to the general criteria for special exceptions found in Subsection U.8.a(2)., as follows: 

 CG  CR  POM  INST  
Maximum Permitted Height by Special Exception  6 stories or 90 feet  150 feet  6 stories or 90 feet  6 stories or 90 feet  

5. Minimum Lot Area, Lot Width and Yard (Setback) Requirements. 
The minimum lot area, lot width and yard (setbacks) requirements for commercial districts shall be as stated in the following chart: 
a. Bulk Requirements Chart. 
Commercial District Dimensional Requirements for All Buildings Measured in Feet.  
Zoning District  Minimum Front Yard Depth  Minimum Rear Yard Depth  Minimum Aggregate Width of Side Yards  Minimum Width of Side Yards  Number of Side Yards Required  
CL  15  30  20  10***  2  
CG  15  30  20  10***  0  
CR  25  50*/**  40  20*  2  
POM  15  25****  20  10****  2  
INST  15  25****  20  10****  2  

NOTES:  *  100 feet when adjoining a residential district.  
**  20 feet when a pad site adjoins a CR development.  
***  25 feet when adjoining a residential district.  
****  Where adjoining a residential district, the setback shall be one foot for each foot of  
building height, but not less than 35 feet.  

Yards shall be measured and determined in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection 
K.6 of this Article. Increased setbacks assigned when adjacent to residential zoning shall be applied when property is adjoining only, and is not to be applied across public street rights-of­way. 
b. 	Residential Development in the CL (Commercial Local) Zoning District. 
(1) 	
All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 

(2) 	
The construction of buildings for residential and mixed uses, as allowed in the CL District in Section Z (use chart) shall be permitted to contain more than one dwelling unit only if the lot area per dwelling shall comply with the following: 


Use  Maximum Density/Minimum Lot Area  
Multi-family and mixed-use buildings  One unit per 2,700 square feet of land area.  
Two family dwellings and semi-detached dwellings  One unit per 3,000 square feet of land area  
Townhouses  One unit per 2,500 square feet of land area and minimum tract area of 7,500 square feet.  

Compliance with current parking requirements shall apply. 
(3) 	
The adaptive reuse of existing buildings for residential or mixed-use purposes shall not be subject to b.(2) above. 

(4) 	
Building Setbacks for residential and mixed use buildings in the CL Zoning District shall be the same as all other buildings in the CL District. 


c. 	Attached Units in Commercial Developments. 
A single building may be developed with zero distance side setbacks for interior units, when attached to other units, provided that: 
(1) 	
The building shall conform to the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located. 

(2) 	
A common access easement for all parking and drive areas shall be attached to the deed of each property. 

(3) 	
A property owner association shall be established with respect to maintenance of the property. 

(4) 	
Each unit and unit sign shall be of consistent exterior design with regard to style, materials and color. 

(5) 	
Residential uses are not permitted in such a building. 


d. All Public Street Frontages Are Front Yards. 
On corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered front yards, but only the side of the lot opposite the frontage of the building shall be considered the rear yard. 
6. 	Signs in the Commercial Zoning District. Regulation of signs in the commercial zoning districts shall be per Section I of this Article. 
G. Reserved. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

H. Industrial Districts. 
1. Purpose. 
The purposes of the three industrial zoning districts are as follows: 
a. 	
IR (Industrial Restricted). To provide locations for offices and light industrial uses which do not require special measures to control odor, dust or noise and which do not involve hazardous waste and whose environmental impacts are contained within the property limits. 

b. 	
IG (Industrial General). To provide for those manufacturing, processing and storage uses which should be separated from other uses by reason of characteristics which may conflict with other uses. The exclusion of residential and commercial uses is intended to promote the economic welfare of the city by reserving especially suited areas for industry and by controlling and intermingling of incompatible uses. 

c. 	
I-MU (Industrial – Mixed Use). To provide locations for light industrial parks, office parks, research and development facilities, high-tech communications and technology facilities, trucking and distribution facilities, and minor commercial uses that support job centers. 


2. Uses. 
a. 	Permitted and Special Exception Uses. 
Uses in these districts shall be permitted, permitted by special exception in accordance with general and specific performance criteria found in Subsection U.8, or not permitted as enumerated in Section Z of this Article. 
b. 	
Conditions for Kennels in the I-MU District. 

(1) 	
Use area must be set back at least 100 feet from any nearby property containing a residential dwelling unit, religious organization's place of worship, educational service facility, residential care facility, hospital, assisted-living facility or nursing home. 

(2) 	
Exterior exercise play areas must be enclosed with solid fencing at a minimum of six feet in height. 

(3) 	
The total number of dogs permitted at any one time shall not exceed one dog per 100 square feet of combined interior/exterior lease area. 



c. 	
Conditions for Flea Markets. 


A flea market shall: 
(1) 	
Comply with current requirements for vendor (employee) and customer parking, calculated based on retail use parking requirements; and 

(2) 	
All elements of the use are setback at least the required structure setback, and 

(3) 	
The use area meets current landscaping requirements from adjacent commercial and residentially used properties and zoning districts. 


d. 	Special Exception Uses. 
Compliance with Use and Development Requirements. Any special exception use granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall only be approved when the use is found to be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1) 	
The off-street parking requirements of Section O. 

(2) 	
The specific performance criteria of individual special exception uses (if applicable) as found in Section U.8.a(7) of this Article. 

(3) 	
The site plan requirements of Subsection S.2, if applicable, following the Board's granting of the special exception. 


e. 	Accessory Uses. 
(1) 	
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any principal permitted use or authorized special exception. 

(2) 	
Home workstations, subject to the requirements of Section K.10 of this Article. The requirements shall not be relaxed for residences in zoning districts where commercial uses may be enumerated as a permitted use in that district. 

(3) 	
Home day-care of up to eight (8) children, as licensed by the State of Maryland. The number of children cared for in an apartment unit that are not members of the household shall not exceed two (2). A home day-care may utilize non-resident employees only for occasional back up staff for the purpose of covering on-site operations for the resident staff during vacations, personal emergencies, appointments, etc. when the resident provider will not be present, as required by their State license. Otherwise, a home day­care shall not employ persons who do not reside on the property. [Ed. Note: State licensure counts those children under age 6 living in a dwelling among those being cared for under the license. This requirement prohibits a home day-care operator’s ability to care for five or more children under the age of two unless a second care giver (as required by State licensure) is also a resident of the dwelling.] 

(4) 	
The outdoor storage of inventory, merchandise and supplies accessory to a principal use, subject to the requirements of Subsection K.17. 


3. Parking Requirements. As applicable under Section O of this Article. 
4. Height Limitation Chart. 


 IR  IG  I-MU  
Maximum Height  60 feet  100 feet  9 stories or 100 feet  

5. Minimum Lot Area, Lot Width and Yard (Setback) Requirements. 
The minimum lot area, lot width and yard (setbacks) requirements for industrial districts shall be as stated in the following chart: 
Industrial District Dimensional Requirements for All Buildings (Measured in feet)  
Zoning District  Front Yard Depth  Rear Yard Depth  Minimum Width of Side Yards  Number of Side Yards Required  
IR  50*  25*  25*  2  
IG  50*  25**  25**  2  
I-MU  35  25***  15***  2  

NOTES: 	* 100 feet when adjoining an “R” district. ** 200 feet when adjoining an “R” district. *** Where adjoining an “R” district, the setback shall be one foot for each foot of building height, but 
not less than 35 feet. 
Yards shall be measured and determined in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection K.6 of this Article. Increased setbacks assigned when adjacent to residential zoning shall be applied when property is adjoining only, and is not to be applied across public street rights-of-way. 
6. All Public Street Frontages Are Front Yards. 
On corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered front yards, but only the side of the lot opposite the frontage of the building shall be considered the rear yard. 
7. Industrial Performance Standards. 
The following industrial performance standards shall be met in the industrial districts for any industrial use prior to the issuance of a zoning permit: 
a. 	
Control of Smoke, Dust and Dirt, Fumes, Vapors, Gases and Odors. The Maryland air pollution control standards shall be used to control the emission of smoke, dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors, gases or odors. 

b. 	
Control of Heat and Glare. No use shall carry on an operation that will produce heat or constant glare which will adversely affect the uses of an adjacent property. 

c. 
Vibration Control. Machines or operations which cause vibration shall be permitted, but in no case shall any such vibration adversely affect the uses of an adjacent property. 

d. 	
Radiation of Electrical Emissions, Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbance. Activities which may emit dangerous radioactivity beyond closed areas shall comply with state and federal codes. No electrical disturbances (except from domestic household appliances) shall be permitted to affect adversely at any point any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. 

e. 	
Electric, Diesel, Gas or Other Power. Every use requiring power shall be so operated that any service line, substation, etc., shall conform to the highest applicable safety requirements. They shall be constructed, installed, etc., so that they will be an integral part of the architectural features of the building or, if visible from abutting residential properties, shall be concealed by evergreen planting. 

f. 	
Wastewater and Waste Treatment. All methods of wastewater and industrial waste treatment and disposal shall be approved by the Department of Utilities and shall be in accordance with all applicable regulations. 


g. 	Storage of Materials. 
(1) 	
No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse. 

(2) 	
All materials or wastes which may cause fumes or dust or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored only if enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards. 


8. I-MU District Use Limitation, Development and Design Standards. 
a. 	Limitations on Retail and Service Uses. 
Uses identified in the I-MU District in the Use Chart cited in Section Z of this Article as a permitted use, but marked with two asterisks shall: 
(1) 	
Not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the building, or 

(2) 	
Not exceed in the aggregate 20% of the gross floor area of a group of buildings designed and approved as a unified development, as designated on the approved site plan. 

(3) 	
Gasoline service stations (4471) are not permitted in the I-MU District, including incidental sales associated with a convenience store. 

(4) 	
Retail shall not be the sole occupant of a structure. 


9. 	Minimum Size of Dwelling Units. 
All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 
10. 	Signs. Regulation of signs in the industrial zoning districts shall be in accordance with Section I of this Article. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

I. Signs. 
1. Minimum Standards, Prohibitions and Applicability. 
a. 	Minimum Standards. 
(1) 	
All signs shall be designed, constructed and installed with permanent materials and finishes (except for temporary signs permitted in Subsection 5 below). 

(2) 	
Temporary signs, such as but not limited to vinyl banners, shall not be used as permanent or ongoing principal signs. 

(3) 	
All signs shall be maintained in good repair, properly painted and maintained in a skillful and reasonable manner. 

(4) 	
Signs advertising a business that has been out of operation for more than 30 days shall be removed. 


b. 	Prohibitions. 
The following types of signs are not permitted: 

(1) 	Animation, bare bulbs, or flashing illumination or imagery. All lighting shall be steady, stationary, and/or shielded light sources directed solely onto the message. 
The prohibition of bare-bulbs shall not prohibit the use of decorative neon tube lighting used: 
(a) 	
in straight sections used only to highlight architectural features (and such use shall not be counted toward sign area), and/or 

(b) 	
when formed into shapes with the intended use of signage (and such use shall be counted toward sign area). 


(2) 	
Roof-mounted signs and temporary portable street signs, except as permitted in Subsection 2.b(2) below. 

(3) 	
Temporary signs, except as enumerated in Subsection 5, below. Streamers, pennants and similar products are prohibited. 

(4) 	
Temporary signs not permitted in Subsection 5 shall be removed within 180 days of October 30, 2015. [ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: This date is April 27, 2016.] 

(5) 	
Signs on or attached to stationary equipment, such as vehicles, trailers, storage containers, etc., when signing is the apparent principle use of the equipment on either a temporary or permanent basis. 

(6) 	
Signs placed in the public street or alley right-of-way of the City of Hagerstown, unless approved by the City of Hagerstown under Chapter 216, Streets and Sidewalks, of the Code. This provision does not apply to portable non-illuminated, changeable message board signs for businesses located in buildings with zero setback, as described in Subsection 2.b(2) below. 

(7) 	
Signs positioned so that it obstructs traffic visibility along streets as determined by the City Engineer. 

(8) 	
Window signs applied to the surface of a glass door that create a solid background which prevents views into occupied storefront space. 

(9) 	
Signs for Home Workstations. 


c. 	Off-Premise Signs. This section of Article 4 does not apply to signs advertising products or businesses located off the premises where the sign is located, commonly known as billboards or off-premise signs. Such signs are regulated under the City Code, Chapter 204, Signs. 
2. Measuring Signs and Building Frontages. 
a. 	Procedures for Measuring Signs. 
Channel letter signs (individual or raceway mounted): measure around outside edge of letters, but do not include descenders of letters. Logos shall be included in measurements for area maximums. 
b. 	
Signs Excluded From Maximum Area Requirements. 

(1) 	
Window signs. 

(2) 	
Portable non-illuminated, changeable message board signs for street level businesses, provided: 

i. 	The sign must be placed within the vicinity of the entry door to the storefront; 
ii. 	The sign shall be taken in when the business is closed; 
iii. 	The maximum size for these signs is 6 square feet per side; 
iv. 	The signs shall be limited to one per business. 

(3) 	
Wall-mounted directory signs for multiple tenant buildings, provided: 

i. 	Signs shall be located beside the entry door; 
ii. 	The maximum size for directory signs is 12 square feet. 

(4) 	
Entrance, exit, and other parking lot directional signs along internal road or driveway networks of development. 

(5) 	
Cornerstones not of an advertising nature built into or attached to a wall of a building. 

(6) 	
Historic interpretive markers. 

(7) 	
Subdivision or development identification signs. 

(8) 	
Government signs: Signs of any size or shape erected by or under the direction of any governmental body or agency in any location for the purpose of promotion, identification, direction, safety, or convenience of the public. 

(9) 	
Theater Marquees in the CC-MU District: Historically, the theaters in the CC-MU district had marquees projecting over the sidewalk to promote the theater’s upcoming events. As marquee signs are a character defining feature of downtown theaters and are crucial to their success, the continued use of theater marquees in the CC-MU is a public goal. In order to allow that tradition to continue, approval of any new theater marquee and associated signs will be by the Historic District Commission on a case by case basis considering historic precedent for such signs in the downtown historic district. 

(10) 	
The minimum size and required posting of signs informing the public of gasoline sales prices in accordance with Maryland law shall not be calculated for the purpose of maximum sign area. That which exceeds the minimum required by Maryland law shall be included in the maximum sign area. 



c. 	
Procedures for Measuring Building Frontage. 

(1) 	
Sign area calculations are based on width of front entrance wall. 

(2) 	
For downtown storefront and other strip store tenants: measure width of lease space on front entrance wall. 

(3) 	
For two-sided storefronts (display windows and customer entry doors on two sides): measure width of lease space on both front entrance walls. 

(4) 	
For buildings or lease spaces that front on two or more public streets: 

i. 	Front entrance wall: measure width as prescribed for that district; 
ii. 	Secondary walls on public streets: 30% of width of front entrance wall. 

(5) 	
For buildings containing multiple tenants (office buildings, upper floors of downtown storefront buildings): measure width of building on front entrance wall. If building has customer entrances on more than one wall, measure width of each entrance wall. 




3. Maximum Number of Signs Permitted. 
a. 	
Maximum Number of Signs. No limitation on number of wall-mounted signs provided 
square footage of total falls within maximums prescribed for that district. 


b. 	
Multiple Occupant Buildings. If building contains multiple tenants (e.g., office buildings, downtown commercial buildings), total wall mounted sign area is limited to formula prescribed for the entire building (e.g., if cap for building is 30 square feet., the total for all signs must add up to 30 or less square feet in area). 

c. 	
Freestanding Signs. No more than one freestanding sign installation per building or shopping center per each street or highway on which the building has frontage. Each pad site in a shopping center shall be permitted one freestanding sign installation. 


4. Sign Dimensional and Design Requirements. 
Site plan applicants are required to present a Program for Signs as part of a required site plan that integrates the design of signs with the design of the building (and/or development) on which they will be displayed and with the surrounding area. An office park may display no more than one freestanding sign to identify the park at each exit and entrance. The style, color and materials of signs shall be consistent with other signs on the property and with the main structure. Dimensional and Design Requirements are as follows. 
a. 	Freestanding Signs. 
Zoning District  Maximum Height (feet)  Maximum Area (square feet)  Maximum area per installation for commercially zoned sections of Dual Highway, Wesel Boulevard and Potomac Avenue north of Northern Avenue (square feet)  
RMOD, RMED, RH*  10  36 for buildings set back 25 feet or less from the street, 48 for buildings set back more than 25 feet from the street.  NA  
RO*, N-MU, CC-MU, CL, C, LC  10  40  NA  
CG, CR, POM, INST  30  100  150  
AT, I-MU  10  100  NA  
IR, IG  30  100  NA  

* For permitted non-residential uses (excluding home work stations) 
b. Flush, Wall-Mounted Signs. 

Zoning District  Maximum Cumulative Area 50 feet or less of building or strip store frontage (square feet)  Maximum Cumulative Area More than 50 feet of building or strip store frontage (square feet)  
RMOD, RMED, RH*  1 per each linear foot of building frontage  1.5 per linear foot of building frontage  
RO*, N-MU, CC-MU, CL, C, LC  1 per each linear foot of building frontage  1 per linear foot of building frontage  
CG, CR, POM, INST, IR, IG, I-MU, AT  1.5 per linear foot of building frontage  2 per linear foot of building frontage  

* For permitted non-residential uses (excluding home work stations) 
c. 	Projecting Signs. No sign shall project more than 52 inches from the building wall or within two feet of the curb line. Dimensional and Design Requirements are as follows for all zoning districts, including non-residential uses in RH and RO Districts (not home workstations): 
Maximum area for storefront or strip store tenant  8 square feet  
Maximum area for single-user building and for upper floor tenants in multi-use buildings  No more than one 36-square foot vertically oriented sign per building frontage  
Minimum vertical clearance  8 feet  
Maximum vertical clearance  Below the second floor for storefront tenants and below the roof line for upper floor tenants and single-user buildings  

d. 	Secondary Changeable Copy/Image Signs. 
(1) 	
For freestanding sign installations, secondary changeable copy/image signs shall be located on the same base as the primary freestanding sign. 

(2) 	
Shall be subject to the total area maximums identified in the preceding subsections for signs. 

(3) 	
Signs which automatically change messages or copy electronically must be set to maintain the image for a minimum of ten seconds in residential districts and six seconds in all other districts. In the residential districts, such signs shall be locked in a single image between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 

(4) 	
All digital signs shall be equipped with automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the brightness to the ambient light at all times of the day and night. 


5. Temporary Signs. 
Temporary signs shall be non-illuminated and limited to the following types: 
a. 	Construction signs, which identify the architects, engineers, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction occurring on the premises on which the sign is displayed. Such signs shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development. 
b. 	
Real estate signs, advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed. Such signs shall be removed upon execution of a lease or contract of sale. 

c. 	
Political and social signs announcing the candidates seeking public political office or other information pertinent thereto, or related to a ballot initiative, or promoting a social or political viewpoint. 

d. 	
Signs advertising only the name, date, time and place of any bona fide fair, festival, bazaar or similar event, when conducted by a public agency or for the benefit of any civic, fraternal, religious or charitable cause; provided that all such signs shall be posted no earlier than 30 days before the event and removed within 24 hours after the last day of the event to which they pertain. Such signs shall not be posted on exclusively residential use properties unless the event is occurring on that property. Such signs may contain the logo(s) of event sponsor(s). 

e. 	
Building mounted grand opening signs for uses permitted by Section Z of this Article, 
provided that such signs shall not be displayed more than one time for up to 10 days. 


f. 	
Seasonal decorations that serve no advertising purpose other than celebrating the holiday or observance. 

g. 	
Change of business name banners/hoods/covers over existing building mounted and freestanding signs, while new signs are being manufactured provided that such sign or signs shall not be displayed for more than eight weeks and shall not exceed the permitted sign area for that site, subject to an approved building or zoning permit. 

h. 	
Yard sale signs on properties containing legal residential uses, provided that such signs shall be displayed only up to eight days before and on the day of the event and only on the property holding the event. The maximum sign area shall be eight square feet. 

i. 	
Signs for approved temporary businesses, subject to size limitations for that district, provided that all such signs shall be removed when the temporary business approval expires. 


6. 	Graduated Progress to Conformity and Prohibition of Electronic Message Boards on Nonconforming Freestanding Signs. 
a. 	Upon application, the Zoning Administrator may approve a replacement sign unit on an existing freestanding sign structure that contains multiple signs exceeding the total permitted sign area, provided that the new sign does not exceed a proportionate share of the total permitted sign area for the number of businesses on the property. When replaced later, existing signs for other users on a property shall comply with this standard. When completed and all existing signs are ultimately replaced, the collective area of the new sign units shall not exceed the total permitted sign area. 
b. No electronic sign shall be added to an existing nonconforming freestanding sign structure. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

J. Overlay Zones. 
1. Planned Unit Developments (PUD). 
a. 	Purpose. 
The purpose of the PUD District is to provide for planned development incorporating a variety of uses and density levels at appropriate locations within the City of Hagerstown which complement the urban nature of the city. The PUD District provides for a total development concept, including a variety of housing types, optimal open space, required public facilities and compatible commercial uses as a part of a detailed development plan. In return for added flexibility from the requirements of the underlying zoning district, PUD developments need to provide improvements to the overall quality of life for the city. 
b. 	Location. 
The PUD District may be established in the RMOD, RMED, RH, CL, CG and CR Districts. The area proposed to be zoned as a PUD District shall have an area of at least five (5) acres. 
c. 	
Principal Permitted Uses and Special Exception Uses, In Accordance With Section S (Site Plan Requirements). 

(1) 	
Uses in these districts shall be permitted, permitted by special exception in accordance with general and specific performance criteria found in Subsection U.8, or not permitted as enumerated in Section Z of this Article. 

(2) 	
A PUD District shall be a mixed-use area and shall contain a mixture of residential types and commercial uses. Residential types shall be mixed among each other and not segregated into housing type pods. 



d. 	
Accessory Uses. 

(1) 	
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any principal permitted use or authorized special exception use. 

(2) 	
Home workstations, subject to the requirements of Subsection K.10 of this Article. The requirements shall not be relaxed for residences in zoning districts where commercial uses may be enumerated as a permitted use in that district. 

(3) 	
Home day-care of up to eight (8) children, as licensed by the State of Maryland. The number of children cared for in an apartment unit that are not members of the household shall not exceed two (2). A home day-care may utilize non-resident employees only for occasional back up staff for the purpose of covering on-site operations for the resident staff during vacations, personal emergencies, appointments, etc. when the resident provider will not be present, as required by their State license. Otherwise, a home day­




care shall not employ persons who do not reside on the property. [Ed. Note: State licensure counts those children under age 6 living in a dwelling among those being cared for under the license. This requirement prohibits a home day-care operator’s ability to care for five or more children under the age of two unless a second care giver (as required by State licensure) is also a resident of the dwelling.] 
e. 	General Requirements for a Planned Unit Development. 
Applications for planned development shall meet the following requirements: 
(1) 	
The area proposed for a planned unit development shall be in one ownership, or, if in several ownerships, the proposal shall be filed jointly by all the owners of the property included in the development plan. 

(2) 	
The site shall be of a size and shape suitable for the development proposed. 

(3) 	
The site is or can be served with public water and wastewater facilities. 

(4) 	
The site shall be located adjacent to adequate highway facilities capable of serving existing traffic and that expected to be generated by the proposed development. 

(5) 	
The owners or developers must indicate that they plan to begin construction of the development within three years after final approval. If construction does not begin within three years, the zoning of the site shall revert to its previous classification unless a time extension is requested by the developer and agreed to by the Planning Commission. If an appeal is pending on approval of a PUD, the three year clock will not start until the conclusion of the appeal process. For the purposes of this section, construction shall mean the complete sub-grade grading of fifty percent (50%) of all streets, construction of primary storm water management facilities and the connection of all required utilities to the PUD tract, unless some alternative definition is incorporated by the Mayor and City Council into the Ordinance rezoning the property to include a PUD Overlay. 


f. 	Application Procedures. 
The following procedures shall be followed with respect to all applications for PUD District zoning: 
(1) 	
Step I. Preliminary Consultation and Concept Plan. A preliminary consultation shall be held between the Planning Commission and the applicant or developer of the proposed planned unit development. The application for PUD District zoning shall be accompanied by a concept plan prepared by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or landscape architect or registered land surveyor. The concept plan shall be to scale and contain sufficient information to establish the identity of proposed uses, grades and approximate dimensions and locations of proposed structures, streets, parking areas, walkways, easements and property lines. It shall include the following information: 

(a) 	
Proposed development layout. 

(b) 	
Proposed reservations for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites and other open spaces. 

(c) 	
Proposed location of neighborhood business within the PUD areas, including all associated off-street parking. 

(d) 	
Types of dwellings and portions of the area proposed therefor. 

(e) 	
Proposed location of dwelling and parking areas. 

(f) 	
A tabulation of the total number of acres in the proposed project and the percentage thereof designated for each of the proposed dwelling types, neighborhood retail business, other nonresidential uses, off-street parking, streets, parks, schools and other reservations. 

(g) 	
A tabulation of overall density per gross acreage. 

(h) 	
Preliminary plans and elevations of the several dwelling types. 

(i) 	
The Planning Commission may require that a traffic impact study be prepared and submitted as part of the review materials for the Planning Commission’s public review meeting. 



(2) 	
Step II. Planning Commission Review and Action. The Planning Commission shall hold a review and make its recommendations to the Mayor and City Council in accordance with the Zoning Map amendment provisions enumerated in Subsection A.9 of this Article. 

(3) 	
Step III. Mayor and City Council Action. Again, in accordance with said Subsection A.9, the Mayor and City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and take formal action to approve or disapprove the PUD District Zoning Map amendment. 

(4) 	
Step IV. Site Plan Review and Action. Upon Mayor and City Council approval of a PUD District Zoning Map Amendment, the applicant shall prepare a detailed development plan in accordance with the site plan requirements delineated in Section S of this Article. 


g. 	Height Regulations. 
(1) 	
Maximum Height – Principal-permitted structure: 60 feet. 

(2) 	
Maximum Height – Accessory structure: 25 feet. 


h.  Off-Street Parking.  
There shall be two spaces per dwelling unit for residential uses. Other uses shall be as delineated in Section O.  
i.  Special Design Requirements.  
(1)  Size. The area proposed to be zoned as a PUD District shall have an area of at least 5 acres.  
(2)  Density of Development and Minimum Lot Size. There is no specific prescribed permitted residential density or minimum lot size for a PUD Development. However, additional open space designed to accommodate active recreational use in addition to that required in (3) below, shall be provided as follows, whether fee simple or condominium:  

Use  For Each Square Foot of Lot Area Below the Following Lot Area Requirement  Requirement of Additional Open Space  
Single Family Detached Dwelling  7,500 square feet  1.0 square feet  
Single-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling  5,000 square feet  1.2 square feet  
Two-Family Dwelling  10,000 square feet  2.5 square feet  
Townhouse Dwelling  2,500 square feet  1.5 square feet  
Stacked Apartment, Courtyard Apartments and Mansion Apartment House Dwellings  2,000 square feet per dwelling unit  1.75 square Feet  

(3) 	Open Space. 
(a) 	
Open space shall be so located and designed to complement the development and serve as an amenity to the development. 

(b) 	
Common open space shall comprise not less than twenty percent (20%) of the total gross area. 

(c) 	
Character-defining open space in the form of “town greens” and other traditional urban or village forms of open space shall comprise not less than 7.5% of the total gross area. 

(d) 	
Forest retention required to meet the terms of Article 7 may occupy up to 25% percent of the required open space, provided it is not located in flood plains or other residual areas, and that wooded area is included in a comprehensive strategy for recreation and aesthetics within the development. 

(e) 	
Such space shall include land area to be developed as recreational areas or which is designated for the common use of all occupants of the planned unit development but shall not include streets, storm water management facilities 

(unless specifically designed to be a community amenity or natural feature), off-street parking areas, or utility easements. Such open space shall not be comprised of accumulations of leftover remnants of land on the site, but shall constitute meaningful contiguous areas of land or a planned, coordinated strategy of distributed open space areas intended to enhance the urban/town experience subject to the approval of the Planning Commission based on reasons set forth in this Article. 

(f) 	
Open space also should provide for the preservation of significant natural features on the land and/or provide recreational amenities for the use of the residents of the development. The Planning Commission must be furnished satisfactory evidence as a condition for approval that such open space area will be continued and that perpetual maintenance is provided for. 

(g) 	
Open space will be for the benefit of the residents and visitors of the development, however, these features and amenities may be made available for use by the general public through dedication to and acceptance by the Mayor and City Council. 


(4) 	Maximum Allocation of Commercial Uses and Residential Uses. All planned unit developments shall include both commercial and residential elements with the following distributions: 
CG and CR District: Minimum 35% of tract in residential use All other base districts: 20%-70% of tract in commercial use 
The Mayor and Council may authorize deviation from the percentage standards of this subsection if the proposed development meets the intent of this Section. 
(5) 	
Compatibility with Neighboring Developments. The perimeter of infill developments shall consider neighboring developments and established building patterns with regards to use, density, street orientation, and landscaping. 

(6) 	
Setback Requirements (measured in feet). 


Use  Front  Side  Rear  Accessory Rear  Lot Width  
Single-family dwelling  10(a)  5  20(b)  5  35  
Single-family semi-detached dwelling  10(a)  5  20(b)  5  25  
Two-family dwelling  10(a)  10  20(b)  5  50  
Townhouse dwelling  0 (c)  5  20(b)  5  20(d)  
Stacked, Courtyard and Mansion House Apartment dwellings  10  10(e)  20(e)  5  75  
Commercial  0  10  0  0  20  
All others  10  10  20  5  20  

See notes on following page. 
(a) 	
Porches and steps may extend no closer than five (5) feet to the front property line. 

(b) 	
A 20 foot rear setback is required to allow for a parking pad on the rear of the lot, accessed via an alley. 

(c) 	
End unit townhomes located at public street intersections shall be so designed as to have their front facade oriented toward the side street. 

(d) 	
The Planning Commission may approve a design that includes townhouses without public street frontage fronting a common green, provided that the green is accepted by the City as a public park, and the design is acceptable to the Fire Marshal for the purpose of emergency access. Should the developer offer the green as a public park and the City accept it, the developer shall establish a fund with sufficient resources for the perpetual maintenance of the park, as may be determined by the City Engineer and convey the fund to City control. 

(e) 	
When stacked, courtyard, and mansion house apartment buildings will be adjacent to (or across alleys from) lots containing single-family, two-family, semi-detached or townhouse dwellings within or outside of the PUD, a 35 foot setback shall be provided. 


(7) 	
Fences. Picket and paddock fences, constructed of composite material or painted wood, and ornamental metal fences, up to three feet in height are exempt from front setback requirements in the PUD District. Such fences used in a public use open space area (such as in a “green”) may be up to five feet in height and are not subject to setback requirements if constructed in accordance with the above standards. 

(8) 	
Design Requirements. A PUD Development shall be designed in accordance with design requirements as set forth in Article 5, Section E (Subdivision Design Principles and Standards). 

(9) 	
Minimum Size of Dwelling Units. All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 


2. Conversion District. 
a. 	Purpose. 
The purposes of this district are to stimulate the adaptive reuse of existing, nonresidential, multi­story and large one-story structures, to maintain and increase the City's assessable base, to expand business and employment opportunities, and to protect residential neighborhoods from excessive traffic, odors, fumes, noise, and light. The Conversion District provides an alternative development concept for underutilized structures while protecting the general health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics through the commitment to an approved development concept plan. Such structures must be in existence prior to March 7, 1977. 
b. 	Location. 
The Conversion District may be located in the following districts: RMOD, RMED, RH, RO, CL, CG, POM, INST, CC-MU, N-MU, I-MU, IR and IG. 
c. 	Permitted and Special Exception Uses. 
Uses in these districts shall be permitted, permitted by special exception in accordance with general and specific performance criteria found in Subsection U.8, or not permitted as enumerated in Section Z of this Article. 
d. 	
Accessory Uses. 

(1) 	
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any principal permitted use or authorized special exception. 

(2) 	
Home workstations, subject to the provisions of Subsection K.10 of this Article. 

(3) 	
Home day-care of up to eight (8) children, as licensed by the State of Maryland. The number of children cared for in an apartment unit that are not members of the household shall not exceed two (2). A home day-care may utilize non-resident employees only for occasional back up staff for the purpose of covering on-site operations for the resident staff during vacations, personal emergencies, appointments, etc. when the resident provider will not be present, as required by their State license. Otherwise, a home day­care shall not employ persons who do not reside on the property. [Ed. Note: State licensure counts those children under age 6 living in a dwelling among those being cared for under the license. This requirement prohibits a home day-care operator’s ability to care for five or more children under the age of two unless a second care giver (as required by State licensure) is also a resident of the dwelling.] 



e. 	
General Requirements. 

(1) 	
The area proposed for a conversion district shall be in one ownership, or, if in several ownerships, the proposal shall be filed jointly by all the owners of property included in the development plan. 

(2) 	
The development shall be for an existing, nonresidential structure containing at least two floors within which all proposed uses, except parking, will be contained. 

(3) 	
The owners or developers must indicate that they plan to begin construction of the development within two years after final approval. If construction does not begin within two years, the zoning of the site shall revert to its previous classification unless a time extension is requested by the developer and agreed to by the Planning Commission. 

(4) 	
A site plan in accordance with Section S for entire area to be utilized shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission prior to the use of the property. 

(5) 	
A concept plan, as required in Subsection f.(2), below, shall be submitted with the application for a conversion district. 




f. 	Application Procedure. 
(1) 
Step 1. Preliminary Consultation. The applicant may request a preliminary consultation with the Planning Commission prior to submission of an application. 

(2) 	
Step 2. Concept Plan. A concept plan shall be submitted with the application. The concept plan shall include sufficient detail to determine consistency with this article. At a minimum, the concept plan shall show the building as existing and as proposed after development, landscaping, parking, and the following information: 

(a) 	
Proposed development layout. 

(b) 	
Proposed reservations for parks, parkways, playgrounds, and other open spaces. 

(c) 	
A tabulation of the total number of acres in the proposed project and the percentage thereof for each structure, parking, open space, and other uses. 

(d) 	
A tabulation of the total square footage in the building, existing and proposed, plus the area and percentage for each residential or non-residential use within the structure. 

(e) 	
Plans, schematics, and elevations of the structure showing how the architectural theme of the building will be retained and the aesthetic environment of the neighborhood will be retained. 



(3) 	
Step 3. Planning Commission Review and Action. The Planning Commission shall hold a review and make its recommendation to the Mayor and City Council in accordance with the zoning map amendment provisions enumerated in Subsection A.9 of this Article. 

(4) 	
Step 4. Mayor and City Council Action. In accordance with Subsection A.9, the Mayor and City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and take formal action to approve or disapprove the Conversion District Zoning Map amendment. 

(5) 	
Step 5. Site plan review and action. Upon Mayor and Council approval of a Conversion District Zoning Map amendment, the applicant shall prepare a detailed development plan in accordance with the site plan requirement delineated in Section S of this article and concept plan approved by the Mayor and City Council. 


g. 	Height. 
The height of any approved additions shall be in accordance with the height limitation of the base zoning district. 
h. 	Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be as required under Section O, except that during review of the site plan, the Planning Commission may permit variation from the number of spaces required, provided such variation relates to the shared use of the parking spaces and is consistent with the approved conversion district concept plan and the special design requirements of this district. 
i. 	
Special Design Requirements. 

(1) 	
In a residential district, commercial uses shall only be allowed when mixed with residential uses unless otherwise approved by the Mayor and City Council. The total floor area used by all commercial uses, whether principal permitted or by special exception, shall not exceed 50% of the existing structure’s gross floor area, unless otherwise approved by the Mayor and City Council. In commercial and industrial districts, residential uses are only permitted when mixed with non-residential uses. 

(2) 	
Additions shall be designed consistent with the architectural theme of the structure and shall be located in the space least visible to the general public. 

(3) 	
The CL maximum square footage requirements for retail trade and restaurants shall only apply where the underlying zoning district is Residential or CL. 



j. 	
Lot Area Requirements. 


The minimum lot area for a Conversion District shall be 20,001 square feet. 
k. 	Minimum Size of Dwelling Units. 
All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 
3. Local Conversion District. 
a. 	Purpose. 
The purposes of this district are to stimulate the adaptive reuse of existing, nonresidential and mixed-use structures embedded within densely developed residential districts and communities, to maintain and increase the city's assessable tax base, and to expand business and employment opportunities. The Local Conversion District allows for alternate forms of use and development for buildings and/or spaces that are part of or very close to residential uses in residential districts. Allowing such uses to fit into existing commercial and mixed use structures re-establishes the historically mixed use nature of the City’s 19th and early 20th Century residential communities. The Local Conversion District provides an alternative development concept for underutilized structures while protecting the general health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics in the vicinity of the site through the commitment to an approved development concept plan. It is acknowledged that such uses will be outwardly commercial in nature and operation, but are reviewed individually to 
ensure the proposed use or uses and improvements are not an undue burden on the surrounding area.  
b.  Location.  
The Local Conversion District may be located in the following districts: RMOD, RMED, RH and RO.  
c.  Permitted and Special Exception Uses.  
Uses in the Local Conversion District shall be permitted, permitted by special exception in accordance with general and specific performance criteria found in Subsection U.8, or not permitted as enumerated in Section Z of this Article.  
d.  Accessory Uses.  
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to those uses permitted by an approved concept plan for the adoption of the overlay district, unless prohibited by the adopted concept plan and/or the special design standards cited in Subsection i. below.  
e.  General Requirements.  
(1)  The area proposed for a conversion district shall be in one ownership, or, if in several ownerships, the proposal shall be filed jointly by all the owners of property included in the development plan.  
(2)  The development shall be for an existing, nonresidential or mixed use structure, constructed before March 7, 1977, in which all proposed uses will be contained, except:  
(a)  Outdoor dining areas and outdoor merchandise display, as regulated elsewhere in this provision; and  
(b)  Additions, as permitted in Subsection i. below.  
(3)  The owners or developers must indicate that they plan to begin construction of the development or commence the use within one year after the overlay is approved. If the use does not commence within two years, the zoning of the site shall revert to its previous classification unless a time extension is requested by the developer and agreed to by the Planning Commission.  
(4)  This overlay district shall only be used for buildings or parts of buildings that are oriented in appearance and access to a public street. This overlay district shall not be used for buildings and uses oriented predominantly toward an alley.  

f.  Application Procedure.  
(1) Step 1. Preliminary Consultation. The applicant may request a preliminary consultation  
with the Planning Commission prior to submission of an application.  
(2) Step 2. Concept Plan. A concept plan shall be submitted with the application. The  
concept plan shall include sufficient detail to determine consistency with this Article. At  
a minimum, the concept plan shall show the building as existing and as proposed after  
development, landscaping, parking, signage, general nature of street furniture and the  
following information:  
(a) Proposed development layout.  
(b) A tabulation of the total square footage in the building, existing and proposed,  
plus the area and percentage for each residential or non-residential use within the  
structure.  
(c) Plans, schematics, and elevations of the structure showing how the architectural  
theme of the building will be retained and not unduly impact adjacent residential  
properties.  
(3) Step 3. Planning Commission Review and Action. The Planning Commission shall hold a  
review and make its recommendation to the Mayor and City Council in accordance with  
the zoning map amendment provisions enumerated in Subsection A.9 of this Article.  
(4) Step 4. Mayor and City Council Action. In accordance with said Subsection A.9, the  
Mayor and City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Planning  
Commission and take formal action to approve or disapprove the Local Conversion  
District Zoning Map amendment.  
(5) Step 5. Site Plan Review and Action. Upon Mayor and Council approval of a Local  
Conversion District Zoning Map amendment, the applicant shall prepare a detailed site  
plan or minor site plan in accordance with the site plan requirement delineated in Section  
S of this Article and the concept plan approved by the Mayor and City Council. The plan  
shall be subject to Planning Commission approval.  
g.  Height.  
No increase in height is permitted, except in accordance with the height limitation in the  
underlying zoning district.  
h.  Lot Area Requirements and Off-Street Parking.  
(1) The maximum lot area for a Local Conversion District shall be 20,000 square feet.  

(2) 	Minimum parking requirements and lot size requirements shall not apply to this overlay district, however existing on-site parking shall not be reduced unless the remaining parking meets current Ordinance requirements. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant a variance to this requirement. However, upon illustration in a rezoning exhibit, the Mayor and Council, as part of the petition for rezoning, may approve a site design that reduces the amount of existing parking if it finds that to do so is an acceptable step to ensure the adequate landscaping and screening of the use from adjacent properties. 
i. 	Special Design Requirements. 
(1) 	
Additions shall be designed consistent with the architectural theme of the structure and shall be located in the space least visible to the general public. 

(2) 	
No outdoor vending machines shall be permitted. 

(3) 	
No outdoor storage of any kind is permitted except display of merchandise at convenience and grocery stores if historically part of a use on the subject property. 

(4) 	
No outdoor dining or seating area for a restaurant shall be permitted in any of the rear yard area between the building and rear property line or within ten feet of a side property line unless historically part of the on-site use. 

(5) 	
Buildings of an industrial, warehouse or automotive service design shall be enhanced via architectural or cosmetic enhancement, site amenities, landscaping, and other strategies to achieve suitability for their new use(s) within a residential district and compatibility with the neighborhood. 

(6) 	
Storefronts previously modified or enclosed shall be rehabilitated to reintroduce a storefront window display design. 

(7) 	
All new residential units shall comply with the requirements of Section K.18. 


4. Historic Districts and Landmarks. 
a. 	Location. 
The Mayor and City Council may designate an historic district or landmark as an overlay zone in any area of the City. The historic district and landmark designation can concurrently occur as an overlay with any of the other various districts. 
b. 	
Criteria. 

(1) 	
Historical significance: 

(a) 	
Has significant character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city, county, state, or nation; 

(b) 	
Is the site of an historic event; 

(c) 	
Is identified with a person or a group of persons who influenced society; or 

(d) 	
Exemplifies the cultural, economic, social, political, or historic heritage of the city. 



(2) 	
Archaeological significance: A site that yields, or scholarly research suggests it may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history, as the location of a significant event, occupation or activity, or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished. 

(3) 	
Architectural significance: 

(a) 	
Embodies the distinctive characteristics or a type, period, or method of construction; 

(b) 	
Represents the work of a master craftsman, architect or builder; 

(c) 	
Possesses high artistic value; 

(d) 	
Represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 

(e) 	
Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, community, or city, due to its singular physical characteristics or landscape. 





c. 	
Procedure. 


Should a site, structure, or district meet any of the following criteria, it may be eligible for designation as an historic district or landmark: The Historic District Commission is authorized and empowered, after making full and proper study, to recommend any site, structure, or district meeting any of the above criteria, within the limits of the City, as a proposed historic district or landmark and to determine the boundary lines of any such district or landmark. The recommendation shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and action. The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the Mayor and City Council in accordance with the Zoning Map Amendment procedures enumerated in Subsection A.9 of this Article. The Mayor and City Council shall hold a review and take formal action to approve or disapprove the historic district or landmark Zoning Map Amendment. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

K. Supplementary Regulations. 
1. Fences and Walls. 
No fence or wall shall be constructed without first securing a zoning certificate from the Planning and Code Administration Department. The applicant shall submit a plan for the fence for review of the zoning certificate application. The following standards shall apply: 
a. 	Visibility at Intersections. 
With respect to corner lots, no fence, wall, gateway, ornamental structure, hedge, shrubbery and other fixtures, construction or planting shall exceed three (3) feet in height in either direction back from the street corner (measured from the intersection of the street rights of ways) for a distance of 25 feet. This restriction applies to all corner lots in all zoning districts where front yards are required. 
b. 	Height and Setback. 
The following maximum height limitation shall be applied to fences: 

District  Front Yard  Side Yard  Rear Yard  
Residential Zoning Districts [ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: see illustration on next page]  3 feet b(1)  6 feet b(1) and b(4)  6 feet b(1) and b(4)  
Residential Uses in a Mixed-Use District  3 feet b(1)  6 feet b(1) and b(4)  6 feet b(1) and b(4)  
Commercial Zoning Districts  Not Permitted c.2  8 feet c(1)  8 feet c(1)  
Commercial and Industrial uses in a Mixed-Use District  Not Permitted c.2  8 feet c(1)  8 feet c(1)  
Industrial Zoning Districts, Including the I-MU District  10 feet c.2  10 feet c(1)  10 feet c(1)  

[ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: The letters in each box shown in parentheses correspond to notes and requirements in subsections shown below and on the following two pages.] 
(1) 	Residential Districts and Residential Uses in Mixed Use Districts. 
(a) 	
When a residential property in a residential zoning district fronts more than one public street, the frontage on the side street and/or street to the rear shall be treated as a side or rear setback for the purpose of fence location, provided the fence is not installed closer to the principal frontage along the side street than the rear façade of the dwelling. 

This provision shall not apply when the side street or street to the rear is of a higher functional classification than the principal frontage, as determined by the City Engineer. In such cases, the front yard fence limitations shall continue to apply. [Ed. Note: See drawing on page 4-72.] 

(b) 	
Front yard fences shall 
be constructed only of 
decorative metal, wood 
picket, vinyl picket or 
composite picket 
construction, with the 
spaces between the 
pickets being at least as 
wide as the pickets. 


(c) 	
Chain link, wire, vinyl, 
paddock, and post and 
rail fences are 
specifically prohibited 
within 25 feet of a street 
right of way. On 
residential properties, 
chain link fencing shall 
be limited to no more 
than four feet in height 
in side and rear yards. 
Barbed wire fences are 
prohibited. 




The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant variances to the requirements of this paragraph. 
(2) 	Entrance Features. 
Fences or walls which serve as entrance features to subdivisions or developments shall be limited to four feet in height. 
(3) 	Specialty Features. 
Specialty fences of a specific and unique purpose, typically not associated with a property boundary, may exceed the height limits of a particular zoning district, subject to Planning Commission approval of the fencing plan as part of the Site Plan or Subdivision Plan approval. Fences of this type may include, but are not limited to, those associated with athletic fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, commercial and industrial storage areas, fencing surrounding telecommunications facilities, and noise attenuation walls. 
(4) 	
When Adjacent to More Intense Uses. 

(a) 	
When a property in a residential or mixed-use zoning district used for residential purposes is adjoining a CG, CR, POM, INST or I-MU district or adjoining a non­

conforming commercial or industrial use similar in character to what would be permitted in the CG, CR, POM, INST or I-MU District, the fence in a side or rear yard may be eight feet in height. No landscaping outside the fence shall be required. 

(b) 	
When a property in a residential or mixed-use zoning district used for residential purposes is adjoining an IR or IG zoned property or adjoining a non-conforming commercial or industrial use similar in character to what would be permitted in the IR or IG Districts, the fence in the side or rear yard may be ten feet in height. No landscaping outside of the fence shall be required. Such fence shall comply with the required front yard setback. 



(5) 	
Setbacks for Retaining Walls. 


See Subsection e, below. 
c. 	Buffers. 
(1) 	When Adjacent to Less Intense Districts. 
When properties in the commercial, mixed use or industrial districts are adjacent to a residential district (and in industrial districts when the property is adjacent to a commercial or mixed use district), landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section S of this Article and Article 5, Section I. The appropriate buffer shall be located outside the perimeter of the fence. The Planning Commission has the authority to reduce or eliminate the buffer requirement outside of the fence based on individual and unique circumstances. 
(2) 	Buffers Required When Adjacent to Public Streets. 
Fences or walls constructed in a commercial or industrial district adjacent to a public street shall provide a perimeter roadside buffer in accordance with Section S of this Article and Article 5, Section I.4.h(8). The appropriate buffer shall be located outside the perimeter of the fence. The Planning Commission has the authority to reduce or eliminate the buffer requirement outside of the fence based on individual and unique circumstances. 

d. 	Construction Standards and Materials. 
Fences shall be constructed of materials specifically designed and manufactured for fencing purposes. 
(1) 	
Fences shall be constructed of materials specifically designed and manufactured for fencing purposes. 

(2) 	
Barbed wire is not permitted in or adjacent to residential, mixed use and commercial districts. Barbed wire fences are permitted in industrial districts provided the barbed wire is installed on top of a fence that is at least six feet in height. 

(3) 	
See Subsection K.1.b. and K.1.c of this section regarding limitations on materials for fences in front yards in residential districts. 

(4) 	
The finished side of any fence shall face outward towards surrounding public street rights-of-way, public parks and public school properties. 


e. 	Retaining Walls and Safety Fences Thereon. 
(1) 	
Retaining Wall Setbacks. In order to ensure that a retaining wall can be maintained or repaired without trespass onto adjacent property, when a retaining wall is constructed on a property that contains or is planned to contain a use other than a single-family dwelling, single-family semi-detached dwelling or two family dwelling, and the wall faces away from the property, the wall shall be set back as follows: 

Wall height: 	24 to 48 inches above adjacent grade: 3 feet. More than 48 inches above adjacent grade 6 feet. 

(2) 	
Safety Fences on Retaining Walls. The provisions of this subsection regarding fences shall not be applied to those installed above retaining walls that are without integral safety railings or where safety railings are set back from the top of the wall by a minimum of three feet. However, safety railings made of fence materials shall comply with limitations on materials found in this subsection. 


2. Special Height Regulations. 
The height limitations contained in the height regulations and yard requirements do not apply to belfries; steeples; spires; electric or communication poles or towers; electric transforming or switching equipment; radio, television, or radar towers; chimneys or smoke stacks; flagpoles; fire towers; cupolas; domes; monuments; penthouses or roof structures for housing stairways; or to tanks, ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building. 
No penthouse or roof structure subject to this height limitation exception shall have a total area greater than 25% of the roof area, nor shall such structure be used for any purpose other than a use incidental to the main use of the building. The height limitations for wireless communications antennas, poles, and towers are specified in Section Q. 
3. Structures to Have Access. 
Every dwelling hereafter erected or moved shall be located on a lot adjacent to a public street. For the purpose of this section, alleys do not constitute a public street. 
4. Floodplain. 
All uses in the flood plain as defined by the map entitled, “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,” and designated as Community Panel No. 240074-0001B, prepared by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration and delineated on the official zoning map, shall comply with Article 6 of this Chapter. 
5. Storm Water Detention and Retention Structures. 
Design, buffering, location and other considerations for the construction of stormwater detention and retention structures are found in Article 5, Section I, of this Code and those Ordinances administered by the City Engineer for the purpose of governing design of such structures. 
6. Procedure for Measurement of Yards. 
a. Front Yard. 
Depth of required front yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost points of the side lot lines, in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at which the side and front lot lines would have met without such rounding. 
b. Rear Yard. 
Depth of required rear yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining the rearmost points of the side lot lines. The forward rear yard line of a required rear yard shall be parallel to the straight line so established. 
c. Side Yard. 
Width of required side yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining the ends of front and rear lot lines on the same side of the lot. The inner side yard line of a required side yard shall be parallel to the straight line so established. 
All public street frontages are “front” yards. These two examples illustrate how yard requirements are determined, both in interior lots and corner lots. The area shown as “street” in these illustrations includes everything within the street right-of-way, not just the improved surface of the road. 

7. Yard Sales. 
Yard sales, as defined in Article 3, are permitted for all residential properties permitted by right, special exception or bona fide nonconforming use, as an accessory use to that dwelling provided there are no more than four such yard sales in a calendar year, and each sale is no longer than three consecutive days in duration. 
8. New Residential Development Sales and Leasing Facilities. 
The use of sales trailers or a constructed home as a model home and/or sales office shall be permitted for the purpose of marketing units for rent or sale within that development, provided that the type and location are shown on the approved site plan or development plan. Otherwise a site plan will be required. 
9. Use of Semi-Trailers and Sea-Containers. 
a. 	Semi-trailers shall not be used for the purpose of storing material or merchandise on a property beyond that customarily associated with the temporary and transitory use of the semi-trailer to transport goods. They shall not be used as storage facilities, except as otherwise permitted on an active construction site. Every semi-trailer maintained on a property shall be kept roadworthy and currently registered and display valid license plates registered to that vehicle. Any semi­trailer made nonconforming by this Article shall be brought into compliance within 24 months of the effective date of this Ordinance or be removed from the property. 
[ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: The amortization period for this provision expired on October 25, 2014.] 
Use of a semi-trailer for a one-time or rare extenuating circumstance of business operations shall be permitted for a period of up to 180 days on commercial properties in commercial and industrial zoning districts, provided the use of the semi-trailer(s) is located on existing paved or gravel surfaces, does not occupy required on-site parking and remains roadworthy and licensed as described above. This provision shall not be interpreted to permit serial use of semi-trailers for ongoing on-site storage or for use in repetitive circumstances. Semi-trailers may be used for on-site secure storage of building supplies and tools at an active construction site as long as construction is ongoing. When used at a construction site, the semi-trailer(s) shall be immediately removed when construction is stopped or is completed. 
b. 	Sea containers shall be used only in accordance with Chapter184 of the City Code. 
10. Accessory Use Home Workstations. 
A home workstation is permitted as an accessory use in any legal dwelling. A home workstation does not involve any customers, clients, nonresident employees, supervisors, partners or co-workers visiting the property. However, the academic or artistic tutoring of individual students shall be permitted, provided no more than one student is under instruction at one time. 
There shall be no sign and no outdoor storage of any kind. Deliveries are limited to those made by the 
U.S. 
Postal Service and similar carriers in vehicles of a size that routinely serve residential areas and in a volume and frequency consistent with those deliveries made to a dwelling. There is no external evidence of any sort that the dwelling is used for any purpose other than that of a dwelling other than: 

a. 	
The commercial appearance of one vehicle used for commuting associated with the business, as limited by Subsection D.3.c. of this Article in residential zoning districts; or 

b. 	
The arrival and departure of individual students of tutors. 


11. Fowl and Farm Animals and Livestock. 
Except as may be permitted by the terms of the Agricultural Transition Zoning District, and zoning districts which specifically permit such use as part of another industry (such as slaughterhouses), the keeping of livestock, fowl and farm animals is not permitted within the City of Hagerstown. Livestock and farm animals include, but are not limited to horses, cattle, sheep, pigs or hogs, goats, alpaca, chickens, turkeys and similar animals. Such animals shall not be kept for any reason, including as household pets. 
12. Alternative Energy Sources/Generators. 
To obtain approval for a wind or solar energy system, the applicant shall submit a zoning permit application with a plan for review by the Planning and Code Administration Department. Once the zoning permit is approved, the applicant may apply for proper permits from the Code Administration Office. 
a. 	Small Wind Energy Systems. 
Small Wind Energy Systems shall be permitted as an accessory use to any principal-permitted use in any zoning district. 
(1) 	
No more than one freestanding Small Wind Energy System shall be permitted on any individual property. 

(2) 	
The minimum setback from any property line for a Small Wind Energy System shall be: 

(a) 	
One and one-tenth (1.1) foot from the base of the structure to each property line for every one foot in structure height (as measured from the lowest point along the base to the highest point of the support tower, the top of either the turbine device or the area swept by the rotor blades, whichever is greatest). 

(b) 	
In the event that the maximum permitted height for Small Wind Energy System cannot be achieved on a specific property, the maximum permitted height shall be controlled by the setback constraints. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not issue a variance to the minimum required setbacks for a Small Wind Energy System. 

(c) 	
Location in the required front building setback is prohibited. 



(3) 	
No Small Wind Energy System shall have a rated maximum output in excess of 15 kilowatts of electricity. No variance to this electric generating capacity shall be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 

(4) 	
No support tower for Small Wind Energy System shall be taller than 100 feet in height. 

(5) 	
All wind energy systems shall be designed such that the lowest point of the area that may be swept by the rotor blades shall have a clearance of not less than 15 feet above the base of the supporting structure. The supporting tower shall not be climbable for the first 12 feet above the base of the structure. Any access doors to wind energy towers and electrical equipment shall be secured by safety locks. 

(6) 	
Guy wires used to support a Small Wind Energy System structure shall be set back at least ten feet from all property lines and shall be secured to stationary anchors properly and securely mounted into the ground, not a tree or other structure on the property. Appropriate, but not excessive, reflective or visible painting or colored objects (such as flags, reflectors, or tapes) shall be placed on all guy wires within ten feet of the ground in sufficient quantities or spacing to make them visible. 

(7) 	
Public Airports and Heliports: With respect to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA): CRF Title 14, Part 77.13 defines the controlling language for towers. The FAA must be notified when: a Wind Energy System is erected within 5,000 feet of a public use heliport that exceeds a 25:1 surface ratio; when requested by the FAA (applicant must contact FAA); when any construction or alteration is located on a public use airport or heliport. 

(8) 	
All supporting towers for a Small Wind Energy System shall be specifically engineered to support a wind turbine. Steel lattice support towers shall be prohibited in all residential zoning districts. The use or modification of a supporting tower originally designed for a telecommunications antenna as a supporting tower for a Small Wind Energy System shall be prohibited. Supporting towers constructed of aluminum also shall be prohibited. 

(9) 	
The applicant shall document that the proposed Small Wind Energy System shall not generate audible noise levels over 55 dBA at all property boundaries. 

(10) 	
All Small Wind Energy Systems shall be designed with braking, governing, or feathering systems to prevent uncontrolled rotation, over speeding, and excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades, and system components. 

(11) 	
To the maximum extent practicable under the applicable regulatory requirements, rotor blades for all Small Wind Energy Systems shall be designed with non-reflective (non­gloss) paints and materials to minimize the potential “flicker” or “strobing” effect of reflected sunlight on adjoining properties. The system also shall be designed or sited to minimize the potential impacts of rotor blade shadow strobing on nearby residential dwellings, where such siting flexibility exists. 

(12) 	
No Small Wind Energy System shall be lighted or illuminated in any way that is not otherwise specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 

(13) 	
No Small Wind Energy System shall contain any lettering, advertisement, or signage of any kind, with the exception of any required or standard warning signage and not more than one (1) manufacturer label bonded to or painted upon the Wind Energy System. 

(14) 	
Small Wind Energy Systems shall be designed and painted in a manner that is appropriate to minimize visual impacts on the area and setting. 

(15) 	
To the maximum extent practicable, all on-site wiring or power lines necessary to control or transmit power from the Wind Energy System shall be placed underground or hidden from public view, except where necessary to connect the system with an above-ground power line. 


(16) 	Where a Small Wind Energy System will be connected to the electric power grid to permit “net-metering”, the applicant also shall provide an affidavit signed by the owner documenting that “the owner will comply with all applicable utility notification requirements contained in the Maryland net metering law and the system will comply with the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 1547 Standard for Interconnecting Distributed Resources with Electric Power Systems, as may be amended, and the applicable requirements promulgated by the Maryland Small Generator Interconnection Standards by the Maryland Public Service Commission.” 
(17) 	
When an approved Small Wind Energy System has ceased active production of electricity for a period of at least 12 consecutive months, the owner of said property shall remove the Wind Energy System and supporting structure from the property. 

(18) 	
Small Wind Energy Systems that are proposed for location in historic districts shall be required to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic District Commission (HDC). The HDC may reject the application if found to compromise the historic architecture of a building or the historic environment of a site. 

(3) 	
To the greatest extent possible, the finished material on the panels should be treated to reduce glare. 


b.  Large Wind Energy Systems.  
Large Wind Energy Systems shall not be permitted in any zoning district within the City.  
c.  Building-Mounted Wind Energy Systems.  
Building-Mounted Wind Energy Systems shall be permitted as an accessory use to any principal-permitted use in any zoning district.  
(1)  No more than one Building-Mounted Wind Energy System with a rated maximum output of not more than 15 kilowatts of electricity shall be permitted on any individual property. No variance to this electric generating capacity shall be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.  
(2)  The highest part of the Building-Mounted Wind Energy System may not exceed ten feet above the highest point of the roof in all zoning districts.  
(3)  Safety and aesthetic standards under Subsection 8.a. (ix) through (xviii) of this Article shall also apply to Building-Mounted Wind Energy Systems.  
d.  Ground-Mounted Solar Collection Systems.  
Ground-Mounted Solar Collection Systems are permitted as an accessory use in any zoning district.  
(1)  In residential and mixed-use zoning districts and for residential uses in any other zoning district, Ground-Mounted Solar Collection Systems shall not occupy more than nine hundred (900) square feet of the lot, shall not be taller than ten (10) feet in height, and shall meet all setback requirements for accessory structures.  
(2)  In commercial and industrial districts, Ground-Mounted Solar Collections Systems shall meet the height and setback requirements for accessory structures in that district.  
e.  Building-Mounted Solar Collection Systems.  
Building-Mounted Solar Collection Systems are permitted in any zoning district.  
(1)  Building-Mounted Solar Collection Systems may not exceed 12 inches in height on gabled or hipped roofs or ten feet on flat roofs.  
(2)  Building-Mounted Solar Collection Systems that are proposed for location in historic districts shall be required to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic District Commission (HDC).  

13. Temporary Contractor Staging Facilities. 
When property is developed or redeveloped in an urban environment, it is very difficult or impossible to stage construction activities only on the property being developed or redeveloped. Therefore, the Zoning Administrator, upon request, receipt of property owner’s authorization of the request and subsequent to notice provided to adjacent property owners 15 days in advance of a decision, may issue a zoning certificate for a temporary contractor staging facility in any zoning district, subject to the following requirements. 
a. 	
The Applicant shall demonstrate that containing all construction staging activity cannot be accommodated only on the subject property. 

b. 	
The Applicant shall demonstrate that the property selected is the most practical location for such staging activity, considering distance to the construction site, keeping potential impacts to as few adjacent properties as possible, access to and from the site and other considerations of the unique conditions of the property selected. The certificate shall be valid for a specified period of time, but can be renewed. The use shall be for an active construction site only. If construction is halted, the temporary staging facility must be cleared within five business days. 

c. 	
The Applicant shall provide a plan to the Zoning Administrator showing the use areas on the site, mitigation steps that may be taken to minimize impacts on surrounding properties and the measures that will be taken to return the property to the same or better condition that existed at the beginning of the use. Upon completion of the need for the staging area as part of the construction project, all materials, equipment, supplies, etc. shall be removed from the staging site within five business days, and required remediation of the site conditions shall be completed within 30 days. 

d. 	
Parties aggrieved by the Zoning Administrator’s decision whether to issue a zoning certificate for such use may appeal this decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of the date assigned to the certificate. 


14. Work to Be Completed in a Professional and Workmanlike Manner. 
Construction of any building, addition to a building, fence, shed, carport, landscaping area required as an element of a site plan, paving or other site feature shall be completed in a professional and workmanlike manner. 
15. Tarps and Pliable Material as Building Materials. 
Tarps, canvas and similar pliable material shall not be used as enclosures for or building materials of buildings or structures. This provision shall not apply to bona fide awnings designed and constructed as such of material intended for use in awnings, or canvas or other pliable materials engineered or professionally designed for such purposes. Any existing material noncompliant to this requirement shall be removed within 180 days of October 30, 2015. [ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: The amortization period for this provision expires on April 25, 2016.] 
16. Dumpster Enclosures. 
Installations of new trash dumpsters on existing developments (where site plan is not required) shall be required to have a dumpster enclosure. The dumpster enclosure shall be compliant with the standard detail maintained by the City Engineer. The Planning Commission may waive this requirement if convinced that the dumpster location is the most logical placement due to unique site constraints and that installation of the enclosure is not practical due to those constraints. 
17. Outdoor Storage of Inventory, Merchandise and Supplies. 
All Outdoor storage of inventory, merchandise and supplies in the CL, CG, CR, POM, INST, IR, IG, I­MU, and Conversion Districts shall, at a minimum, be located at least 10 feet from adjacent property lines and street rights of way, and buffered in accordance with the provisions of the section pertaining to the buffering of parking areas. 
This provision shall also be applied to properties and uses where a site plan is not required for a new or expanded use which introduces outdoor storage to an area, regardless of whether a site plan is required for the proposed use. 
18. Minimum Size of Dwelling Units. 
Effective June 14, 2019 every new dwelling unit of any type created or constructed within the City of Hagerstown shall comply with the following minimum requirements for finished living area: 
Efficiency Unit:  500 square feet.  
One-bedroom Unit:  650 square feet.  
Two-bedroom Unit:  800 square feet.  
Three-or-more bedroom Unit:  1,000 square feet.  
Efficiency Unit with live/work space:  1,000 square feet.  
One-bedroom Unit with live/work space:  1,300 square feet.  
Two-bedroom Unit with live/work space:  1,600 square feet.  
Three-or-more bedroom Unit with live/work space:  2,000 square feet.  

19. Rooming Houses. 
Rooming Houses shall be permitted in existing buildings in those zones identified in Section Z provided the facility complies with the following conditions: 
a. 	
Maximum of 16 rooming units per rooming house property, except a greater of number units may be possible in the CG district if approved by Special Exception by the Board of Zoning Appeals; 

b. 	
Maximum of 3 residents per rooming unit; 

c. 	
Minimum size of rooming units based on occupancy: 


(1)  Minimum of 150 square feet for one person;  
(2)  Minimum of 200 square feet for two persons;  
(3)  Minimum of 320 square feet for three persons;  
d.  Minimum of one bathroom containing at least one toilet, at least one sink and at least one bathtub or shower per four rooming units and not more than one flight of stairs between rooming units and bathroom;  
e.  Cooking shall not be permitted in rooming units;  
f.  Minimum of one kitchen per rooming house in a common area of the facility;  
g.  Twenty-four-hour per day on-site supervisor representing the owner when the rooming house contains more than 16 rooming units;  
h.  Meets off-street parking requirements for Group Quarters. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have the authority to grant a variance to this requirement.  


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

L. Reserved. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

M. 	Maintenance, Expansion, Expiration, Confirmation and Change of Nonconforming Uses. 
1. 	
Confirmation of Nonconforming Use. In the event that there is a nonconforming use in existence on the date of adoption of this article, the owner or lessee of the premises in question may file with the Zoning Administrator a certification in writing of such form furnished by the Zoning Administrator and shall set forth fully the type of nonconforming use and all other applicable information in reference to the structure location and general use. With the information provided, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to confirm the existence of a nonconforming use. Should the initial application’s information be insufficient to confirm the nonconformity and continuous use of the alleged nonconformity to the Zoning Administrator’s satisfaction, he or she may request additional information of the applicant prior to rendering a decision. The Zoning Administrator shall not have the authority to approve expansions, enlargements or changes of nonconforming uses. In the event that the Zoning Administrator declines to confirm the existence of a nonconforming use, the applicant may apply to the Board of Zoning Appeals seeking confirmation. The case would be heard by the Board de novo. 

2. 	
Restoration. Nothing in this article shall prevent the restoration of a nonconforming use, building or structure destroyed by fire, windstorm, explosion, act of public enemy, accident or for any other reason whatsoever, or prevent the continuance of said nonconforming use, provided that the owners of the property in question shall file with the Zoning Administrator a notice of intention to continue the nonconforming use within six months of said destruction or damage, and provided further that said restoration or construction is commenced within one year of the date of said notice of intention to continue the nonconforming use in question. In the event that said notice is not filed, then the nonconforming use in question shall be deemed to have been abandoned. 

3. 	
Expiration of Nonconforming Use. Except as hereinafter provided, nonconforming uses, as defined herein, shall be allowed to continue in existence in perpetuity, provided that said use does not cease for any reason whatsoever through a period of two years. If any nonconforming use of land shall cease for any reason whatsoever through a period of two years, said nonconforming use shall be deemed to have been abandoned, and the then applicable zoning provisions shall apply to the area in question. 

4. 	
Amortization of Certain Uses. 


a. 	Adult Entertainment Businesses. Adult book, video and merchandise stores, adult motion picture theaters and adult mini motion picture theaters, situate in the zoning districts CL, CC-MU or CR (formerly the C-1, C-3/D-MU and C-4 Districts) at the time this Article becomes effective shall be removed by two years from the effective date of the article. 
[ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: Effective date of Ordinance amendment is October 22, 1991. Uses shall have been removed by October 22, 1993.] 
b. 	Bail Bonding and Parole/Probation Offices. An office for (1) bonding of defendants in the criminal justice system or (2) paroling and the probation of defendants in the criminal justice system made nonconforming due to amendments to this Chapter adopted on September 25, 2012 and effective on October 25, 2012 shall be removed by five years from the effective date of the amendment to this Chapter, being October 25, 2017. Nonconformity may be created due to 
(1) location within a zoning district in which such uses are prohibited, (2) being closer than the minimum 500 foot distance from Public Square or (3) closer than the minimum 250 foot distance to another such use. When nonconformity is created by distance between uses, the more recently established use shall be removed. 
c. 	
Inoperable Motor Vehicles. Any car repair facility storing inoperable motor vehicles outdoors in excess of the number described in the definition of “junkyard” claiming nonconforming status shall remove any vehicles in excess of the two vehicles described therein within 36 months of the effective date of this Article. This provision shall not apply to a motor vehicle impound and storage facilities as defined and regulated by this Chapter. [ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: The effective date of Ordinance amendment is October 22, 2013. The amortization period expires on October 22, 2016.] 

d. 	
Temporary Signs. Per Subsection I.b(4), temporary signs made nonconforming to these regulations are to be removed within 180 days of October 30, 2015. [ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: This date is April 27, 2016.] 

e. 	
Use of Semi-Trailers. Per Subsection K.9.a, the parking and storage of semi-trailers is limited to certain activities. Existing uses other than those enumerated became nonconforming. Non­conforming trailers are to be removed within 24 months of the effective date of the Ordinance amendment. [ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: The amortization period for this provision expired on October 25, 2014] 


5. 	Change and Expansion of Nonconforming Use. Structural alterations of a building or structure or the use of a parcel, lot or tract of land which does not conform to the provisions of this article shall be allowed only if the building or structure to be altered or the parcel, lot or tract of land to be used is in conformance with the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
However, upon application, the Board of Zoning Appeals may approve the structural alteration of a building or structure or the use of a parcel, lot or tract of land which is not in conformance with the provisions of this article. The cumulative effect of the alteration(s) or extension(s) shall not exceed 35% of those existing buildings or structures and parcels devoted to a nonconforming use. The 35% maximum shall be applied to new buildings and additions as related to the cumulative existing area of buildings and shall be applied to new uses of land as related to the cumulative existing area used for the specific purpose of the expansion. Parking, landscaping and other areas shall not be included in determining the 35% maximum of building and land use expansion areas, however parking areas may be enlarged by up to the same 35% figure in order to provide additional parking for the enlarged use. 
No nonconforming use shall be enlarged, expanded or extended to an adjacent property on which no part of the nonconforming use is located. 
A use that is enumerated as a special exception use in a zoning district, but has been conducted without a special exception because of nonconformity or due to being in existence on land prior to annexation into the city, shall be treated as if a special exception has been obtained, and is not subject to expiration upon two years of inactivity per Subsection M.3., above. However, in cases where a nonconforming special exception use proposes to enlarge or expand, the applicant shall be required to obtain the special exception, or be subject to the limitations on expanding a nonconforming use found in the paragraph above. 
6. 	
Automatic Expiration Upon Bringing Property into Conformance. Once changed to a use permitted by right or special exception in the district in which it is located, no building, structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. 

7. 	
Change of Nonconforming Use to Another Use. A nonconforming use may be changed to another use not permitted by right or special exception in the district in which the property is located if the applicant shows that the proposed change will have less objectionable external effects than the existing nonconforming use with respect to traffic generation and congestion, including truck, passenger car and pedestrian traffic; noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare or vibration; storage and waste disposal; and appearance. Such a change is termed a special exception, requiring the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals is prohibited from changing a nonconforming use to any of the following uses: 

a. 
Adult entertainment business; 

b. 
Bonding, probation and parole of defendants in the criminal justice system; 

c. 
Drinking place; 

d. 
Homeless shelter; 

e. 
Hookah or vapor lounge; 

f. 
Kennel; 

g. 
Sale of fireworks; 

h. 
Tattoo parlor, massage parlor, steam bath or sauna; 

i. 
Nursing home; 

j. 
Outpatient substance abuse centers, including disbursement of addiction treatment drugs; 

k. 
Hospitals, including psychiatric, substance abuse and specialty hospitals; 

l. 
Assisted living facilities; and/or 

m. 
Rehabilitation centers. 




When a district permits the above uses, changing the use is not subject to this provision and the use shall comply with all performance standards as may apply in that district. 
8. 	Expansion of Nonconforming Single-Family Dwellings. Existing nonconforming, single-family dwellings in any district may expand without limitation with respect to area. Such dwellings shall be treated as principal-permitted uses in that district and shall conform to yard requirements and all other regulations for that district. 
9. 	Expansion of Nonconforming Residential Uses to Increase Number of Dwelling Units. Nonconforming single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings in any zoning district shall not be expanded or altered for the purpose of creating additional residential units. 
10. 	
On-Site Redevelopment of a Nonconforming Use. When a structure or facility containing a valid and legal nonconforming use has deteriorated or aged to a point that renovation or rehabilitation is not practical, it may be reconstructed on the subject property at a location that is not the existing footprint of the building or improvements, provided that the proposed redevelopment complies with all setback, landscaping buffer and parking requirements of this Chapter. Architectural renderings of the proposed redevelopment and a signage plan shall be included in the application and improvements shall be constructed in accordance with those plans. 

Such a proposal shall be subject to review and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals through the process set forth in the change or expansion of a nonconforming use, which shall specifically find that the proposal is not detrimental to the local community and the general welfare. 

11. 	
Exemption for Buildings Constructed as Two-Family Dwellings. A structure is exempt from the effects of the expiration period of nonconformity under the following conditions: 

a. 	
The building was constructed as and appears as a two-family dwelling, displaying such features as two front doors, two driveways, separate porches, addresses, and/or other physical characteristics of a two-family dwelling; and 

b. 	
That building has not been modified on the interior for use as a single-family dwelling; and 

c. 	
The building is located in a zoning district that permits two-family dwellings, but is rendered noncomplying or nonconforming due to the property not meeting lot area, width, and other bulk requirements. 




Under the above conditions, each of the two units may be reoccupied regardless of any period that the building has been vacant. 
12. 	Expansion of Nonconforming Residential Uses in Non-conforming Mixed-use Building. A valid and legal nonconforming mixed-use structure in any residential district where mixed-use structures are not permissible may convert the vacant ground floor commercial space to a single residential unit. Such a proposal shall be subject to review and approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals through the process set forth in the change or expansion of a nonconforming use, which shall specifically find that the proposal is not detrimental to the local community and the general welfare. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals application shall include exterior building elevations illustrating how the commercial front shall be renovated to convert the appearance of the commercial area to residential in appearance consistent with the architectural design and appearance of the rest of the structure. 
Should the Board of Zoning Appeals approve the application, the exterior modifications shall be completed in accordance with the approval provided by the Board, including any conditions of approval that may be required. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

N. 	Noncomplying Structures and Uses. 
1. 	
Maintenance. A structure or use which does not comply with current bulk requirements, but which complied with the requirements in effect when it was constructed, may remain in place and may be maintained or repaired as necessary. 

2. 	
Additions Not Requiring Variances. Any additions to a noncomplying structure or use must comply with current bulk requirements unless a variance is granted. However, an addition to a single-family, two-family or semi-detached dwelling may encroach into a front, side or rear setback without a variance, provided that: 

a. 	
The addition comes no closer than three feet to a side property line; and 

b. 	
The addition encroaches no further into the setback than the existing dwelling; and 

c. 	
Does not result in the creation of additional dwelling units. 



3. 	
Restoration. If a noncomplying structure is destroyed by fire, flood or other calamity, it may be replaced without a variance, without complying with current bulk requirements, provided that: 

a. 	
It may be replaced with a structure of the same or lesser size and dimensions in the same location as the destroyed structure, provided the Zoning Administrator determines that it is not feasible to replace the structure in a location closer to compliance with current bulk requirements. 

b. 	
It may be replaced with a structure of the same or lesser size and dimensions in a location which is closer to compliance with current bulk requirements than the original location, provided that the Zoning Administrator determines that it is not possible to replace the structure in a location fully in compliance with current bulk requirements. 

c. 	
Redevelopment as a result of destruction by fire, flood or other calamity may be permitted subject to Subsection M.10. 



4. 	
Vacancy Exception. The provisions of Subsection 3 above (and any potential addition permitted by Subsection 2 above) shall not apply if the structure was vacant for more than two years immediately prior to being destroyed. Subsection 3 shall apply only if a building permit is obtained within two years of the date the structure was destroyed, construction pursuant to the building permit begins within six months of the issuance of the permit, and construction is substantially completed within one year of the issuance of the permit. The building permit shall be revoked and a variance shall be required if these conditions are not met. 

5. 	
Intentional Demolition and Replacement. These provisions shall not be deemed to permit the intent­ional demolition and replacement of a structure which does not comply with current bulk requirements, which is governed by Subsection M.10. 



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

O. Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
1. Purpose and Applicability. 
a. 	Requirement and Exceptions. Permanent off-street automobile parking space and truck loading space shall be provided for all new structures, except: 
(1) 	
Single-family, two-family and semi-detached dwellings on infill lots within subdivisions recorded prior to the effective date of this article, and 

(2) 	
Existing structures or uses, increased in size by less than 35% after the adoption of this article. 

(3) 	
Structures and uses in existence on the date this Zoning Ordinance becomes effective shall not be subject to parking and loading requirements, except when specified as a condition of use approval in this Article. 

(4) 	
In the CC-MU District, if parking available to the public is located within 500 feet of the use and the applicant can demonstrate the availability of sufficient quantity to serve the required parking for the use, the creation of additional off street parking shall not be required. 


b. 	
Existing Parking Below Current Requirements Shall be Retained. 

(1) 	
Any parking or loading facilities now in existence to serve such structures or uses shall not, in the future, be reduced except where they exceed such requirements, in which case they shall not be reduced below such requirements. 

(2) 	
This provision shall not apply to a Conversion District, Local Conversion District or the CC-MU District. [ADMINISTRATIVE NOTE: See Subsection O.5]. 



c. 	
Garages Not To Be Counted Toward Parking Requirements. 


For single-family detached, semi-detached and townhome dwelling units, garage spaces shall not be counted toward this requirement unless the dwellings are part of a condominium regime and the condominium rules and condominium plat require the parking spaces in the garage to be kept clear of storage and the spaces therein are required to be maintained for parking use. Deed restrictions shall be entered into the Land Records of Washington County to require this as long as the development exists. 
d. 	Off-Street Yard Parking for Residential Development. 
On all existing improved residential lots and lots in new residential development, the following off-street parking design requirements shall apply: 
(1) 	
Parking Areas shall be solid paved surfaces or permeable pavers; 

(2) 	
Rear yard parking garages or parking pads are the preferred off-street parking system; 

(3) 	
Driveways accessing the lot from a front or side street shall be one vehicle in width; 

(4) 	
Driveways serving front-loaded garages from front and/or side streets shall be permitted to be as wide as the garage; 

(5) 	
For lots without garages and without the ability to provide rear yard parking, front yard parking pads or turn-arounds of single-vehicle-width driveways shall be permissible provided the parking area does not exceed 50% of the front yard area. 


2. Application Procedure. 
No application for a site plan shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such buildings, improvement or use (See Article 5, Section I -Site Plan Standards) a plan showing the adequate space to comply with acceptable design standards and criteria indicating and designating off-street parking and/or loading. 
The plan shall clearly show the size and location of parking and loading spaces, the width and arrange­ment of access driveways and arrangement of walls, fences and screen planting as they apply to parking areas and adjacent streets, alleys and highways. 
3. Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
Off-street parking and dimensional requirements are found in Article 5, Section I (Site Plan Standards). 
4. Required Number of Parking Spaces. 
Use  Required Spaces  
Ambulance facility  Two spaces per ambulance  
Assisted-living facility  One space per every four beds plus one space per employee on largest shift  
Auto sales and service  One space per employee plus one per 2,000 square feet of lot area.  
Auto service station  Two spaces per service bay, plus one per employee  
Banks and financial institutions  One space per 200 square feet of net floor area  
Bed and breakfast inns  One space per guest room  
Bowling lanes  Three spaces per bowling lane  
Cluster development  Two spaces per dwelling unit (may include garage, carport or driveway)  
Commercial retail sale (less than 2,000 square feet of floor area)  One space per 350 square feet of net floor area  
Commercial retail sale (freestanding and 2,000 square feet or greater of floor area)  5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet net floor area  
Community center, library, museum  One space per 400 square feet net floor area  

Use  Required Spaces  
Educational (schools)  One space per employee; ample student and visitor parking as determined by the Planning Commission  
Elderly housing  One space per every three units  
Fire stations  10 spaces minimum  
Group quarters, including rooming houses, dormitories, alternative living units, group homes and halfway houses  One space per employee on largest shift plus one space for each sleeping room or one space for each two beds, whichever is greater  
Hospitals  Four spaces per bed  
Hotel, resort, motels (see restaurant and meeting/banquet hall, if applicable – additional space is required)  One space per guest room  
Manufacturing plant  The greater of one space per employee on maximum working shift or one space per each 1,000 square feet and one space for each 350 square feet of office space or sales floor space  
Medical or dental offices/clinics  The greater of four spaces per practitioner or one space per 200 square feet of net floor area  
Mortuary or funeral home  One space per 150 square feet of visitor floor area  
Apartment dwellings  Two spaces per unit, except for mansion house apartment over-under flats, which shall provide 1.5 spaces per unit. If over 25 dwelling units, one space for each 25 units must be set aside for recreational vehicles. This requirement for recreational vehicle spaces shall not be applied in the CC-MU District.  
New residential units in new construction in the CC-MU Zoning District  0.5 spaces per dwelling unit plus 0.5 spaces per bedroom, rounded up to the nearest whole number  
Nursing homes and rehabilitation centers  One space for every four beds plus one space per employee on the largest shift.  
Office building  One space per 200 square feet of net floor area  
Outpatient substance abuse centers, including disbursement of addiction treatment drugs  The greater of four spaces per practitioner or one space per 200 square feet of net floor area. For any use established after the adoption of this provision, when by the conduct of the use large numbers of clients will arrive on site at the same time for regular administration of addiction treatment medications, the provider shall demonstrate to the Zoning Administrator that there is adequate parking supply to serve their clients.  
Place of worship  One space for each 5 persons for which seating is provided in sanctuary, except where mass transit is provided by the church  
Private club/lodge  One space for each 2 persons for which seating or lodging is provided  
Recreational establishment (other than theaters, swimming pools and bowling lanes)  One space per 80 square feet of floor space and/or as determined by the extent of outdoor use by the Planning Commission  
Restaurants, taverns, lounges, night clubs, meeting room/banquet hall  One space per 50 square feet customer floor space [NOTE: see separate requirements for walk up or drive in restaurants]  
Shopping center: 25,000 to 400,000 square feet 400,000 to 600,000 square feet More than 600,000 square feet  Per 1,000 square feet customer floor space: 4.0 spaces 4.25 spaces 4.5 spaces  
Single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, semi-detached dwellings, townhouses, mansion apartment houses  Two spaces per unit  
Swimming pool  One space per every seven persons lawfully permitted at any one time  

Use  Required Spaces  
Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums  One space per every four seats  
Townhouses or single-family attached dwellings  Two spaces per unit  
Transportation terminals (trucking, etc.)  One space per main shift employee  
Two-family dwelling  Two spaces per unit  
Warehouses or wholesale establishments  One space per 1,500 square feet gross floor space and one space for each 350 square feet of office or sales floor space  

Unless otherwise enumerated in the above chart, the number of parking spaces required shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on the standards found in the Institute of Transportation Engineers Parking Generation Manual, 3rd Edition. When a use is not addressed in the Parking Generation Manual, the Zoning Administrator shall render an interpretation of the nearest use addressed in the Manual. Parties aggrieved by the Zoning Administrator’s assignment of appropriate classification based on the above reference may appeal said decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
5. Off-Site Parking. 
a. 	
In calculating total parking space requirements, spaces located on a lot other than that lot on which the principal use is located may be included, provided that such parking is within 500 feet of the nearest boundary of the lot on which the use is located and that the permanent availability of such spaces for the use in question is documented by the applicant. 

b. 	
In the CC-MU District, if parking available to the public is located within 500 feet of the use and the applicant can demonstrate the availability of sufficient quantity to serve the required parking for the use, the creation of additional off street parking shall not be required. 


For public assembly uses of 1,000 seats or greater (such as civic centers, sports venues, religious sanctuaries and performing arts theaters) in the CC-MU District, this provision may be applied when the off-premise parking is located within 1,500 feet of the subject property. Also, see the parking study provisions permitted in the CC-MU Zoning District. Sufficiency of such parking proposed pursuant to this provision shall be determined by the Planning Commission through review and approval of a site plan. 
6. Handicapped Parking. 
Handicapped parking shall be in conformance with the “Maryland Accessibility Code,” COMAR 05.02.02., as administered by the Chief Code Official. 
P. Reserved. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

Q. Wireless Communications Facilities (WCF). 
1. Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Article to facilitate the provision of wireless personal communications services in our community, while at the same time protecting the City’s residential neighborhoods and historic districts from unsightly and incompatible intrusions. To achieve this purpose, this Article identifies sites, structures, and zoning districts where the location of wireless communication antenna arrays and structures are preferred, delineates standards for the positioning and/or construction of wireless communications antenna arrays and structures, and specifies the review process required for various facility types and siting locations. 
2. Removal of Abandoned or Obsolete WCF. 
Any WCF that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such WCF shall remove the WCF within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such WCF is not removed within said 90 days, the City may remove the WCF at the owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single WCF, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the WCF. 
3. Temporary WCF in any Zoning District. 
a. 	
Application Procedures. A minor site plan is required, if the disturbance is less than 5000 square feet, with approval by staff. For projects involving more than 5000 square feet of disturbance, a site plan will be required and shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. Following approval by the Planning Commission, a building permit is required. 

b. 	
Height. The height restriction shall be determined by the Chief Code Official, based on intended positioning and/or construction method. 

c. 	
Setback. The setback requirement is the same as for the underlying zoning district. 

d. 	
Screening. The WCF shall be positioned to minimize the visual impact to the surrounding uses. Landscaping and privacy screening shall be employed to screen outdoor equipment facilities from view. 


4. Development Standards. 
The goal of this section is to encourage the siting of attached WCFs and WCFs with support structures in a manner which is consistent with community character and which minimizes potential visual impacts in areas of local concern. Areas of particular concern are the City’s residential neighborhoods and historic districts. 
a. 	Micro Wireless Communication Antenna Array in Any Zoning District. 
(1) 	
Application Procedures. A minor site plan will not be required unless a fenced compound is being expanded by 500 square feet or more. Expansions of less than 500 square feet and retrofit of landscaping to comply with current screening requirements shall be addressed through a scaled drawing submitted at building permit application. A building permit must be obtained for all WCFs and attached WCFs. When the compound is not landscaped in accordance with the requirements of this Section, the addition of landscaping to bring the compound into compliance will be required at the building permit stage. 

(2) 	
Height and Setback. There are no height and setback restrictions. 

(3) 	
Screening. Landscaping and privacy screening shall be employed to screen outdoor equipment facilities from view. When located in an historic district, it is recommended that the micro antenna and any necessary support devices be painted and/or positioned to minimize its visual impact and to protect the historic character of the affected building and neighboring buildings. 


When facilities are proposed to be added to an existing compound that is nonconforming to landscaping requirements, landscaping shall be installed in accordance with these requirements, per Subsection a.(1) above. 
b. 	
WCF, Attached or With Support Structure, of Stealth Design in Any Zoning District. 

(1) 	
Application Procedures. If equipment facilities and/or sheds are located on the ground, a minor site plan is required. A building permit must be obtained for all WCFs and attached WCFs. 

(2) 	
Height. A wireless communications facility constructed in a stealth application in accordance with this section shall be subject to the same height limitation as would apply to the building or structure if it were not being used to contain a telecommunications facility, unless a variance is approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 

(3) 	
Setback. The setback requirement is the same as for the underlying zoning district. unless the stealth structure is a disguised tower or pole, camouflaged as something such as a tree, flagpole or other item not subject to a height or setback limitation imposed by this Ordinance, in which case the tower shall be setback a minimum distance from any property line equal to 125% of the proposed tower height. 

(4) 	
Screening. The antenna array and any necessary support devices must be hidden from view through some form of stealth design. This may include location inside a steeple, tower, chimney, etc., or disguised as a flagpole, utility pole, or other object which might reasonably be expected to be found in the underlying zoning district. Landscaping and privacy screening shall be employed to screen outdoor equipment facilities from view. 



c. 	
Co-location of Antenna Arrays on Existing Wireless Communications Support Structures in Any Zoning District. 

(1) 	
Application Procedures. If equipment facilities and/or sheds are located on the ground, a minor site plan is required unless the new equipment is proposed to be located in an existing fenced compound. A building permit must be obtained for all WCFs and attached WCFs. 

(2) 	
Height and Setback. There are no height and setback restrictions. 

(3) 	
Screening. Landscaping and privacy screening shall be employed to screen outdoor equipment facilities from view. In cases where equipment is proposed to be added to an existing compound where the fenced area is not screened with landscaping, the Zoning Administrator may require installation of that landscaping consistent with current standards, but a site plan will not be required if they only improvement outside of an existing compound is the addition of landscaping. 



d. 	
Attached WCF in All Districts With The Exception of Historic Districts. 

(1) 	
Application Procedures. If equipment facilities and/or sheds are located on the ground, a minor site plan is required. A building permit must be obtained for all WCFs and attached WCFs. 

(2) 	
Height. There are no height restrictions for antenna arrays attached to publicly used or owned structures. Antenna arrays attached to any other existing building or structure shall not project more than 15 feet above the highest point of the building or structure. 

(3) 	
Setback. The setback requirement is the same as for the underlying zoning district. 

(4) 	
Screening. Landscaping and privacy screening shall be employed to screen outdoor equipment facilities from view. In the CC-MU, CL, RMOD, RMED, RH (residential uses), RO, and AT District, the antenna array and any necessary support devices shall be painted and/or positioned to minimize the visual impact to the surrounding uses. 



e. 	
Attached WCF in Historic Districts. 

(1) 	
Application Procedures. This is a two-step application process. First, the application must be approved by the Historic District Commission in the Certificate of Appropriateness process. Following approval, a building permit is required. 

(2) 	
Height. There are no height restrictions for antenna arrays attached to publicly used or owned structures. Antenna arrays attached to any other existing building or structure shall not project more than 15 feet above the highest point of the building or structure. 

(3) 	
Setback. The setback requirement is the same as for the underlying zoning district. 

(4) 	
Screening. The antenna array and any necessary support devices shall be painted and/or positioned to minimize its visual impact and to protect the historic character of the affected building and neighboring buildings. Landscaping and privacy screening shall be employed to screen outdoor equipment facilities from view. 



f. 	
WCF in Any Zoning District. 


If equipment facilities and/or sheds are located on the ground a minor site plan is also required. 
(1) 	Application Procedures. 
This is a two-or three-step application process depending on the zoning district in which the property is located. First, if the property is located in the CC-MU, CL, RMOD, RMED, RH, RO or AT Districts, the application must be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the special exception process. Next, (or first in the case of the remaining districts) the application must be approved by the Planning Commission in the site plan review process. Following approval, a building permit is required. If equipment facilities and/or sheds are located on the ground a minor site plan is also required. The site plan will show all future co-location pad sites within the compound in order to eliminate the necessity of new site plans each time a cabinet is added. 
(2) 	
Submittal Requirements. 

(a) 
A Co-location Study to demonstrate that co-location of the antenna array is not possible on any existing WCF support structures or other structures, including letters from WCF tower owners refusing co-location stating reason for refusal; 

(b) 	
For the districts in which a special exception is required, a feasibility study to demonstrate that locations in the POM, INST, I-MU, IR, IG, CG and CR zoning districts were explored as preferred siting alternatives; 

(i) 	
A Visual Simulation to demonstrate the impact of the WCF on surrounding neighborhoods and historic districts; and 

(ii) 	
Any other support materials deemed necessary by the Planning Commission (and by the Board of Zoning Appeals, when applicable). 





(3) 	
Height. 


Maximum height shall be as shown in the following chart: 
Zoning District  Maximum Height (feet)  
RMOD, RMED, RH (residential uses), RO, CL and N-MU  50  
AT, RH (non-residential uses), CC-MU,POM and INST  100  
CG, CR and I-MU  140  
IR and IG  199  

(4) Setback. 
The setback requirement is the same as for the underlying zoning district, with the following addition: WCFs must be setback a minimum distance from any property line equal to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the proposed tower height. 
(5) Screening. 
Landscaping and privacy screening shall be employed to screen outdoor equipment facilities from view. 
(6) Lighting and Fencing. 
The top of the WCF shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the Planning Commission shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. Security fencing shall be erected around the WCF support structure and equipment facility as a means of preventing non-authorized access to the WCF. 
g. Cell on Wheels (COW) in Any District. 
When a COW is used in any zoning district, it shall be permitted in accordance with the temporary use permit section of this Article (See Section R). 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

R. Temporary Uses. 
1. Authorization of Temporary Uses. 
The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to authorize a temporary use of land, in any district, for a period not exceeding 30 days, provided the land shall be entirely cleared of such use within five days after such temporary authority expires. Up to three extensions of the temporary uses may be granted by the Zoning Administrator for periods not exceeding 30 days each, up to a maximum limit of 120 days. The extension may be approved upon written request if there are no modifications of the use and no complaints regarding the temporary use have been received. Requests for extension of a temporary use that involve any use modification or that is the subject of a complaint will be processed in accordance with the procedures for the original temporary use approval. 
2. Criteria for Approval. 
A temporary use may be approved if the Zoning Administrator determines that: 
a. 	
The use will not adversely affect adjacent properties. 

b. 	
The use does not require significant or permanent changes to the existing topography, vegetation, structures or other features of the site, and will be returned to the same or better condition upon expiration of the use. 


3. Procedures. 
The Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice of the request for a temporary use to all adjacent properties a minimum of 15 days prior to issuing a temporary use zoning certificate and allow adjoining property owners and occupants the opportunity to comment on the proposal. The Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for a temporary use. Appeals from the decision of the Zoning Administrator shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be heard by the Board on original jurisdiction, as if the Zoning Administrator’s process never occurred. Appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date of the Decision and Order per Article 8.B. 
4. Limitations and Samples. 
a. 	
Limitations. The temporary use process shall not be used to advance the occupancy of a use that is otherwise permitted by this Article by right or special exception and intended for ongoing occupancy, but has not yet secured necessary planning, zoning and building permit approvals or is intended to engage in trade without securing a fixed and enclosed place of business. 

b. 	
Sample Uses That Warrant a Temporary Use Permit. Some uses that would warrant a temporary use permit would include, but not be limited to, sets for movie production companies, special events, fund raising carnivals, Christmas tree sales and similar seasonal temporary uses, decorator show houses held as a fund raiser for a not-for-profit organization, off-site construction staging areas and location of mobile sales and management offices on a construction site in advance of final approval of site plans and building permits. Temporary Use Permits for the sale of fireworks are specifically prohibited. 



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

S. Zoning Permit and Site Plan Requirements. 
1. Zoning Permits. 
a. Zoning Permits Required. 
No building or structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered or use of said building, structure or land changed to another use without a zoning permit issued by the Zoning Administrator wherein the Zoning Administrator certifies that the proposed building or alteration described in the permit conforms with the provisions of this article. 
b. Pending Applications for Building Permits. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any development, building structure or part thereof for which official approvals and required building permits have been granted before the enactment of this article, the construction of which shall have been started within six months after the effective date of this article and the completion thereof carried on in a normal manner and not discontinued for reasons other than those beyond the builder's control. 
c. Information Required. 
To obtain adequate information for the issuance of zoning permits, all applications for permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the Zoning Administrator, including existing or proposed building alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this article. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator. 
d. Effect of Approval. 
The granting of approval of a site development plan or the issuance of a zoning permit for any structure or use located within or adjoining a floodplain shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature by the Zoning Administrator or by any other public body or official as to the practicality or safety of any structure or use proposed or erected and shall create no liability upon or cause action against such public body or official for any flood, chronic wetness or pollution damage that may result pursuant thereto. 
e. 	Filing Fees. 
(1) 	
Permits for a main or principal use shall also cover any accessory use established at the time on the same lot or tract of land. 

(2) 	
Commencing with the effective date of this article, all applications for zoning permits, petitions to rezone property, interpretations, special exceptions and variances shall be according to the fee schedule adopted by the Mayor and Council and amended from time to time. 

(3) 	
There shall be no refund of any fee paid hereunder. 

(4) 	
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the following uses are exempt from fees: 

(a) 	
Government bodies; 

(b) 	
Government-owned and/or operated utilities. 




f. 	Expiration of Zoning Permit. 
If the work described in any zoning permit has not begun within six months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall automatically expire; it shall be canceled by the Zoning Administrator, and written notice by certified mail thereof shall be given to the persons affected. However, failure to send such notice shall not be a prerequisite to the automatic expiration of said permit. If the work described in any zoning permit has not been completed within two years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the Zoning Administrator, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new zoning permit has been obtained. 
g. 	Zoning Permit Revocation. 
A zoning certificate (including zoning approval of a building permit) may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator if the recipient of the certificate fails to develop or maintain the property in accordance with the plans submitted, the requirements of this Chapter, the list of permitted uses as found in Section Z of this Article, an approved site plan, or any other requirement lawfully imposed in connection with the issuance of the zoning certificate or zoning approval of the building permit. 
The Zoning Administrator shall provide the recipient of the zoning certificate or other zoning approval ten (10) days of notice of intent to revoke the certificate and shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons for the revocation. Such notice is not required if, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, the violation is an immediate threat to property or public safety. If the certificate is revoked, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the holder of the zoning certificate a written statement of the decision and the reason therefore. The holder may appeal such decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the procedures for administrative appeal. 
2. Site Plan Requirements and Duration. 
a. 	
Requirements. 

(1) 	
Prerequisite to the issuance of a zoning permit, a site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for approval by the Planning Commission for all new construction greater than 5,000 square feet, including disturbed area, or involving multiple-family dwellings, townhouses, churches and other places of worship, schools and other educational facilities, hospitals and health care facilities, parking lots and all commercial and industrial structures, or additions there to. 

(2) 	
Prerequisite to the issuance of a zoning permit, a minor site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for his or her approval for all new construction greater than 500 and less than 5,000 square feet, including disturbed area, involving apartment dwellings, townhouses, churches and other places of worship, schools and other educational facilities, hospitals and health care facilities, parking lots and all commercial and industrial structures, or additions there to. 

The minor site plan shall meet all those requirements made of plans submitted under Subsections (1) and (2) above for Planning Commission review, unless specific plan requirements are waived by the Zoning Administrator, given the simplicity of the proposal or plan. The Zoning Administrator or the applicant may require Planning Commission site plan review as provided for in Subsection (1) above. 

(3) 	
All new construction involving multiple-family dwellings, churches and other places of worship, schools and other educational facilities, hospitals and health care facilities, parking lots and all commercial and industrial structures, less than 500 square feet including disturbed area shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator during the Building Permit review process. The plan shall be drawn to scale and accurately and correctly represent the existing conditions and proposed improvements to the degree that the Zoning Administrator deems necessary for sufficient review of the proposal for zoning compliance. The Zoning Administrator may require a minor site plan in accordance with Subsection (2) above, when in his or her judgment the proposal is of such extent or complexity to warrant more detailed review and plans, or when the submission of successive plans under this subsection serves to circumvent the intent and need for site plans for significant construction. 

(4) 	
Where the submission of a site plan or minor site plan is required under this section, approval of the site plan shall be based upon design principles and standards and required improvements set forth in the City of Hagerstown Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Article 5, Sections E and I of this Chapter), and other ordinances, regulations and policies established by the City. 

(5) 	
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the construction of single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings and single-family semi-detached dwellings and associated accessory structures thereof. 



b. 	
Submission Procedure. 

(1) 	
Site plans and minor site plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, registered landscape architect, registered land surveyor or professional planner (A.I.C.P.). 

(2) 	
A preliminary consultation may be held with the Planning Commission to discuss the general concept, use and design of the proposal. If consultation is desired, a generalized sketch or plat of the proposed site plan shall be submitted with five copies at least one week prior to the scheduled consultation and shall consist of location map, boundary, topography, and general proposed land uses drawn to scale. 

(3) 	
The site plan administrative review procedures shall be the same as those required for development plan review and approval pursuant to the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, (Article 5), including a sketch plan submittal and Planning Commission approval when necessary. 

(4) 	
The number and format of copies required shall be set by a policy adopted by the Planning and Code Administration Department, however additional copies shall be submitted as determined by the Planning and Code Administration Department in unusual situations. The Planning Commission shall notify the Zoning Administrator of its approval or disapproval of the site plan within 30 days from the date of formal submission to the Commission. However, failure to approve or disapprove a site plan within 30 days shall not constitute approval. 

(5) 	
Site plan submission is not required for single-family or two-family dwelling units unless planned as part of a Planned Unit Development, or specifically required elsewhere in this chapter. 



c. 	
Duration. 


The purpose of a site plan or minor site plan is to set the final approved development of the site until such later time that new or revised plans are submitted for additions or redevelopment of a site. All improvements, including but not limited to conditions of approval, site configuration, parking space, and landscaping required in accordance with this Article shall be maintained on an ongoing basis. Failure to maintain features and improvements shown on an approved site plan constitutes a violation of this Chapter. 
d. Expiration. 
A site plan shall be considered void if the required permits are not secured and substantial construction accomplished within two years of the date the site plan is approved. A site plan shall expire in three years, unless re-approved by the Planning Commission and relevant agencies. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

T. Historic District Review. 
1. Application. 
Before the construction, alteration, reconstruction, relocation, or demolition of any landmark or site or structure within an historic district, if any exterior work is involved which would change the exterior appearance of the site or structure, the person, individual, firm, or corporation proposing to make the construction or change shall file an application with the City for a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of Hardship. The application of paint to previously painted surfaces and the changing of paint colors is exempt from this review process. Any window sign, as defined in Article 3, whether located on the interior or exterior of the window, shall be subject to this provision. Any window sign legally installed prior to October 30, 2015 shall be nonconforming, but once removed, shall not be reinstalled unless done so in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
Every such application shall be referred to and considered by the Historic District Commission and accepted or rejected by the Historic District Commission, and no building permit, demolition permit, or zoning certificate for any change may be granted until the Historic District Commission has acted thereon as hereinafter provided. The application shall be accompanied by plans of any proposed construction, alteration or repair. 
Prohibition of Identical Application. An application which is identical to a rejected application shall not be submitted within a period of one year after rejection. 
2. Application Review. 
In reviewing the plans for any such construction or change, the Historic District Commission shall give consideration to the historical, archaeological, or architectural significance of the site or structure and its relationship to the historical, archaeological, or architectural significance of the surrounding sites, structures, or districts; the relationship of the exterior architectural features of the structure to the remainder of the structure and to the surrounding sites, structures, or districts; the general compatibility of exterior design, scale, proportion, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used; and to any other factors including aesthetic factors which the Historic District Commission deems to be pertinent. 
a. 	Exterior Features Only, Visibility and In-Kind Repair and Replacement. The Historic District Commission shall consider only exterior features of a structure and shall not consider any interior arrangements. 
The Historic District Commission shall review all proposed changes to structures and site features, however it shall evaluate leniently any change to sites that are not visible or not intended to be visible from a public right-of-way. Through its adopted Design Guidelines or an adopted policy, the Historic District Commission may adopt a list of types of work that it delegates authority to Staff for review based on the limited nature of the work. 
In-kind repair and in-kind replacement of exterior features is considered ordinary maintenance and, therefore, not subject to review by the Historic District Commission. Also, the Commission shall not disapprove an application except with respect to the several factors specified above. 
b. 	Evaluation and Level of Significance. The Historic District Commission shall be strict in its judgment of plans for sites or structures determined by research to be of historical, archaeo­logical, or architectural significance and all work visible, or intended to be visible from a public street and public parks and public spaces. This provision does not extend to visibility from public alleys. The Historic District Commission shall be lenient in its judgment of plans for sites or structures of little historical, archaeological, or architectural significance, and for plans involving work that is not visible, or intended to be visible from public streets, public parks and public spaces, or for plans involving new construction, unless such plans would seriously impair the historical, archaeological, or architectural significance of the surrounding sites, structures, or districts. The Historic District Commission is not required to limit construction, reconstruction, or alteration to the architectural style of any one period. 
3. Certificate of Appropriateness. 
a. 	
Approval. If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction, or alteration affecting a site or the exterior of a structure, or for the relocation or demolition of a structure, and the Historic District Commission in reviewing the application finds that the proposal will not materially impair the historical, archaeological, or architectural significance of the site or structure, then the Historic District Commission shall file a Certificate of Appropriateness with the City and a permit can be issued. 

b. 	
Denial. If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction, or alteration affecting a site or the exterior of a structure, or for the relocation or demolition of a structure, and the Historic District Commission in reviewing the application finds that the proposal is detrimental to the historical, archaeological, or architectural significance of the site or structure or that the proposal will materially impair the historical, archaeological, or architectural significance of the surrounding sites, structures, or districts, then the Historic District Commission may not approve the application. The Historic District Commission shall file a copy of its objections, including the reasons therefor, with the City and the permit shall not be issued. 

c. 	
Modification. In the case where a proposal was not accepted and the Historic District Commission suggested an alternate plan or made recommendations, the applicant may later resubmit the modified proposal. The Historic District Commission may approve the modification and file a Certificate of Appropriateness with the City and then a permit may be issued. 


4. Certificate of Hardship. 
When it is possible that the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness will render use of this provision unnecessary, the applicant shall first proceed with that application as described in Subsection 3 of this Section. 
If a Certificate of Appropriateness is denied, or if the Zoning Administrator determines that the HDC, in the reasonable application of the standards in its Design Guidelines duly adopted by the Mayor and City Council, will likely be required to reject the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the applicant may apply directly for a Certificate of Hardship. 
a. 	
Application. The property owner may apply for a Certificate of Hardship if he can show that a modification or denial of their proposal: 

(1) 	
Will cause undue financial hardship to the owner; or 

(2) 	
Will be a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial benefit to the city; or 

(3) 	
Will not be in the best interests of a majority of the persons in the community due to its obstruction or serious complication of a bona fide Major Economic Development Opportunity, or due to other reasons. 



b. 	
Burden of Proof on Applicant. The burden of proof is on the property owner to prove to the Historic District Commission that its failure to approve a Certificate of Appropriateness will cause undue financial hardship to the owner, will be a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial benefit to the city, or will not be in the best interests of a majority of the persons in the community. 

c. 	
Submittal Requirements. The Historic District Commission shall prescribe uniform submittal requirements, necessary for determining whether the following hardship standards have been met. 

(1) 	
Standard for determining that preservation of a site or structure would cause undue financial hardship: 

(a) 	
The site or structure is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible; 

(b) 	
The site or structure cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which will meet reasonable investment-backed expectations; and 

(c) 	
Documented efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the site or structure and preserving it have failed. 



(2) 	
Standard for determining that preservation of a site or structure will be a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial benefit to the city or will not be in the best interests of the majority of the persons in the community: 

(a) 	
The project is funded in the Capital Improvement Plan and Budget of the City of Hagerstown, the County Commissioners of Washington County (including the 

Washington County Free Library), the Washington County Board of Education (educational and administrative facilities only), the State of Maryland or the federal government, and the government agency has complete designs for the capital project; or 

(b) 	
The site or structure is incompatible with the Comprehensive Plan's goals for the enhancement of that neighborhood and the community in general; or 

(c) 	
The HDC receives what it determines to be a satisfactory and detailed recommendation from the City Administrator or his or her designee in support of a project that is a bona fide Major Economic Development Opportunity, approved as such by the City Administrator or his or her designee after application of the then-current standards established by the City. 



(3) 	
If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction, or alteration affecting a site or the exterior of a structure, or for the relocation or demolition of a structure, the preservation of which the Historic District Commission considers to be of unusual importance to the city or unusual importance to the entire state or nation, the Historic District Commission shall attempt with the owner of the structure to formulate an economically feasible plan for the preservation of the site or structure. 



d. 	
Approval. If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction, alteration, relocation, or demolition affecting a site or the exterior of a structure and the Historic District Commission in reviewing the application finds that denial of the proposal will cause undue financial hardship to the owner, will be a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial benefit to the city, or will not be in the best interests of a majority of the persons in the community, then the Historic District Commission shall file a Certificate of Hardship with the City and a permit can be issued provided any conditions of approval are met. 

e. 	
Documentation and Salvage of Buildings to be Demolished. If a site or structure is to be demolished and the Historic District Commission has determined that it contains special historical, archaeological, or architectural components that can be removed before or during the demolition process, then these components or materials should be salvaged in a manner agreed to between the property owner and the Historic District Commission. The Historic District Commission shall be permitted to record the site or structure prior to demolition. This should include photographs, measured drawings, written architectural descriptions and historical data or additional on-site documentation by some other method within a time period of 60 days. When the building is being demolished in accordance with a Certificate of Hardship issued for a public works project, the HDC may require documentation of the existing building meeting current professional historic preservation standards be completed by the developer at the developer’s expense. 

f. 	
Denial. In the event that the Historic District Commission denies a Certificate of Hardship or if a property owner does not have sufficient funds to properly maintain a site or structure and the City or other interested parties feel that preservation of the site or structure is worthy of future 


consideration, then all means toward a Preservation Reserve status should be considered. The Historic District Commission shall have 90 days from the time it concludes that no economically feasible plan can be formulated to negotiate with the owner and other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the site or structure. 
After the 90 day Preservation Reserve status has transpired and the Historic District Commission evaluates the new alternative and it meets with their approval, then depending on the applicability, either a Certificate of Hardship or a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be filed with the City and a permit may be issued. However, if no new acceptable alternative has been found, then the Historic District Commission shall reject the alternative and issue a letter of rejection. Thereafter, if rejected, the application shall not be renewed within a period of one year. 
5. Approval Time. 
The Historic District Commission shall file with the City a certificate of its approval, modification, or rejection of all applications and plans submitted to it for review. Work shall not be commenced on any such project until such a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of Hardship has been filed, and the City shall not issue a building permit for such change or construction unless and until it has received such a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of Hardship. The failure of the Historic District Commission to act upon a completed application within 45 days from the date the completed application was filed shall be deemed to constitute automatic approval of the proposed changes unless an extension of this 45 day period is agreed upon mutually by the applicant and the Historic District Commission, or the application has been withdrawn. 
6. Demolition of Potential Landmarks. 
a. 	
Consideration by Historic District Commission. Whenever a permit for demolition is applied for in the City for a site or structure which is listed as a potential landmark in the Comprehensive Plan, but which is not designated as a landmark by the Mayor and City Council at the time of permit application, such application shall be forwarded to the Historic District Commission. No permit for demolition may be granted until the Historic District Commission has acted thereon as hereinafter provided. 

b. 	
Determination by the Historic District Commission. Upon receipt of such application, the Historic District Commission shall make a finding as to the significance of the site or structure, under the criteria established in Subsection J.4.b, and recommend whether it should be designated a landmark. 

(1) 	
Where the Historic District Commission recommends that the site or structure be designated a landmark, it shall be forwarded as a Zoning Map amendment to the Planning Commission and Mayor and City Council. In the interim, the Chief Code Official shall withhold issuance of the permit until the Zoning Map amendment becomes effective, at which time the application shall be governed by the procedures established in Subsection 

T.1. 

(2) 	
Where the Historic District Commission or the Mayor and City Council determines that the site or structure shall not be designated a landmark, it shall be removed from the Comprehensive Plan as a potential landmark and the Chief Code Official may forthwith issue the permit for demolition. 

(3) 	
Time limits for Historic District Commission action. Within 45 days after the filing of a permit for demolition, the Historic District Commission shall render its findings and determinations with respect to an application. Failure to adhere to this time limit shall allow the permit to issue by operation of law. 




7. Demolition by Neglect. 
a. 	Record of Demolition by Neglect, Notice. When, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, there is significant deterioration of a landmark, site, and/or structure located within a historic district as a result of willful neglect in the maintenance and/or repair of said landmark, site and/or structure, which deterioration threatens the imminent demolition of the landmark, site and/or structure, the Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice to the owner(s), the occupant(s) or any other person(s) responsible for the maintenance of the property, of the determination that the landmark, site and/or structure is being demolished by neglect, and specifying the deteriorated conditions found. The Notice shall provide that corrective action of the deteriorated condition(s) shall commence within 30 days of the receipt of said notice and shall be completed within a reasonable time thereafter, as specified by the Zoning Administrator. The notice shall also advise the recipient(s) that a hearing may be requested within 20 days after the receipt of said notice appealing the determination, the deteriorated condition(s) described in the notice, and/or the necessity of corrective action. 
Demolition by neglect shall include, but is not limited to the following conditions: 
(1) 	
The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports. 

(2) 	
The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members. 

(3) 	
The deterioration of exterior chimneys. 

(4) 	
The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster, mortar or masonry. 

(5) 	
The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations, including broken windows and doors. 

(6) 	
Deterioration resulting from damage due to weathering. 

(7) 	
The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition. 


b. 	Time for Corrective Action and Provision for Public Hearing. Upon a timely request for hearing, an appeal hearing shall be held by the Historic District Commission (the “Commission”) no sooner than 30 days after written notice is provided to all interested parties. Within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing, unless such time is extended by the Commission at the request of the parties or upon the initiative of the Commission, the Commission shall issue a written opinion, affirming or reversing the decision of the Zoning Administrator, and containing its findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
If the opinion of the Zoning Administrator is affirmed by the Commission, the owner or other interested party shall institute the corrective action within 30 days of the receipt of the written decision, with said work to be completed within a reasonable time thereafter. 
c. 	
Failure, Neglect or Refusal to Act; City Authority. If the owner(s) or other interested person(s) receiving notice to take corrective action fails to do so within 30 days of receipt of the notice of the Zoning Administrator or receipt of the written decision of the Commission affirming the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator may employ the necessary labor, equipment and materials to perform the corrective action as expeditiously as possible. Any costs incurred in the performance of this corrective action will be the responsibility of the owner(s), or other interested person(s), and said amount shall be billed to that party. The actual costs of the corrective action and necessary remedial work required hereunder, if not paid by the owner(s) or other interested person(s), shall be charged to the owner(s) of record of such property on the next regular tax bill pursuant to Chapter 223-11 of the City Code. 

d. 	
Additional Remedies. In addition to the remedial measures permitted in Subsection c. hereof, any owner(s) or interested person(s) failing to comply with a notice to take corrective action shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and subject to a fine of up to 500 dollars. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. 


8. Demolitions Ordered by the Chief Code Official. 
HDC review of a demolition of a structure shall not be required when the structure has been determined by the Chief Code Official to be an imminent threat to public safety and its immediate demolition or alteration is required. In such cases, the property owner shall be required to file an application with the HDC proposing how the site will be stabilized and improved (if necessary) in order for the vacant land area and any affected or newly created building facades to be consistent with the applicable Design Guidelines for the district in which it is located. 
9. Human Burial Sites Preservation Advisory Board. 
The Historic District Commission shall serve as a human burial sites preservation advisory board and provide advice and guidance to the Planning and Code Administration Department and the Planning Commission on human burial sites preservation issues as may be required by Article 5, Section K of this 
Chapter. The decisions of the Historic District Commission on such matters shall be advisory only, except 
where the property is located in an historic district and the proposed work would have otherwise come 
under the jurisdiction of the Historic District Commission set forth in Subsection T.1 of this Article. 
10. Appeal Process. 
Appeals of decisions made by the Historic District Commission in furtherance of this Article may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 8 of this Code. 
11. Violations. 
The treatment of violations of this Section of this Article shall be as described in Article 8 of this Code. 
U. Board of Zoning Appeals -Applications, Notice, Powers and Duties. 
1. Application and Notice for Interpretations, Special Exceptions and Variances. 
a. 	
Applications shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals by the applicant at least 21 days in advance of the public hearing. 

b. 	
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall advertise the hearing in accordance with the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city once each week for two successive weeks, with the first such publication of notice appearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing. 

c. 	
Notice of said advertised hearings shall be posted on the property at least ten days prior to the public hearing at a location where the sign is readable from curbside, or a sidewalk in front of the property. 

d. 	
The owner of the property or his or her agent shall be notified at the time of advertisement by mail of the date, time and place of the public hearing. 


2. Appeals; Transmission of Records; Time Limitations. 
Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person who may have the right to appeal or by any department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals at their next available meeting. The Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
When the decision of the Zoning Administrator being appealed is a notice of zoning violation, such appeal shall be filed not later than 30 days from the date of the action of the Zoning Administrator and shall state the reasons for the appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall dismiss any appeal not filed in accordance with this section. The day after the date of the notice shall constitute the first day of this time period, and the period shall expire at the close of business on the 30th day of this period. When the 30th day falls on a weekend or legal holiday, then the period shall expire at the end of the next business day. 
3. Stay of Proceedings on Appeal. 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
4. Hearing An Appeal. 
a. 	
Notice of Hearing; Time Limit for Decision. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall give public notice thereof by advertising in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city once each week for two consecutive weeks, with the first such publication of notice appearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within 45 days of the hearing. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. Failure to comply with this subsection by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be construed as approval of a requested variance, special exception, or confirmation, expansion or change of a nonconforming use, and shall vacate a notice of violation appealed to the Board. 

b. 	
Continuances. Upon request of the applicant or upon its own motion, the Board may continue a hearing at another time and/or date once such hearing has been started; however, the Board shall announce the date and hour of continuance of such hearing while in session. 

c. 	
Postponement of Hearing. Upon request of the applicant or upon its own motion, the Board may postpone a scheduled hearing. Requests for postponement of a scheduled hearing shall be filed in writing with the Board not less than five working days prior to the date of the hearing. The granting of such requests shall be at the discretion of the Board. 


5. Considerations to be Given in Board of Zoning Appeals' Decisions. 
The following rules of procedure are set up to be followed by Board of Zoning Appeals before deciding any case. The Board: 
a. 	
Shall give public notice and hearing; 

b. 	
May make inspection of the premises involved in the application and the surrounding area; 

c. 	
Shall give consideration to the purpose, application, interpretation, and standards of this 
Article. 


d. 	
Shall give consideration to present physical conditions on the premises and in the vicinity and the City’s goal to provide for orderly growth and improvement of our neighborhoods and community as a whole; 

e. 	
Shall give consideration to the Special Exception and Variance standards prescribed in Subsection 8 and to the effect of such special exception or variance upon the peaceful enjoyment of people in their homes and whether such use would deteriorate the quality of life in the neighborhood, through undue traffic congestion, neighborhood parking shortages, odors, dust, gas, smoke, fumes, vibration, glare, noise, or similar impact; 

f. 	
Shall give consideration to the most appropriate use of land and structures in accordance with the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan; 

g. 	
Shall open the hearing on each special exception and variance case with a staff presentation to orient the Board and the applicants to the pertinent sections of the ordinance related to the proposed use or appeal and to any issues which City staff or City Boards or Commissions may have with the proposal; 

h. 	
Shall give all interested parties an opportunity to testify as to any material facts in connection with the proposed use; 

i. 	
Shall act as a fact-finding body and shall approve or disapprove the issuance of a permit for the proposed use in accordance with the evidence in the record before it. 


6. 	Review of Applications and Recommendations by Interested Boards and Commissions on Applications for Interpretations, Special Exceptions and Variances. 
The Planning Commission, Historic District Commission, and Board of Traffic and Parking may submit recommendations and the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider such recommendations at the time of public hearing on any application for special exception or variance. 
7. 	Interpretations, Special Exceptions and Variances. 
a. 	
Interpretations. The Board of Zoning Appeals is empowered to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination, including but not limited to questions concerning nonconforming uses made by the Zoning Administrator or any other agent of the City in the enforcement of this article. 

b. 	
Special Exceptions. The Board of Zoning Appeals is empowered to hear and decide such special exceptions as specifically authorized by the terms of this article; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions if same does not violate the spirit and intent of this article. A special exception shall not be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless and until it finds that the general criteria found in Subsection U.8.a and when applicable, the specific criteria for particular special exception uses in specific districts found in Subsection U.8.a.7 are met. 

c. 	
Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals is empowered to authorize upon appeal applications for a variance filed by a person or persons with a contractual or proprietary interest in the property. The Board may only authorize a variance from height, lot width, lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, setback requirements, parking space requirements, sign area, and buffer width requirements of this article. A variance shall be granted only upon specific findings made by the Board that each of the criteria for variances found in Subsection U.8.b are met. 


8. Criteria for Approval of Special Exceptions and Variances. 
a. 	Special Exceptions. 
No special exception shall be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals until and unless the Board, in its written order finds that the application complies with the following criteria: 
(1) 	
Complete Application and Documentation. A written application for a special exception is submitted by a person or persons with a financial, contractual, or proprietary interest in the property indicating the section of this article under which the special exception is sought, stating the grounds on which it is requested, and including a concept plan of the proposed use which outlines the specific characteristics of the intended use on that site. 

(2) 	
Authority to Grant Special Exception and General Standards. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this article described in the application to grant the special exception and that the granting of the special exception will not materially or adversely affect the adjoining and surrounding properties, if: 

(a) 	
The characteristics of the use and its operation on the property in question as proposed in the application and concept plan will not create any greater adverse impact than the operation of such a use on any other property with the same zoning, and 

(b) 	
The proposed activity will comply with all conditions and requirements set forth for the specific use in that zoning district. 




In making this determination, the Board shall consider, among other things, the impact of the proposed use on neighborhood parking and traffic and whether any proposed activities will create adverse visual, odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or similar impact for surrounding properties. 
(3) 	
Conditions of Approval. In granting any special exception, the Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe any special conditions in addition to those specified in the Ordinance which it feels are necessary to carry out the intent of this Article and address the issues identified in a.(2) above, so that protection of adjacent properties, the neighborhood as a whole, and the public interest is ensured. Violation of such conditions and safeguards when made a part of terms under which the special exception is granted shall be deemed a violation of this article and punishable under Article 8 of this Code. 

(4) 	
Limited to Use Proposed to the Board. No use or activity permitted by a special exception shall be enlarged or extended beyond the limits authorized in the grant of special exception without approval of the Board. 

(5) 	
Change of Special Exception Use. Changes from one special exception use to another use permitted by special exception shall require approval by the Board. 

(6) 	
Use Variances or Special Exceptions for Uses Not Enumerated As Such are Prohibited. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Zoning Appeals grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this article in the zone involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this article in such zone. 

(7) 	
Specific Special Exception Criteria for Certain Uses. The following special exception uses shall be subject to the following specific use standards. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not approve a special exception unless the use complies with these requirements, and shall not grant a variance to the following standards. 

(a) 	
Fitness & Recreational Sports Centers (71394), provided that: 

(i) 	
The nature of the use will not materially or adversely conflict with the character of the neighborhood. 

(ii) 	
A pool shall not be located nearer than 75 feet from any property line nor nearer than 125 feet from any existing dwelling. 



(b) 	
Bed and breakfast inns in an existing structure (721191): 

(i) 	
There shall be no exterior evidence that a building is being used for any purpose other than a residence, except for one permitted sign of no more than two square feet. 

(ii) 	
Off-street parking shall be provided; one space per guest room. In no case shall parking be provided in a front yard. All parking area must be adequately screened with a minimum five-foot landscaped buffer. 


(iii) 	A site plan shall be submitted and approved by the Planning Commission prior to the issuance of the zoning certificate. 

(c) 	
Uses permitted by right in the CL District of a type to serve the particular high-density residential development provided for in the RH District, as well as nearby residents, so long as located geographically on the same tract of land as the proposed new residential development: 

(i) 	
The commercial use shall occupy no more than 10% of the tract area. 

(ii) 	
There shall be a phasing requirement which ensures that: 


[a] 	The residential development will precede the commercial development; and 
[b] 	The commercial development will never exceed the 10% ratio for the ultimate build-out of the residential development. 

(d) 	
Mixed-Use Building of commercial and multi-family residential units in the RH District: 

(i) 	
A mixed-use building shall be a multi-story structure with a minimum of three floors. 

(ii) 	
The first floor of the structure may be occupied by commercial uses allowed by right in the CL District. 


(iii) 	At least 15% and no more than 33% of the structure shall be occupied by commercial uses. 
(iv) 	
A mixed-use building shall have direct access to an arterial or major collector street as classified by the City Engineer. 

(v) 	
A concept plan for the project shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission which shall include at a minimum: 


[a] 	Proposed development layout. 
[b] 	Proposed architectural elevations. 
[c] 	A tabulation of the square footage proposed for commercial and for residential uses. 
[d] 	Proposed landscape beautification and buffering plans. 

(e) 	
Hair, nail and skin care stores and dog grooming establishments in the RO Zoning District: 

(i) 	
Business use shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of floor area. 

(ii) 	
The property shall be located on a Collector Street (or higher) as shown on the Transportation Map of the Comprehensive Plan. 


(iii) 	Shall be permitted only in a multi-family, mixed-use or non-residential building. 
(iv) 	A plan for signs shall be submitted to the Board and made part of its review, and that (as may be modified) shall be approved as part of the special exception. 

(f) 	
For specific requirements of Wireless Communications Facilities, see Section Q of this Article. 




b. 	Variances. 
No variance shall be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals until and unless the Board, in its written order finds that the application complies with the following criteria: 
(1) 	
Unique Condition of Property. Whereby due to exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topographical conditions, or other unusual situations or conditions peculiar to a specific parcel of property, or of the use of the property, the strict application of these regulations would result in peculiar or unusual practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon, the owner of the property; and 

(2) 	
Minimum Necessary to Afford Relief. The variance requested is the minimum reasonably necessary to overcome the unusual conditions applicable to the property; and 

(3) 	
Compliance Would Preclude Common Use. That the literal interpretation of the provisions of this Article would deprive the applicant of uses commonly enjoyed by other similar properties in the same district under the terms of this Article; and 

(4) 	
No Special Privilege. That granting the variance will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Article to other lands or structures with the same zoning; and 

(5) 	
Self-Created Hardship. No variance shall be granted in any case where the applicant, owner or their agent has created or caused to be created a situation which would or has necessitated the issuance of a variance in order for such property to comply with this Article; and 

(6) 	
Consistent With the Intent of the Ordinance. That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Article, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 


Conditions of Approval. The Board may prescribe appropriate and specific conditions and safeguards, including location, construction, maintenance, and operation in conformity with this Article. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be a violation of this Article. 
Use Variances Prohibited. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Zoning Appeals grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Article in the zone involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Article in such zone. 
Variances Solely to Increase Residential Density Yield Prohibited. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Zoning Appeals grant a variance to the minimum lot area and/or minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements of the Ordinance for the purpose of increasing residential density or residential dwelling unit or lot yield. 
9. Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination made and issue a written opinion and orders to be enforced by the Zoning Administrator as herein set forth. Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be by the majority. 
Except as provided in the next paragraph, if an application is disapproved by the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Board shall take no further action on another application for the same or substantially the same proposal on the same premises until after 12 months from the date of the last disapproval. 
A subsequent application for the same or substantially the same proposal on the same premises may be filed if accompanied by an affidavit setting forth new and different grounds, which the applicant believes would be sufficient for the approval of the proposal contained in the application. After having considered the said application and the facts alleged in the accompanying affidavit, the Board may grant another hearing with the requisite legal notice, provided it is satisfied that new and different grounds or conditions exist which would have a bearing on the consideration of said proposal and would justify another hearing. 
10. Variance Exception for Public Improvements. 
There are occasions where the City of Hagerstown, Washington County Board of County Commissioners or the State of Maryland may enter into an arrangement to purchase part of a property in the furtherance of public interest (street right-of-way, park land, public building, etc.). When the land remaining to the owner is less than minimum lot standards for the district in which it is located, or a building is left closer to a property line than would otherwise be permitted by setback requirements, reduction of parking spaces below current minimum standards, or the development would no longer comply with other bulk requirements of this Article (or be driven further into noncompliance), neither the property owner nor the City, County or State shall be required to apply for and obtain variances for the proposed subdivision of that land. 
V. Reserved. 
W. Reserved. 
X. Reserved. 
Y. Reserved. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

Z. Chart of Permitted and Special Exception Uses. 
Uses shall be principal permitted uses, special exception uses, or prohibited in each zoning district in accordance with the matrix found on the following pages. Some uses are permitted subject to performance and locational standards within a district, and the reader shall review the chart closely to determine whether locational or performance standards apply to a proposed use. 
Blank 	Not permitted. 
P 	Permitted-Principal Use. 
P* 	Permitted-Principal use in accordance with parking requirements (Section O). 
P# 	Permitted-Principal use in the POM district, subject to certain limitations enumerated in Subsection F.2.b(5). 
P@ 	Permitted-Principal use in the N-MU and CC-MU districts, subject to certain enumerated requirements in Subsection E.7. 
P** 	Permitted-Principal use in the I-MU district, subject to certain enumerated requirements in Subsection H.8. 
SE 	Special Exception Use. 
In interpreting the appropriateness of proposed uses, the North American Industry Classification System (U.S. 2002) (NAICS) will be considered along with other factors to determine similarity to delineated uses in the zoning districts. It is to be used as a guide, and not a default interpretation of the intent and purpose of this Article and is non-binding upon the Zoning Administrator. 
USE CHART ORGANIZATION 
Category Residential Districts Chart All Other Districts Chart Page Page 
Residential Uses 4-135 4-138 
Public and Institutional Uses 4-136 4-140 
Office and Professional Uses 4-136 4-142 
Entertainment and Hospitality Uses 4-137 4-143 
Broadcast and Production -------4-145 
Service and Sales Industries 4-137 4-145 
Automobile-and Transportation-Related Uses -------4-148 
Industrial, Manufacturing and Heavy Land Uses 4-137 4-149 
Temporary Uses 4-137 4-152 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

A
. 
U
S
E 
C
H
A
R
T 
­
A
G
R
I
C
U
L
T
U
R
A
L 
T
R
A
N
S
I
T
I
O
N 
A
N
D 
R
E
S
I
D
E
N
T
I
A
L 
Z
O
N
I
N
G 
D
I
S
T
R
I
C
T
S
. 

The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
n
i
n
g 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 
U
s
e 
 AT  RMOD  RMED  RH  RO  
Residential Uses  
One single-family dwelling per unit of land existing as of January 1, 2012.  P  
One dwelling, single-family, detached, per lot, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P  P  P  P  
One dwelling, two-family, per lot, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P  P  P  P  
One dwelling, single-family semi-detached, per lot, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P  P  P  P  
One dwelling, townhouse, per lot, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P  P  P  
Dwelling, quadraplex, in cluster developments only, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P  P  P  
Dwelling, triplex, in cluster developments only, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P  P  P  
Dwelling, new construction mansion house apartment, subject to minimum lot area requirements.  SE  P  
Dwelling, stacked apartment, subject to minimum lot area requirements.  P  
Dwelling, courtyard apartment, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P  
Dwelling, mansion house apartment, in an existing building, subject to performance requirements cited in Subsection D.5.g.  P*  P*  
Dwelling, multi-family, constructed for that purpose prior to October 1, 1956. Such use shall not have been expanded or enlarged to add additional units beyond that which was in existence prior to March 7, 1977. This does not include large homes converted to apartment use.  P  P  
Dwelling, Mansion House Over-Under Flats, subject to the requirements of Section D.5.g(2)  P  P  
Rooming house in existing buildings, subject to conditions in Section K.19.  P  P  
Alternative living units, small group homes and small halfway houses.  P  P  P  P  
Large group homes and large halfway houses.  P  
Large group homes and large halfway houses, only in pre-1956 apartment buildings.  P  
Large group homes and large halfway houses, only in mansion house apartment buildings.  P  P  
Continuing care retirement community on a minimum tract size of 20 acres.  P  
Model home sales office in dwellings or trailers in new home developments for use within the development, provided the type and location are shown on the approved site plan or development plan.  P  P  P  P  

The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
n
i
n
g 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 
U
s
e 
 AT  RMOD  RMED  RH  RO  
Mobile Home Parks, subject to the design requirements found in Subsection D.5.h.  P  
One garage per lot that does not front a public street, subject to provisions of Subsection D.5.i.  P  P  P  P  
Public and Institutional Uses  
Ambulance services (621910), fire protection (922160) and police protection (922120).  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Adult day-care services (624120).  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Cemetery, columbarium and mausoleum for humans (not pet cemeteries) and crematoriums.  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Child day-care services (624410).  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Commercial and private membership outdoor swimming pools, provided the pool meets distance requirements cited in Subsection D.5.j.  P*  P*  P*  
Community centers, including but not limited to cultural, civic and educational centers.  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Country clubs, golf courses and summer camps.  P  
Fitness and recreational sports centers.  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Municipal parking lots and decks.  P  P  P  P  
Museums (712), except zoological parks.  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Primary and secondary schools, public and private, provided all setback, parking and other regulations are met without variance.  P  P  P  P  
Primary and secondary schools, public and private, for which setback, parking or other regulations cannot be met without variance.  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Private parks, playgrounds and community gardens.  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Public administration (92), except correctional institutions publicly-managed (922140) and privately-managed (561210).  P  
Public parks.  P  P  P  P  
Religious sanctuaries (8131) (church, synagogue, mosque, wedding chapel, etc.) with traditional accessory uses, provided all setback, parking and other regulations are met without variance or waiver and reuse of existing structures comply with setbacks.  P  P  P  P  
Religious sanctuaries (8131) other than those described in the previous line, or not meeting all site design requirements.  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Office and Professional Uses  
Administrative support services (561).  P*  
Ambulatory health care services, with exception of outpatient substance abuse centers (621420).  P*  
Colleges, universities, trade and commercial schools, except primary and secondary schools (611).  SE  SE  SE  SE  
Finance and insurance (52), monetary authorities – central bank, credit intermediation and related activities (521-522), except pawn shops (522298).  P*  

The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
n
i
n
g 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 
U
s
e 
 AT  RMOD  RMED  RH  RO  
Funeral homes (81221) including accessory crematories.  SE  SE  SE  P*  
Hospitals, including psychiatric, substance abuse and specialty hospitals (622).  SE  
Nursing homes, assisted living facilities and rehabilitation centers  P  
Offices, business and professional (55 and 56), except waste management and remediation services (562).  P  
Professional, scientific & technical services (54), except veterinary services.  P*  
Entertainment and Hospitality Uses  
Agri-tourism.  P  
Bed & breakfast inns (721191).  SE  SE  SE  
Camping and Campgrounds (7212)  SE  
Service and Sales Industries  
Farms in existence on the date of the adoption of this ordinance, or at the time of annexation into the city, may continue in use. Commercial farming operations may not be expanded with respect to area or intensity of usage, nor may the type of commercial agricultural use be altered.  P  
Hair, nail and skin care stores (81211) and dog grooming establishments.  SE  
Kennels (812910).  P  
Mixed use building of commercial and residential units.  SE  P  
Nurseries and greenhouses -the raising of plants for sale with attached commercial outlet (444220).  P  
Uses permitted by right in the CL District in a location to serve the needs of surrounding residential uses.  SE  
Wineries and vineyards (312130).  P  
Industrial, Manufacturing, and Heavy Land Uses  
Blacksmithing and farriers services.  P  
Temporary Uses  
Temporary Contractor Staging Facility, subject to provisions in Subsection K.13.  P  P  P  P  P  
Temporary Uses, subject to provisions in Section R.  P  P  P  P  P  

B
. 
U
S
E 
C
H
A
R
T 
– 
M
I
X
E
D
­
U
S
E
, 
C
O
M
M
E
R
C
I
A
L
, 
I
N
D
U
S
T
R
I
A
L 
A
N
D 
O
V
E
R
L
A
Y 
D
I
S
T
R
I
C
T
S
. 

This chart begins on the next page and contains the complete list of uses addressed by this ordinance. When a use is not permitted in the AT, RMOD, RMED, RH and RO Districts, that line was omitted from Chart A. 
City of Hagerstown Land Management Code v3.5 

The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Residential Uses  
One single-family dwelling per unit of land existing as of January 1, 2012.  
One dwelling, single-family, detached, per lot, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P@  P@  P  P  
One dwelling, two-family, per lot, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P@  P@  P  P  
One dwelling, single-family semi-detached, per lot, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P@  P@  P  P  P  P  
One dwelling, townhouse, per lot, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P@  P@  P  P  
Dwelling, quadraplex, in cluster developments only, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P  
Dwelling, triplex, in cluster developments only, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P  
Dwelling, new construction mansion house apartment, subject to minimum lot area requirements.  P@  P@  P  P, but not in RMOD  
Dwelling, stacked apartment, subject to minimum lot area requirements.  P@  P@  P  P  P, but not in RMOD  
Dwelling, courtyard apartment, subject to minimum lot requirements.  P@  P, but not in RMOD  
Dwelling, mansion house apartment, in an existing building, subject to performance requirements cited in Subsection D.5.g.  P*  
Dwelling, multi-family, constructed for that purpose prior to October 1, 1956. Such use shall not have been expanded or enlarged to add additional units beyond that which was in existence prior to March 7, 1977. This does not include large homes converted to apartment use.  

4­138 

City of Hagerstown, Maryland Land Management Code v3.5 Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Dwelling, mansion house apartment and stacked apartments, both new construction and conversion of existing buildings, subject to minimum lot area requirements and criteria in Subsection F.5.b.  P  
Dwelling, Mansion House Over-Under Flats, subject to the requirements of Section D.5.g(2)  P  
Dormitories for secondary and post-secondary educational institutions.  P  
Rooming house in existing buildings, subject to conditions in Section K.19.  P  
Rooming house in existing buildings outside the Smart Growth A&E District, subject to conditions in Section K.19.  P  
Rooming house in existing buildings, over 16 rooming units, subject to conditions in Section K.19.  SE  
Alternative living units, small group homes and small halfway houses.  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Large group homes and large halfway houses.  P  P  P  P  P  
Large group homes and large halfway houses – in a PUD if the PUD development contains multi-family dwelling units.  P  
Large group homes and large halfway houses, only in pre­1956 apartment buildings.  
Large group homes and large halfway houses, only in mansion house apartment buildings.  
Artist Live-Work Space in large former commercial, industrial or institutional buildings.  P  P  P  P  P  
Artist Live-Work Space in buildings approved for a Local Conversion District Overlay, without regulation on the size and composition of the resident household.  P  

4­139 

Land Management Code v3.5 City of Hagerstown, Maryland Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Up to two dwelling units in a building that previously contained no dwelling units or one dwelling unit, provided that commercial uses as outlined in the LC District are included within the building.  P  
Apartment dwellings legally in existence as a permitted, special exception or non-conforming use, where there is no increase in the number of dwelling units in a building that contains commercial uses, or will contain commercial units (Local Conversion only).  P  
Continuing care retirement community on a minimum tract size of 20 acres.  P  P  
Model home sales office in dwellings or trailers in new home developments for use within the development, provided the type and location are shown on the approved site plan or development plan.  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Mobile Home Parks, subject to the design requirements found in Subsection D.5.h.  
One garage per lot that does not front a public street, subject to provisions of Subsection D.5.i.  P  P  P  
Public and Institutional Uses  
 
Ambulance services (621910), fire protection (922160) and police protection (922120).  SE  SE  SE  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  SE  
Adult day-care services (624120).  P  P  SE  P  P  P  P  SE  
Cemetery, columbarium and mausoleum for humans (not pet cemeteries) and crematoriums.  SE  P  P  P  P  
Child day-care services (624410).  P  P  SE  P  P  P**  P  
Civic and social organizations (8134).  SE  P  SE  P  P  SE  

4­140 

City of Hagerstown, Maryland Land Management Code v3.5 Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Commercial parking lots and decks.  P  P  P  
Commercial and private membership outdoor swimming pools, provided the pool meets distance requirements cited in Subsection D.5.j.  P  P  
Community centers, including but not limited to cultural, civic and educational centers.  P  P  SE  P  P  P  SE  P  
Country clubs, golf courses and summer camps.  P  
Fitness and recreational sports centers.  P  P  SE  P  P  P#  P  P**  P  P  P  P  
Libraries.  P  P  P  P  
Municipal parking lots and decks.  P  P  P  
Museums (712), except zoological parks.  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Primary and secondary schools, public and private, provided all setback, parking and other regulations are met without variance.  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Primary and secondary schools, public and private, for which setback, parking or other regulations cannot be met without variance.  SE  P  SE  SE  SE  P  
Private parks, playgrounds and community gardens.  P  P  P  P  
Public administration (92), except correctional institutions publicly-managed (922140) and privately-managed (561210).  P  P  SE  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Public parks.  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  

4­141 

Land Management Code v3.5 City of Hagerstown, Maryland Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Religious sanctuaries (8131) (church, synagogue, mosque, wedding chapel, etc.) with traditional accessory uses, provided all setback, parking and other regulations are met without variance or waiver and reuse of existing structures comply with setbacks.  P  P  SE  P  P  SE  P  
Religious sanctuaries (8131) other than those described in the previous line, or not meeting all site design requirements.  P  P  SE  P  P  SE  P  
Office and Professional Uses  
 
Administrative support services (561).  P  P  SE  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Ambulatory health care services, with exception of outpatient substance abuse centers (621420).  P  P  SE  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Artist Studios  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Banks, savings institutions & credit unions (521-522), except pawn shops (522298).  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Business Service Centers (56143) and Quick Printing Services (323114).  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Colleges, universities, trade and commercial schools, except primary and secondary schools (611).  P  P  SE  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Finance and insurance (52), monetary authorities – central bank, credit intermediation and related activities (521­522), except pawn shops (522298).  P  P  SE  P  P  P  P  P  P  SE  
Funeral homes (81221) including accessory crematories.  P  SE  P  P  SE  
Hospitals, including psychiatric, substance abuse and specialty hospitals (622).  P  P  P  P  P  
Large animal veterinary clinic (541940).  P  

4­142 

City of Hagerstown, Maryland Land Management Code v3.5 Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Medical and diagnostic laboratories (6215).  P  P  
Nursing homes, assisted living facilities and rehabilitation centers  P  P  P  P  P  
Offices, business and professional (55 and 56), except waste management and remediation services (562).  P  P  SE  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Offices for bonding, probation and parole of defendants in the criminal justice system, not within 500 feet of Public Square or within 250 feet of another such use.  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Outdoor Automated Teller Machines (ATM), not accessory to a banking institution.  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Outpatient substance abuse centers, including disbursement of addiction treatment drugs.  P  P  P  P  P  
Photography Studios.  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Professional, scientific & technical services (54), except veterinary services.  P  P  SE  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Veterinary services (54194), completely enclosed.  SE  SE  SE  P  P  P  P  P  
Veterinary services (54194), with outdoor runs, not kennels (as defined in Article 3 and permitted in other districts).  SE  P  P  
Entertainment and Hospitality Uses  
 
Adult entertainment business uses, subject to the provisions of Subsection F.2.b.(4).  P  
Agri-tourism.  
Amusement and recreation establishments (713120, 71395 and 713990).  P  P  P  P  

4­143 

Land Management Code v3.5 City of Hagerstown, Maryland Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Banquet and reception facilities (722320).  P  P  P  P  
Bed & breakfast inns (721191).  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Camping and Campgrounds (7212)  
Catering kitchens, for preparation of food for off-site delivery and associated office and storage use (722320).  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Convention and Conference Centers.  P  
Drinking places (722410) and brewpubs, distillery pubs and wine pubs within the Smart Growth A&E District.  P  
Drinking places (722410) and brewpubs, distillery pubs and wine pubs outside the Smart Growth A&E District.  SE  SE  SE  P  P  SE  
Entertainment club.  SE  SE  SE  P  
Hotels and motels (72111).  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Multi-purpose arenas for sporting events, entertainment and other assembly events.  P  P  P  P  P  
Night clubs.  SE  P  P  P  P  P  
Performing arts companies (7111).  P  
Restaurants (7221 and 7222), no limit on size.  P  P  P  P  P#  P**  P  
Restaurants (7221 and 7222) not to exceed 3,000 square feet per establishment.  P  P  P  
Satellite Simulcast (off track) Betting Facilities.  P  P  

4­144 

City of Hagerstown, Maryland Land Management Code v3.5 Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Theater, movie (512131).  P  P  P  
Theater, performing arts (711310).  P  
Tobacco stores and vapor and hookah lounges, located at least 500 feet from any existing tobacco store or vapor or hookah lounge.  P  P  
Visitor Welcome Center.  P  
Visual and performing arts studios.  P  P  P  
Broadcast and Production  
 
Broadcasting (515).  P  P  P  P  
Broadcasting (515) except transmission points.  P  P  P  
Motion picture and sound recording industries (512).  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Telecommunications (517).  P  P  P  P  P  
Service and Sales Industries  
 
Check cashing services (522390).  P  P  
Convenience store without fuel pumps (445120).  P  P  
Dry cleaning and laundry services (8123).  P  P  P  P  P  P#  P**  P  P  P  P  

4­145 

Land Management Code v3.5 City of Hagerstown, Maryland Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Farms in existence on the date of the adoption of this ordinance, or at the time of annexation into the city, may continue in use. Commercial farming operations may not be expanded with respect to area or intensity of usage, nor may the type of commercial agricultural use be altered.  
Farm equipment and supply stores (444220).  P  P  
Flea Markets, subject to performance criteria found in Subsection F.2.b(9) or Subsection H.2.c, as applicable.  P  P  P  
Gasoline and diesel fuel, sale to the public.  P  P  
Hair, nail and skin care stores (81211) and dog grooming establishments.  P  
Hair, nail and skin care stores, ear piercing services, hair replacement services, permanent makeup salons (81211) and dog grooming establishments.  P  P  P  P  P  P#  P**  P  P  
Kennels (812910).  
Kennels, day boarding and over-night boarding, subject to conditions enumerated in Subsection F.2.b(7) (812910).  P  P  
Kennels, day boarding and over-night boarding, subject to conditions in I-MU enumerated in Subsection H.2.b (812910).  P  P  P  
Internet publishing and broadcasting (516).  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Internet service providers web search portals and data processing services (518).  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Mixed use building of commercial and residential units.  P@  P@  P  P  P  
Mixed-use building of Commercial and Residential Units, subject to criteria in Subsection F.5.b.  P  

4­146 

City of Hagerstown, Maryland Land Management Code v3.5 Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Newspaper publishers (511110).  P  P  P  P  P  
Nurseries and greenhouses -the raising of plants for sale with attached commercial outlet (444220).  P  SE  SE  P  
Outdoor vending machines entirely on private property in active use and not in a public street right-of-way, provided that the vending machines(s) comply with building setbacks unless abutting a building.  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Pawn shops (522298), provided a 500 foot separation is maintained from any other pawn shop (also see next page).  P  
Personal and household goods repair and maintenance (8114).  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Photo finishing (81292).  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Produce stands (812910).  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Retail and wholesale sale of home improvement materials and supplies, with a minimum floor area of 25,000 square feet and a maximum of 75,000 square feet (444110).  P  P  
Retail and wholesale trade (44-45) excluding auto and other motor vehicle dealers unless all vehicle storage is indoors and excluding adult businesses – up to 5,000 square feet in net floor area per business. This provision shall also include retail bakeries (311811) and retail confectioneries (311320). Regulation of specific trade uses that are found elsewhere in this chart shall prevail. (Ed. Note: See Page 4-146 regarding gasoline sales)  P  P  P  
Same as above, up to 15,000 square feet in net floor area per business.  P  P#  P**  
Same as above, up to 75,000 square feet in net floor area per business.  P  P  

4­147 

Land Management Code v3.5 City of Hagerstown, Maryland Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Same as above, no limit in floor area.  P  
Retail and wholesale trade (44-45), and pawn shops (522298), up to 25% of the total gross square footage of floor area of the buildings on a single property or of the buildings in a unified development under common ownership spanning more than one property. A pawn shop is only permitted if 500 foot separation is maintained from any other pawn shop.  SE  SE  
Sale of fireworks only from single-user, freestanding buildings, not to exceed 5,000 square feet of floor area (453998).  P  P  
Tanning and depilatory salons (812199).  P  P  P  P  P  P#  P**  P  P  
Tattoo parlors and massage parlors, steam baths and saunas (812199).  P  P  
Uses permitted by right in the CL District in a location to serve the needs of surrounding residential uses.  P  P  
Wineries and vineyards (312130).  
Automobile and Transportation Related Uses  
 
Automotive Repair & Maintenance (8111).  SE  P  P  P  P  SE  
Automotive Repair and Maintenance (8111) in buildings constructed prior to 2010 with outdoor storage and service areas screened with opaque fencing and landscaping in accordance with Article 5.  P  
Automobile and truck sales, subject to performance standards found in Subsection F.2.b(8) (4411 & 4412), including motor vehicle rental or leasing when a principal use. Storage of for-sale inventory and rental (cont’d.)  P  P  P  

4­148 

City of Hagerstown, Maryland Land Management Code v3.5 Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
fleets shall be calculated separate from requirements for customer and employee parking.  
Commercial Bus Stops and Terminals, provided indoor waiting areas and restroom facilities are provided at all times buses may stop at the facility and buses pull entirely off of public streets to pick up and discharge passengers.  P  P  P  P  
Motor Vehicle Impound and Storage Lots, provided that a six-foot opaque fence encloses the storage yard and landscaped buffers are provided as required by Article 5, Subsection I.4.j when adjacent to residential, commercial or mixed-use zoning districts.  P  P  
Parking Lots & Garages (81293), private, commercial and municipal, including offsite parking lots maintained by and designated for a permitted or special exception use on a lot located within 500 feet.  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Transit and Ground Transportation (485) provided area for parking vehicle fleets be enclosed with an opaque fence at least six feet in height (eight feet for buses and large trucks), maintained in good repair, with landscaping outside of the fence in accordance with the requirements of Article 5, and not including bus stations or terminals.  P  P  
Industrial, Manufacturing, and Heavy Land Uses  
 
Adult day care with vocational centers.  SE  SE  SE  P  P  P  
Blacksmithing and farriers services.  P  P  
Breweries and distilleries.  P  
Butchering.  P  P  P  P  
Carpet and upholstery cleaning services (56174).  P  P  P  

4­149 

Land Management Code v3.5 City of Hagerstown, Maryland Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Construction and landscaping contractors with storage Yards.  P  P  
Fossil fuel electric power generation (221112).  P  P  
Foundries (3315).  SE  
Indoor plant cultivation and processing facilities, when interior space is 25,000 square feet or less in gross floor area.  P  SE  P  P  P  
Indoor plant cultivation and processing facilities, when interior space is over 25,000 square feet in gross floor area.  SE  SE  SE  P  P  
Landfills and rubble fills (562212).  SE  
Livestock auction facilities.  SE  
Manufacturing, Light, when interior space is 25,000 square feet or less in gross floor area.  P  SE  P  P  P  P  
Manufacturing, Light, when interior space exceeds 25,000 square feet in gross floor area.  SE  SE  SE  P  P  
Manufacturing, General.  SE  P  P  
Manufacturing, Heavy.  P  
Motor vehicle supplies and new parts wholesalers (42112).  P  P  
Natural gas distribution (2212).  SE  
Other support activity for road transportation (48849).  P  P  

4­150 

City of Hagerstown, Maryland Land Management Code v3.5 Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Petroleum and petroleum products wholesalers (4247).  SE  SE  
Rail transportation facilities with outdoor storage but without on-site processing.  P  P  
Recycling Operation, with all sorting and separating activity occurring indoors.  P  P  
Remediation Service (562910).  SE  SE  
Research and development facilities.  SE  P  P  P  P  
Self-Storage Mini-Warehouse Facilities (531130).  P  P  
Septic Tank and Related Service (562991).  SE  SE  
Social Service Industries (624).  P  P  
Solid waste collection (562111).  SE  
Specialty Trade Contractors (238).  P  P  P  
Specialty Trade Contractors (238), with storage and preparation confined to interior of building.  P  
Vocational Rehabilitation Services (624310).  P  P  P  P  
Warehousing and storage (493).  P  P  P  
Warehousing & Storage (493) in buildings erected prior to October 1, 1956.  P  

4­151 

Land Management Code v3.5 City of Hagerstown, Maryland Article 4: Zoning Ordinance 
The key to the symbols used below is found on page 4-133. Refer to page 4-6 for explanation of district name abbreviations.  

 Z
o
ni
ng 
D
i
s
t
r
i
c
t 
 O
v
e
r
l
a
y 
Z
o
ni
ng 
 
U
s
e 
 N-MU  CC-MU  CL  CG  CR  POM  INST  I-MU  IR  IG  C  LC  PUD  
Warehouse/Flex space, provided such space does not exceed more than 50% of the total gross floor area of the building.  SE  P  
Wastewater treatment facilities (22132).  P  P  
Wholesale and retail sales of products manufactured or stored on the premises in conjunction with any other principal permitted use.  P  P  P  
Temporary Uses  
 
Temporary Contractor Staging Facility, subject to provisions in Subsection K.13.  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Temporary Uses, subject to provisions in Section R.  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  

4­152 

ARTICLE 5 
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance 

Table of Contents 
Section 	Page 
A. General Provisions 	5 -3 
B. Reserved 	5 -7 
C. Subdivision of Land Procedure 	5 -9 
D. Reserved 	5 -19 
E. Subdivision Design Principles and Standards 	5 -21 
F. Subdivision and Site Plan Data Requirements 	5 -27 
G. Required Improvements in Subdivisions 	5 -35 
H. Required Dedication of Expanded and Planned Street Rights-of-Way 	5 – 41 
I. 	Site Plan Standards 5 – 43 
J. 	Reserved 5 – 65 
K. 	Land Development Protection of Human Burial Sites 5 – 67 Appendix: Certifications 5 -71 



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

ARTICLE 5 
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance 
A. General Provisions. 
1. Title. 
This Article shall be known and cited as the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Hagerstown, Maryland, as amended. 
2. Administration of Ordinance. 
This Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be administered by the Hagerstown Planning Commission. All applications, fees, maps, and documents relative to subdivision approval shall be submitted to the City of Hagerstown Planning and Code Administration Department for review and formal action by the Hagerstown Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission. 
3. Application and Interpretation. 
No land within the incorporated area of Hagerstown, Maryland, shall be subdivided, nor shall any lot be sold or building erected in a subdivision as herein defined, until a plat of the subdivision is approved by the Commission and the plat properly filed and recorded by the Clerk of the Circuit Court for Washington County, Maryland. 
Pursuant to the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, a Clerk of the Circuit Court shall not record a plat of a subdivision unless the plat has been approved by the Commission as required by law. Any subdivision plat recorded without Commission approval has only the legal effect of an unrecorded plat. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements to meet the stated purpose and intent of these Regulations. Where the provisions of these Regulations impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other regulations, or ordinance, the provisions of these Regulations shall prevail. Where the provisions of any federal, state, or City statute, ordinance, or regulation impose greater restrictions than these Regulations, the provisions of such federal, state, or City statute, regulation, or ordinance shall prevail. 
The transfer, whether by gift, purchase, or otherwise, of a portion of a lot, tract, or parcel of land, to the City of Hagerstown, or to any agency thereof, for the purpose of acquisition of a road right-of­way, may not be subject to these Regulations. However, prior to the exchange of title, the proposed acquisition shall be approved by the Hagerstown Planning Commission. 
a. Mergers. 
The divisions or mergers of residentially zoned land that involve conveyance between adjoining and contiguous parcels, may not be subject to these Regulations, provided that: 
(1) 	
Neither the parcel being divided nor the parcel being enlarged are in a previously recorded subdivision. 

(2) 	
The land conveyed shall be merged into the adjoining parcel, and common property line eliminated so as to form one lot. 

(3) 	
The division shall not create a violation of the zoning regulations, except that conveyances are permitted between parcels which do not comply with current zoning bulk regulations if neither parcel becomes less complying. Merger of a noncomplying parcel into a larger parcel is also permitted. 


b. Minor Subdivisions. 
(1) 	
Exempt from Sketch and Development Plan. A Minor Subdivision as defined herein is exempt from the Sketch Plan and Development Plan. Initial submissions of Minor Subdivisions may be at the Final Plat stage. 

(2) 	
Such subdivisions shall affect the entire parcel or tract. 

(3) 	
The Zoning Administrator may permit Minor Subdivisions which are not in accordance with the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning regulations if: 

(a) 	
The Minor Subdivision improves the compliance of existing lots that do not meet current zoning bulk regulations by bringing the noncomplying lots as close to zoning compliance as possible; and 

(b) 	
The remainder of the parcel after the Minor Subdivision is in accordance with the zoning regulations. 

(c) 	
The subdivision of an existing duplex into two separate lots with a common wall. 




c. Resubdivision or Boundary Line Adjustment. 
Resubdivision plan approval is required in order to modify a previously recorded plat by adding or deleting lots or modifying lot lines. Provided there are no public road or private access place improvements required and no addition to the area previously recorded, a resubdivision or boundary line adjustment is exempt from the Sketch Plan and Preliminary Plan procedures of this subtitle. Initial submissions may be at the Final Plat stage. 
d. Adjustments to Recorded Plats. 
(1) 	
The combination or recombination of a portion of previously subdivided and recorded lots may be approved by the Zoning Administrator if the total number of lots is not increased, and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this Article. 

(2) 	
However, where a tract, consisting of two or more parcels or lots of record is subdivided or re-subdivided by simplified or minor plat for the purpose of placing on their own lots existing townhouse units in zoning districts that do not permit townhouse units and/or if the new resultant lots do not comply with current lot area and width requirements for 


townhouse development on individual lots in districts that permit townhouses, the owner may, when under common ownership, re-plat the property to abandon the townhouse lots and re-establish interior parcel or lot lines that existed at the time the simplified or minor plat was approved. When the tract is re-platted to abandon the interior townhouse lines and re-establish previous existing interior lot lines, the owner shall regain all rights thereto, as if the simplified or minor subdivision had never occurred. The townhouse structure shall be demolished prior to entering the re-platting process. Variances to bulk area requirements will not be required to abandon the simplified plat and re-establish those interior lot lines that existed when the simplified plat was created. No increase in the number of lots above existing shall be permitted. 
4. 	Subdivision of Record. 
Any plat or subdivision approved by the Zoning Administrator and/or the Planning Commission under the auspices of this Article and recorded among the Land Records of Washington County prior to the effective date of this Article shall be accepted as valid and no further approval by the Commission shall be required for the conveyance of lots so shown. 
5. 	Definitions. 
Article 3 of the Land Management Code shall govern all definitions as they apply to this Article. 
6. 	Modification. 
Where the Commission finds that unnecessary hardships may result from strict compliance with these Regulations, or where the Commission finds that modification of these standards is in the public interest or in the interest in achieving the best quality of development design, or protects environmentally sensitive features worthy of preservation that will otherwise be damaged or destroyed, it may vary the provisions found in Sections E and G of this Article, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such modification will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these Regulations. 
The applicant must establish that the request will meet one or more of the following conditions: 
a. 	
Avoid an undue hardship that was not self-created and that results from the peculiar and 
uncommon conditions of the property; 


b. 	
Avoid a clearly unreasonable requirement that would not serve any valid public purpose; 

c. 	
Allow an alternative standard that is clearly proven by the applicant to provide equal or better results; 

d. 	
Allow a layout or improvements that would clearly be more in the public interest than what would occur if the modification were not granted; 

e. 	
Remove a requirement that is not appropriate, especially because of the small size of the proposed subdivision; or 

f. 	
A modification may also be granted where necessary for preservation of environmentally 
sensitive features. 



Where a modification is granted, the Commission may attach such conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect general public interest or the character of the neighborhood, and may require a guarantee or bond to assure compliance. 
7. 	Assessment of Lots in a Subdivision. 
The filing of plans with the Commission shall not constitute a basis for a change of tax assessment. When the final subdivision plat is filed with the Clerk of the Circuit Court for recording, it becomes public information, and a print of the plat so recorded is forwarded to the County Assessor office. 
8. 	Appeals. 
Appeals from the provisions of this Article shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 8 of this Code. 
9. 	Amendments. 
The Commission may recommend and the Mayor and City Council may adopt amendments to the provisions of these Regulations if it is determined, after public hearing and advance public notice of said hearing, that any such amendment will better the public interest and the general purpose of these Regulations, as defined in the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. 
10. Violations and Penalties. 
The treatment of violations of this Article, and penalties for those violations shall be in accordance with Article 8 of this Code. 
10. Repeal. 
All other Ordinances, regulations, or statutes in conflict with the provisions of these Regulations or inconsistent with the provisions of these Regulations are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give these Regulations full force and effect. 
11. Severability and Separability. 
Should any Article, Section, Subsection, or provision of these Regulations be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the Subdivision Regulations as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
12. Effective Date. 
This Ordinance was first adopted and became effective on March 1, 1976. It has been amended and revised on several occasions over time, including substantive amendments effective January 20, 2007, and inclusion within this larger Land Management Code effective September 26, 2008. 
B. Reserved. 



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

C. 	Subdivision of Land Procedure. 
1. 	Introduction. 
The procedure for obtaining approval of a Major subdivision consists of the following four steps: 
a. 	
Sketch Plan/Preliminary Consultation and Approvals; 

b. 	
Final erosion and sediment control/stormwater management review and approvals; and 

c. 	
Development Plan Review and Approvals; and 

d. 	
Final Plat Review and Approval. 


With respect to the Planned Unit Development Process as outlined in the Zoning Ordinance, the Concept Plan and Exhibit approved by the Mayor and Council shall serve as the Sketch Plan for the purposes of this Article. 
2. 	Sketch Plan Review and Preliminary Consultation. 
The Sketch Plan/Preliminary Consultation process is intended to provide the applicant with an opportunity to resolve problems with respect to a subdivision early in the proceedings and to make necessary modifications and revisions prior to incurring the expense of preparing formal development plans. By definition, a Minor Subdivision is exempted from this process. In addition, in certain cases where the size and complexity of the proposed development is minimal, the Planning and Code Administration Department may advise the applicant to proceed to the Development Plan stage at the applicant’s discretion. 
a. 	
Pre-Application Meeting with Staff. A pre-application meeting or preliminary consultation is designed to introduce the applicant to the City’s zoning and subdivision regulations and procedures, to discuss the applicant’s objectives, and if needed or desired, to schedule a site inspection. 

b. 	
Site Inspection. After the pre-application meeting, a site inspection of the property may be arranged. Appropriate parties may include members of the Planning Staff, other appropriate City officials, and the Planning Commission. 


The purpose of the visit is to familiarize local officials with the property’s existing conditions and special features, to identify potential site design issues, and to provide an informal opportunity to discuss site design concepts; potential locations for proposed buildings and street alignments, also including the general layout of designated greenway lands and open space (if applicable). Comments made by municipal officials and staff or consultants shall be interpreted as being only suggestive. It shall be understood by all parties that no formal recommendations can be offered and no official decisions can be made at the Site Inspection. However, it is anticipated that observations will be utilized to develop a mutual understanding on the general approach for subdividing and developing the property. 
c. 	Sketch Plan Submission. The Sketch Plan diagrammatically illustrates a conceptual layout for lots, greenway lands, open space, building sites, and street alignments. It does not include hard engineering data necessary for construction. However, the sketch plan must include the site environmental features, preliminary estimates of storm water management requirements, and design narrative required by the City’s Storm water Management Ordinance. Submission of a Sketch Plan does not constitute formal filing of a plan with the City, and shall not commence the statutory review period. The Planning Commission shall review the Sketch Plan for consistency with the Policies and Goals of the Comprehensive Plan, with the criteria contained in the Zoning Ordinance, Forest Conservation Ordinance, and with other applicable City ordinances. Their review should advise the applicant of the extent to which the proposed subdivision or land development conforms to the relevant standards of this Article, and may suggest possible plan modifications that would increase its degree of conformance. 
d. Review Elements. The Planning Commission’s review may include, but is not limited to: 
(1) 	
The location of all areas proposed for land disturbance (streets, foundations, yards, storm water management areas, etc.) with respect to notable features of natural or cultural significance; 

(2) 	
The potential for street connections with existing streets, other proposed streets, or potential developments on adjoining parcels; 

(3) 	
The location of proposed access points along the existing road or street network; 

(4) 	
The proposed building density and impervious coverage. 

(5) 	
The availability and capacity of water and sewer. 

(6) 	
Proposed public improvements; highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract to the extent known to developer. 

(7) 	
Consideration of Forest Conservation and other environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited to slopes of 15% percent or greater. 

(8) 	
Open space. 

(9) 	
Parking considerations. 

(10) 	
The extent to which the environmental site design (ESD) techniques have been incorporated into the design. 


3. Sketch Plan Data Requirements and Planning Commission Review. 
a. Data Requirements. 
The required sketch plan shall contain, at a minimum, the data listed in Article 5, Subsection F.1, of this Article. 
b. Planning Commission Review. 
The Planning Commission shall review the Sketch Plan and the findings and recommendations and any other reports pertaining to the Plan, and provide comments, recommendations, and requirements as appropriate. The Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the Sketch Plan. 
(1) 	
If the Planning Commission grants the conditional approval of a Sketch Plan, the conditions and reasons thereof shall be stated in writing. 

(2) 	
If the Planning Commission disapproves the Sketch Plan, the reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing and reference shall be made to the specific sections of this Article and/or the Comprehensive Plan. 

(3) 	
If the Planning Commission approves the Sketch Plan, the applicant is authorized to proceed with the preparation of a Development Plan. Approval of a Sketch Plan shall not incur any vesting rights. 


4. Development Plan Review. 
The Development Plan is intended to provide detailed information sufficient for a formal review by the various municipal reviewing agencies and other authorities and is to be used as a basis for construction. Final approval of the Development Plan is determined by the Planning Commission. This Plan shall conform to the Sketch Plan. The City shall review the Plan to assess its accuracy, conformance with municipal ordinances, and likely impact upon the surrounding neighborhood, upon the natural and cultural resources on the property, and the City as a whole. 
5. Development Plan Data Requirements. 
The developer shall file with the submission of the Development Plan all of the construction drawings and documents to complete construction of streets, utilities, engineering data, storm drains, and storm water management facilities, together with all necessary appurtenances thereto in accordance with procedures and criteria contained in the City of Hagerstown’s, Public Ways Construction Standards & Engineering Guidelines. The developer shall prepare and submit copies as required to the Planning and Code Administration Department. 
The required development plan shall contain, at a minimum, the data listed in Article 5, Subsection 
F.1 of this Article. The development plan shall also include a preliminary version of the final 
subdivision plat, showing the proposed location of lot lines and easements. 

6. Development Plan Approval. 
The Planning Commission shall review the Development Plan and the findings and recommendations and any other reports pertaining to the Plan, and shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the Development Plan. 
a.  Formal Notice of Approval.  
If the Planning Commission grants the conditional approval of the Development Plan, the conditions and reasons thereof shall be stated in writing.  
b.  Formal Notice of Rejection.  
If the Planning Commission disapproves of the Development Plan, the reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing and reference shall be made to the specific sections of this Article and/or the Comprehensive Plan.  
c.  Signature and Effective Period of Plan.  
If the Planning Commission approves the Development Plan, approval of the Development Plan shall be noted by the Zoning Administrator signing and retaining as many copies as he or she may determine to be necessary for public use and record after any outstanding issues or conditions of approval are resolved by the applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall distribute signed copies to relevant agencies as set forth by Office policy. The Zoning Administrator may sign as many copies as the applicant deems necessary for their purposes. Approval of a Development Plan shall in no way constitute approval of the Final Plat. Development Plan approval shall be effective for a period of three years, and such additional three year periods as may be specifically approved in writing by the Commission.  
d.  All Applicable Permits Required.  
Approval of the Development Plan by the Commission does not constitute permission to construct Required Improvements. Final storm water management plan approval must be obtained from the City Engineer and the Washington County Conservation District, and all required permits must be obtained from all applicable City agencies and state and federal agencies before construction may commence.  
e.  Digital Submittal Before Construction.  
The digital submittal of the Development Plan and/or final storm water management plan as required by Subsection F.1 must be received prior to the issuance of construction permits. This is necessary for final house number addresses and integration into the utility infrastructure in the City’s Geographic Information System (GIS).  
f.  Field Modification of Approved Improvements.  
When changes or alterations of an approved Development Plan and/or final storm water management plan become necessary during construction, written approval of the changes shall be secured before execution of such changes. Implementing improvements that are not approved is a violation of the Ordinance, subject to enforcement and penalties. Requests for approval of changes must be submitted to the Planning and Code Administration Department, illustrating the proposed changes in red-line mark-ups of the approved plans. A digital submittal in accordance with Subsection F.1, is also required. Changes or alterations that are not shown as such, noted and illustrated, shall not be considered approved. Submittals shall be in accordance with policies  

adopted by the Planning and Code Administration Department for required numbers of copies 
necessary for routing plans to affected agencies. 
g. Administrative Approval of Minor Changes. 
Changes that have little substantive impact on the overall Development Plan and/or final storm water management plan may be approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator. Substantial revisions must be reviewed by the Planning Commission. The Zoning Administrator reserves the right to require an applicant to obtain Planning Commission approval of any proposed amendment to the Development Plan and/or final storm water management plan. 
7. Withdrawal. 
A Development Plan, upon written request of the applicant, shall be withdrawn from consideration by the Commission. 
8. Final Storm Water Management Plan Review. 
The final storm water management plan is intended to provide detailed information on the engineering design of all proposed storm water management practices and erosion and sediment control techniques for the project. The final storm water management plan shall incorporate or address all comments received during the Sketch Plan and Development Review Plan processes. 
9. Final Storm Water Management Plan Data Requirements. 
The developer shall submit detailed construction drawings, reports, calculations, and other supporting documentation in accordance with the requirements of the City’s Storm Water Management Ordinance. 
10. Final Storm Water Management Plan Approval. 
The City Engineer and the Washington County Conservation District shall review the Final Storm Water Management Plan and the findings and recommendations and any other reports pertaining to the Plan, and shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the Final Storm Water Management Plan. 
If the City Engineer approves the Final Storm Water Management Plan, approval by the 
City Engineer shall be noted by signing the said Plan. 

11. Final Plat Review. 
The purpose of the Final Plat is to require formal approval by the Commission before plats for subdivisions are recorded as required by these Regulations. The Final Plat shall conform to the approved Development Plan and shall reflect all changes required by the Commission pursuant to the Development Plan review procedure. 
The Final Plat may constitute only that portion of a particular development phase of the approved Development Plan, which the developer proposes to construct and record at that time, provided that such portion conforms with all the requirements and standards of these Regulations. 
a. 	Wastewater Capacity Required. 
A Final Plat shall be approved only when the Planning Commission has determined that wastewater facilities will be adequate to support and service the proposed subdivision as regulated under the City’s Sewer Capacity Allocation Program, as amended from time to time. 
b. 	Digital Submission and Standards. 
A digital submission of the Final Plat in a format utilizing commonly accepted engineering practices and one accepted and approved by the City Engineer shall be submitted, accompanying the final mylar. Existing, vacated, and proposed property line must be on unique layers for identification in the City’s digital tax mapping system. All property line work shall be accessible on a separate layer. 
c. 	City Grid and Monument System. 
The work shall be tied to the City Grid and monument system (MD State Plane Coordinates NAD 83-epoch 1996). At a minimum, two field-identified property corners shall have City Grid coordinates identified, preferably along an exterior line or along a city right of way, at least 300 feet apart, if feasible. 
12. Final Plat Data Requirements. 
The required final plat shall contain, at a minimum, the data listed in Article 5, Subsection F.2, of this Article. 
13. Final Plat Certification. 
The following certifications and related information shall appear on the Final Plat: 
a. 	
Certification of Ownership and Dedication signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided consenting to the preparation and recording of said Final Plat, establishing minimum building restriction lines and dedicating the following public uses: roads, streets, alleys, walks, utility and storm drainage rights-of-way, open space, and other areas approved for dedication to public use by the Commission. 

b. 	
Certification of Accuracy signed by a registered land surveyor or property line surveyor responsible for the survey and Final Plat with seal. 

c. 	
Certification of the Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene signed by the Washington County Health Officer regarding the installation of water supply and wastewater systems. 

d. 	
Certification signed by the City Engineer approving the installation of streets and other improvements as defined herein in accordance with City Standards where these improvements have been completed, dedicated and accepted by the City prior to Final Plat approval. 

e. 	
Certification signed by the City Clerk of the City of Hagerstown acknowledging that a performance security in the amount determined by the appropriate City official(s) has been posted 


with the City of Hagerstown guaranteeing completion of all improvements as defined herein in accordance with City Standards where these improvements have not been completed, dedicated and accepted by the City prior to Final Plat approval. 
f. 	
Certificate of Approval signed by the Chairman of the Commission certifying that the subdivision shown on the Final Plat is in compliance with the Subdivision Regulations, Hagerstown, Maryland, and approving the Final Plat for recording with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington County. 

g. 	
Additional Restrictions. Any other restrictions or requirements relating to land use, height, area or bulk regulations or restrictions designed to promote the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance or Comprehensive Plan as determined by the Commission. 

h. 	
Covenants and Easements. Protective covenants and easements, if any, in form for recording. 


14. Final Plat Approval. 
The Commission shall approve or disapprove the Final Plat, if all requirements of these Subdivision Regulations have been complied with within 30 days after the submission thereof to the Commission; otherwise such Final Plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Commission upon demand. 
The applicant may waive the 30-day limitation and consent to an extension of such period. 
a. 	
Approval of the Final Plat shall be noted by the signing of the Certificate of Approval by the Chairman of the Commission. 

b. 	
If the Commission disapproves the Final Plat, it shall set forth the reasons for disapproval in its records and provide the applicant with written notification of such reasons. 


Every Final Plat approved by the Commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the Comprehensive Plan and a part thereof. 
The Commission shall have the power to agree with applicant upon use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions which are designed to promote the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hagerstown. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the Final Plat prior to the approval and recording thereof and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as part of the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map of the City of Hagerstown. 
15. Acceptance of Required Improvements. 
Approval of the Final Plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the City of any Required Improvement shown upon the Final Plat. Acceptance of such Required Improvement shall be made only by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with these Regulations and other applicable ordinances, statutes and regulations. 
16. Recordation. 
The Final Record Plat shall be recorded with the Land Records Division, Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington County, and shall be a clear and legible black line print on mylar. This print shall be an exact copy of the approved Final Plat as certified by the Chairman of the Commission. The Applicant/ Developer shall record the Final Plat. 
a. Six Months to Record. 
The Record Plat must be recorded with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington County within six months of Planning Commission approval; if not, approval of the Final Plat by the Planning Commission shall be void. 
b. Recorded Copies. 
Within five working days of the date of recordation, the applicant shall submit to the Planning and Code Administration Department a reproducible and two black line prints of the Final Plat with proof of recordation affixed thereto. Failure to provide the Department with the appropriate documentation of recording within the time period specified shall constitute a violation of this Article and the applicant shall be subject to penalties as provided in Article 8, (Violations and Penalties). 
17. Withdrawal. 
A Final Plat, upon written request of the applicant, shall be withdrawn from consideration by the Commission. 
18. Simplified Plat Procedure. 
Where a Subdivision, as defined herein, is submitted, but the intent of the Subdivision is not for development purposes, a Simplified Plat may be submitted for approval by the Zoning Administrator, without the necessity of the applicant going before the Planning Commission. 
Examples of Subdivisions not for development purposes are as follows: acquisition of additional acreage solely for property enlargement, a conveyance for acquisition purposes only, readjustment of property lines and/or correction of deed discrepancies, and conveyance of an existing structure for residential purposes only. Also, the creation of a plat for the purpose of implementing a condominium regime for existing structures and/or uses (including minor improvements thereto) that do not create additional dwelling units or habitable commercial or industrial space may be processed as a simplified plat. 
The Planning Commission, Planning Director, Zoning Administrator or the applicant may require Commission approval as provided for in Subsection C.14. 
a. Data Requirements. 
The required simplified plat shall contain, at a minimum, the data listed in Subsection F.2 of this Article. 
b. Certifications and Documents. 
Each Simplified Plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall contain or be accompanied by such certificates, affidavits, endorsements or documents as may be required by the Commission in enforcement of these Regulations. 
c. Simplified Plat Approval. 
(1) 	
The Zoning Administrator shall approve or disapprove a Simplified Plat, if all Subdivision Regulations have been complied with, within 30 days after submission of the completed Plat. Otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved and the certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Commission on demand. The grounds of disapproval of said Plat shall be stated upon the records of the Commission and the Applicant so notified in writing. 

(2) 	
Approval of the Simplified Plat shall be noted by the signing of a certificate of approval by the Chairman of the Commission. 


19. 	Condominium Plats. 
No plat for the creation of condominium units within existing buildings or land condominium units shall be recorded in the Land Records of Washington County unless and until the plat is submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review and signature. 
The review conducted by the Zoning Administrator shall be limited to verifying that there are no proposals, conditions or plans within the plat that would be a violation of the Zoning and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinances. Also, this review shall be for the purpose of verifying that the proposed use is permitted by the Zoning Ordinance, or if the existing use is illegal or nonconforming. 
In the event that the condominium plat is for a use that is nonconforming to the Zoning Ordinance, confirmation of that use shall be secured by the applicant in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 prior to recording the condominium plat. 
Condominium plats will be treated as a simplified plat for processing. 
20. 	Plat Fees. 
According to the fee schedule adopted by the Mayor and Council and amended from time to time. 
21. 	Properties in Violation at Time of Application or Processing. 
When a property with an open violation case or known violation of this Land Management Code is submitted into the subdivision process, the Zoning Administrator may suspend review and processing of the application pending resolution of the violation. Such suspension also suspends any review timing standards as set forth in this Chapter. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

D. Reserved. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

E. Subdivision Design Principles and Standards. 
1. Application. 
a. Design Principles. 
The subdivision plat shall conform to the principles which are generally exhibited in the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance, and any other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations included but not limited to the transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan and the City’s Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
b. Minimum Standards. 
The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered minimum standards and requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
c. Remnants. 
All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets, public lands, stormwater management area, open space or other proposed uses, so that remnants and landlocked area shall not be created. 
No land shall be subdivided unless there exists adequate access to the land over approved streets or roads as defined herein, or unless such access will be provided by the developer, or if such land is considered by the Commission to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or improper drainage, geological structure, topography or any other feature harmful to the health, safety and general welfare of present and future residents of the City of Hagerstown. 
2. Street Layout and Subdivision Design. 
a. Standards. 
Arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan and the Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines; and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. Any proposed intersection with a state highway will be subject to the review and approval of the State Highway Administration. 
b. Consideration of Existing Natural Features. 
Street layout should consider natural and topographic features such as tree lines, hedgerows, stone walls, fence lines, and watercourses. Alteration of natural, cultural, or historic site features should be kept to the minimum necessary. Any prominent natural vistas should be emphasized. 
c. Pedestrian, Transit, and other Transportation. 
Many streets have purposes in addition to vehicular traffic and should be designed to incorporate bicycle, pedestrian, and public transit routes. 
d.  Connection to Existing Neighborhoods.  
All development shall be reviewed for potential connections to new and existing neighborhoods. The overall street plan for any subdivision must provide access to the subdivision by a public street(s) connected to the existing road system. Multiple points of egress (two or more) are recommended. Developments of 51 to 100 units may be acceptable with one public street point of egress if an emergency access point is provided. Two or more public street access points are required where the number of dwelling units exceeds 100. Streets within new subdivisions, where possible, shall align with and connect to those of adjacent subdivisions. New streets shall interconnect within a development and with adjoining development. The overall layout shall provide for continuation or appropriate projection of existing roads or streets (constructed, recorded, or planned) in the surrounding area.  
e.  When Connectivity Cannot be Accomplished.  
Where topography or other significant conditions make continuance or projection of existing streets impossible or substantially impracticable, they shall still accomplish the transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan or to any specific area transportation plan, as approved by the Commission.  
f.  Access May Be Limited to Arterial Streets.  
Where subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street or other streets with expected arterial traffic volumes as defined by the Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines, the Commission may limit access from individual lots and may require local access streets, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment. All lots shall front on a public street right-of-way.  
g.  Traditional Street Design Preferred.  
Preferred designs are rectilinear street layouts, with occasional diagonal elements to enhance visual interest, and appropriate traffic calming measures as necessary; and curvilinear street layouts, in response to topography. Terminal vistas of protected open space or prominent structures should be incorporated into the design layout.  
h.  Future Connection to Undeveloped Land.  
Street stubs shall be constructed adjacent to undeveloped land to provide for future connections. Temporary easements for turnarounds shall be provided at the boundary lines and appropriate arrangements shall be made for those parts of temporary turnarounds outside of street right-of­way to revert to abutting owners at such time as the street shall be extended.  
i.  Cul-de-Sacs.  
Cul-de-sacs are discouraged and shall be allowed only where topographical considerations offer no practicable alternatives for connections or through traffic. Where a cul-de-sac is unavoidable, variations to standard cul-de-sac design shall be considered, including loop lanes, crescent design, or by incorporating a planting island at the terminus. Cul-de-sac streets shall not be longer than 600 feet from the nearest intersecting street.  

j.  Railroad Crossings.  
A subdivision involving new or existing streets crossing railroad tracks shall provide adequate right-of-way and slope easements, for construction of an underpass or overpass.  
k.  Limit on Number of Approaches to an Intersection.  
No street intersection shall include more than four street approaches.  
l.  Sidewalks.  
Streets shall be bordered by sidewalks on both sides, excepting circumstances where a sidewalk on one side may be deemed sufficient, as recommended by the City Engineer and/or Planning and Code Administration Department, and approved by the Planning Commission.  
m.  Street Focus.  
Streets shall be the focus of buildings. All buildings will front on public streets. Reverse frontage lots are discouraged unless unique conditions exist and the Planning Commission approves an adequate landscape plan to shield the rear yards of the lots.  
n.  Street Trees.  
Street trees shall be provided in accordance with Subsection I.4.i of this Article.  
o.  Development and Use of Alleys Encouraged.  
Alleys are a predominant Hagerstown feature and the use of alleys is encouraged in new subdivisions to allow for vehicle parking to the rear of properties, to provide additional connectivity, and to improve the pedestrian orientation of primary streets by reducing or eliminating curb cuts. Alleys may be either public or private, depending upon function. Private alleys shall be constructed to City standards.  
p.  Gated Neighborhoods Prohibited.  
Gated neighborhoods isolate parts of the community from others, interfere with traffic flow, create maintenance conflicts with respect to snow removal, trash pickup and other service requirements, and are, therefore, prohibited.  
q.  Private Streets.  
Private streets are prohibited.  
r.  Panhandle or Pipestem Lots.  
Panhandle lots are discouraged and shall be allowed only where topographical considerations and/or existing conditions offer no practicable alternatives. The following requirements shall apply:  

(1) 
Shall contain only one single-family dwelling unit and its uninhabited accessory structures. 

(2) 
The maximum panhandle length shall be 150 feet. 

(3) 
The minimum panhandle width shall be 25 feet. 


Administration of these requirements may be modified in cases where there is a second frontage on another public street right-of-way, that meets minimum lot width standards, and the house constructed orients its front yard to the second frontage. 
s. One Dwelling Structure Per Lot. 
The Zoning Ordinance, in most cases, limits lots to containing no more than one dwelling structure per lot. This shall not preclude condominium subdivision when applicable. Consult the applicable sections of Article 4. 
t. Open space. 
Every residential subdivision of a density of ten units per acre or greater shall dedicate a portion of such land for the purpose of open space and recreational equipment to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the subdivision. Such open space may also be made available to the general public through dedication to and acceptance by the City. Such open space shall not be comprised of accumulations of leftover remnants of land on the site, but shall constitute meaningful contiguous areas of land which provide for the preservation of significant natural features, and/or provide recreational amenities. A minimum of 20% of the gross acreage of the subdivision must be open space. This open space shall be in accordance with the standards specified in Section D, Subsection 7.c.(2), of Article 4 (Zoning Ordinance) -Cluster Development -Site Design Criteria. The following criteria shall be used to determine open space requirements within a subdivision: 
Maximum Percentage of Total Land Required 
Gross Residential Density for Open Space* 
20 units/acre and greater 25% 
10 units/acre – 19 units/acre 20% 
*For cluster development and Planned Unit Developments, the minimum percentage of land required for open space shall be in accordance with the respective provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
u. Rear Yards of Townhomes. 
For all townhouse lots hereafter created, where the unit shall be attached on both sides to other buildings or dwellings, the rear yard shall abut an alley or an open space area. This requirement is for the purpose of providing access to the rear yard of interior lots that does not require passing through the dwelling. 
v. Applicable Use of Site Plan Standards. 
When a subdivision development plan serves as a site plan for improvements to lots, the applicable provisions of Section I shall be applied to the design of such improvements and incorporated into the development plan. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

F. Subdivision and Site Plan Data Requirements. 
The following data is the minimum necessary to affect complete review and consideration of proposed development, and shall be shown on the relevant plan. If a particular data requirement may not be present or relevant, a notation shall be made on the plan that such element is not present or relevant, so that it is clear that the issue has been addressed. Additional or unique conditions or circumstances may necessitate the Planning and Code Administration Department to require additional data in order for the plan to be complete so thorough review of site conditions and proposed development can be made. 
There are two charts; one in Subsection F.1 and one in Subsection F.2. Each of these two charts occupies several pages. Each chart is a single document although spread across several pages. 
1. Sketch Plans, Development Plans, Site Plans, and Minor Site Plans. 
Plan Requirement  Sketch Plan  Development Plan  Site Plan  Minor Site Plan  
Scale (at least one page showing entire development on one sheet)  1” = 10 feet to 1” = 100 feet  1” = 10 feet to 1” = 100 feet, depending on size of development  Under 3 acres: 1” = 20 feet Over 3 acres: 1” = 50 feet or 1” =100 feet  1” = 10 feet  
Text size at least one-eighth (1/8) inch in height  X  X  
Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of sheets.  X  X  X  
Boundary of project shown as follows: -----------— — -----------­ X  X  X  
Legend clearly indicating which features are existing and which are proposed.  X  X  X  X  
Vicinity map, showing the approximate relationship of the development to its general surroundings, including existing or mapped streets and all municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of the development.  1” = 1,000 feet or greater  1” = 1,000 feet or greater  
Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof.  X  X  X  
Approximate proposed layout, (location, alignment, width), and tentative names of streets, lots and other elements basic to the proposed use in relationship to site conditions.  X  
Streets on and adjacent to the tract (both existing and proposed).  X  
One hundred year floodplain limits and approximate location of wetlands, if any.  X  X  X  X  
Significant topographic, physical, and cultural features including fields, pastures, meadows, wooded areas, significant trees, significant vegetation, steep slopes, ponds, streams, existing rights-of-way, easements, and any  X  X  X  

Plan Requirement  Sketch Plan  Development Plan  Site Plan  Minor Site Plan  
significant historical resources, including known and suspected human burial sites.  
The limit of disturbance line in relation to the retention of existing trees proposed to be saved.  X  
The approximate location and general description of proposed methods for sewage collection, storm drainage, water supply, storm water management and other utilities.  X  
Show and label the City/County boundary line if appropriate.  X  X  X  X  
Forest Stand Delineation and Preliminary Forest Conservation Plan.  X  
Open Space areas, as required by and of such design standards as are required by this Article.  X  X  
Calculations demonstrating that the proposed development complies with the parking requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.  X  X  X  X  
Where any revision is made, or when the Plan is a resubdivision of a previously approved Plan, dotted lines shall be used to show features or locations to be abandoned and solid lines to show the presently proposed features.  X  
A notation stating the zoning district in which the proposed development is located, including overlays.  X  X  X  X  
Location by City tax map, block and parcel numbers (City Unique ID number).  X  X  X  
Name of subdivision or development. The name shall not duplicate, be the same spelling or alike in pronunciation to any recorded subdivision.  X  X  
Names and addresses of the developer and owner(s) if other than the developer.  X  X  X  
Certificate signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor or registered professional engineer, responsible for the survey and/or engineering computations of the Plan.  X  X  X  
Owner’s certifications and statements.  X  X  X  
Date of drawing, and revision schedule.  X  X  X  
North arrow.  X  X  X  
A boundary survey or survey of record of the property to be subdivided, and all remaining lands, including map book and page reference, locating and identifying adjacent or abutting streets (existing or platted), subdivisions, unsubdivided parcels, easements, water areas, and the like, and all visible monuments, showing all courses, distances, and area, and tie-ins to all adjacent street intersections. At a minimum, show the entire parent tract or original parcel on an index map.  X  X  X  

Plan Requirement  Sketch Plan  Development Plan  Site Plan  Minor Site Plan  
Existing contours with intervals not more than five feet where the slope is 10% or greater and not more than two feet where the slope is less than 10%. Elevations based on United States Geological Survey or equivalent adjusted datum. (Source of contour data referenced on site plan; include a benchmark with elevation and location on the plan.)  X  X  X  
Slopes of 15% or greater, including a written justification for need in cases where the developer proposes to develop or disturb such slopes.  X  X  X  
Location, width and names of all existing or prior platted streets or other public streets, railroad and utility rights-of­way, parks and other public open spaces, and municipal corporation lines within or adjoining the tract.  X  X  
Other conditions on the tract being subdivided including, but not necessarily limited to, watercourses, wetlands, floodplains, rock out crop areas, wooded areas and other environmentally sensitive areas and significant features.  X  X  X  
Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: location, size and invert elevation of existing sanitary sewerage facilities and storm drains; location and size of water mains; location of fire hydrants, utility lines and street lights.  X  X  X In work area  
Proposed public improvements; highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract to the extent known to developer.  X  X  
Location and design of all required sidewalks and crosswalks.  X  X  
If water mains, sanitary sewers, and storm drains are not on or adjoining the tract, indicate the direction, distance to, and size of nearest water mains and sewers showing invert elevation of sewers to extent known to developer.  X  X  
Other conditions on adjoining land within 100 feet; approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls, character, location and ownership of private sewerage systems within 100 feet of the development boundary, railroads, utility lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjoining un-platted land; for adjoining platted land refer to subdivision Plat by name recorded.  X  X  
Street Plan containing the following: (a) Location of all proposed streets. (b) Widths of all proposed rights-of-way and proposed paving widths. (c) Proposed street names. (d) Plan and centerline profile of all proposed streets.  X  
Indicate location of any on-street parking. Also include calculation of parking requirements, both on and off site.  X  X  

Plan Requirement  Sketch Plan  Development Plan  Site Plan  Minor Site Plan  
Layout and dimension of proposed lots, including lot lines, lot numbers, and block letters. Provide calculations of the density of residential development.  X Generally depicted  X  X Density for single lot development  
If applicable, include the number and types of units proposed, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other non-public uses, including parking spaces, exclusive of single-family and two-family dwellings. Show the building footprints for all structures. Provide tabulated data for parking requirements.  X General location of structures only  X  X  
Building setback lines.  X  X  X  
Notation explaining all associated planning and zoning files (BZA, FC, NCU, annexation, HDC, past subdivisions or site plans).  X  X  X  
Location and dimension of all parcels proposed to be dedicated or reserved for school sites, parks, open space used by occupants of the development, and for other public uses.  X  
Identification including plan and profile of all utilities proposed within the development, including the location, grade, and size of storm drains, catch basins, drainage ways and channels, sanitary sewerage facilities, pumping stations, water mains, street lights, fire hydrants, and other required public facilities and improvements.  X Within work area  
Copy of current deed of ownership, and copy of homeowner association documents (if applicable).  X  X  X  
Rights-of-way proposed to be created for all access, storm drainage, and utilities purposes.  X  X  
A Forest Conservation Plan, including the locations and means for forest retention, reforestation or afforestation.  X  X  
A Landscape Plan, including locations and specifications for required street trees, drawn in accordance with all requirements of Subsection I.4.  X Within work area  
A final storm drainage plan and final storm water management plan, with calculations.  X  X  
A final grading plan, showing grading for all subdivision improvements, and, where applicable, mass grading.  X  X  
Location of all existing and proposed buildings, lighting, fencing, structures, parking facilities and other improvements, and means of trash collection. Include a scale dimension from the property line to proposed buildings. All parking facilities shall be designed in accordance with Subsection I.4 of this Article.  X (Not for proposed single-family, duplex, or semi­detached dwellings)  X  X Within work area  
If alterations are to be made to existing buildings structures or other improvements, dotted lines to show features or locations to be abandoned and solid lines to show proposed features.  X  X Within work area  

Plan Requirement  Sketch Plan  Development Plan  Site Plan  Minor Site Plan  
Zoning district, including overlays, City Unique ID number, and County tax map and parcel number, and election district.  X  X  X  X  
A final sediment control plan, if required by Soil Conservation District regulations, for the entire project area to be recorded and for any adjacent area affected by the area to be recorded, including: (a) The location of forest protection measures, temporary and permanent sediment control measures and vegetative stabilization. (b) The construction sequence for providing forest protection measures and adequate sediment control measures to prevent off site drainage.  X  X  
A digital submittal of the Plan is required. It shall be in a format utilizing commonly accepted engineering practices and one accepted and approved by the City Engineer. It shall show all proposed improvements, including but not limited to, proposed grading, streets, utility lines, service locations, storm drains, building footprints, setbacks, curb locations, sidewalks, the exterior boundary of the subdivision, and all new interior lot lines. It shall be tied to the City Grid and monuments system (MD State Plane Coordinates NAD 83-epoch 1996).  X  X  
Photometric Plan.  X  

2. Plats: Final, Simplified, Minor, Condominium, and Other. 
a. 
Drafting Standards. 

b. 
Existing Information. 


c. 
Proposed Layout. 



Plan Requirement  Simplified  Minor  Final  Condo  
Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof, and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.  X  X  X  X  
An appropriate scale no less than 1" = 10 feet nor greater than 1" = 100 feet, in multiples of ten feet.  X  X  X  X  
When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be submitted showing the entire subdivision drawn to scale.  X  X  X  X  
Where the Plat is a resubdivision of a previously approved Plat, dotted lines shall be used to show features or locations to be abandoned or vacated and solid lines to show the presently proposed features.  X  X  X  
The Plat shall contain an adequate legend so as to clearly indicate which features are existing and which are proposed.  X  X  X  X  
The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a heavy line.  X  X  X  X  
The plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor on a sheet 18 x 22 3/4 inches with a 1½-inch margin for binding along the left  X  X  X  X  

Plan Requirement  Simplified  Minor  Final  Condo  
edge and a ½-inch margin along the remaining edges, or the current requirements of the Office of Land Records at the Washington County Courthouse.  
All linear and angular dimensions for locating the boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, alleys, public and private easements, shall be expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot. Angular measurements shall be expressed by bearings. All curve data shall be expressed by a curve table on the face of the Plat, each curve being tabulated and numbered to correspond with the respective numbered curves shown throughout the Plat. Dimensions, both linear and angular, shall be determined by an accurate control survey in the field which shall be checked for closure and must balance and close within an accuracy of one to 10,000. Horizontal control shall be based on the Maryland Coordinate Grid System (NAD 83 -epoch 1996) in a coordinate table located on the face of the Plat.  X  X  X  X  

Plan Requirement  Simplified  Minor  Final  Condo  
Name of the subdivision.  X  X  X  X  
Date of drawing, north point and scale.  X  X  X  X  
Name and address of the owner of the land being subdivided and name and address of the developer if different from that of the owner.  X  X  X  X  
Name, address, and professional seal of the engineer or surveyor, licensed in the state of Maryland.  X  X  X  X  
Location of subdivision by tax map number, election district, city and state.  X Add street address  X  X  X  
Vicinity map showing the relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all streets and municipal boundaries existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property.  X Not less than 1” = 2,000 feet  X  X Not less than 1” = 1,000 feet  
Complete outline survey of the property to be subdivided, showing all courses, distances, and area, and tie-ins to all adjacent street intersections. The entire parent tract must be shown and/or described on the plan or the index sheet.  X  X  X  
Owners of adjoining land.  X  X  X  
The location, name, and right-of-way of each street and the locations and width of all other rights-of-way and pavement widths.  X  X  X  
The location and angles of departure of adjoining property and street right-of-way lines, the names of abutting subdivisions, and the names of adjoining property owners, including deed reference. The abutting subdivisions shall be identified by lot and block  X  

Plan Requirement  Simplified  Minor  Final  Condo  
numbers, subdivision name, place of record or other proper designation.  
The location, size and ownership of all existing easements as defined herein, both within the subdivision and within 100 feet of the subdivision’s boundaries.  X  
The location of any existing forest conservation easements.  X  X  X  
The location of any designated 100-year floodplain and floodway.  X (Approximate)  X  X  
Show and label all existing property monumentation found.  X  X  X  
Required building setback lines.  X  X  
The zoning designations of the site, including overlays.  X  X  X  
Notation explaining all associated planning and zoning files (BZA, FC, NCU, annexation, HDC, past subdivisions and site plans)  X  X  X  X  
Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way.  X  X  X  
Condominium Review Signature Block  X  
All existing buildings and improvements as defined herein located within the boundaries of the subdivision. The distance between any existing structure to the new property line shall be determined and labeled.  X  

Plan Requirement  Simplified  Minor  Final  Condo  
Lot layout with lots numbered in numerical order. In tracts containing more than one block, the blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order.  X  X  X  
Area of each lot, parcel, site or other unit shown on the Plat.  X  X  X  X  
The names, right-of-way widths and cartway or pavement widths of all proposed streets.  X  
Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of every street, lot, and boundary line, with new lines of division shown and labeled as such.  X  X  X  
Building setback line for each street and property line.  X  X  
Location and dimensions of all parcels proposed to be dedicated or reserved for open space use as defined herein or for other public uses with the purposes indicated thereon.  X  

Plan Requirement  Simplified  Minor  Final  Condo  
The location, width, and purpose of all existing or proposed easements or rights-of-way and boundaries by bearings and dimensions.  X  X  X  
The location and description of all markers, monuments, or other evidence found or established to determine the boundaries of the subdivision.  X  X  X  X  
Private restrictions, if any, proposed to be included in deeds.  X  X  X  X  
Location and description of all proposed afforestation and reforestation areas.  X  X  
Clearly note or graphically show building setback lines.  X  X  
Show any limited access vehicular restrictions required by the appropriate governing jurisdiction.  X  
Maintenance responsibilities.  X  X  X  
Parking restrictions.  X  X  X  

G. 	Required Improvements in Subdivisions. 
1. 	Purpose and Applicability. 
a. 	
The purpose of this Article is to delineate the Required Improvements as defined herein which shall be required of the applicant as condition for final approval. 

b. 	
All construction shall be completed in accordance with Specifications as defined in the City Engineer’s Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines or successor documents, the City of Hagerstown Zoning Ordinance, and constructed in a manner acceptable to the Commission and other applicable City departments and agencies. 

c. 	
All Required Improvements delineated in these Regulations shall be installed and constructed by the developer who shall pay all costs involved in installation, construction, inspection, and testing. 

d. 	
Approval of the Final Plat by the Commission does not constitute permission to construct Required Improvements. Appropriate permits must be obtained from the City Engineer and other applicable departments and agencies before construction may commence. 


2. 	Streets and Alleys and Attached Dwellings Located at Intersections. 
Streets and alleys shall be graded and surfaced in accordance with the design standards in the City Engineer’s Public Ways: Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines, and with Chapter 216 of the Code of the City of Hagerstown, or successor documents. 
In the case of a subdivision containing lots 
fronting on an existing State, County, or City 
maintained road, the developer shall provide 
required right-of-way as necessary to serve the 
needs of such subdivision for access and traffic. 

When the end unit of a townhouse building is located at the intersection of two public streets, or a public street and a non-public driveway in a development, the end unit shall be architecturally designed to present a front facade to the side street. (See illustration). 
3. 	Street Signs and Traffic Control Devices. 
Street signs and all other traffic control signs and devices shall be installed at the developer’s expense in accordance with the City Engineer’s Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines and with Chapter 216 of the Code of the City of Hagerstown. All street intersections on County and state roads and signage shall comply with County and state policies and ordinances, as applicable. 

4. Street Lights. 
Street lights shall be installed in all subdivisions. The Hagerstown Department of Utilities, Electric Division, or its designee, will design and/or approve the street light system. 
The developer is responsible for the purchase and installation, to approved Hagerstown Department of Utilities, Electric Division specifications, of the street light system. The Hagerstown Electric Division shall furnish or contract to furnish electrical power during this time, at no charge to the developer, and shall assume all operation and maintenance costs of the entire installed system, one year after the City of Hagerstown assumes ownership of all streets and rights-of-way within the development. Until that ownership transpires, the developer will be responsible for all aspects of the street light system. 
5. Storm Drainage Facilities. 
a. When Required. 
The developer shall provide in every subdivision, storm drains, culverts, drainage ways, or other works adequate to collect and dispose of all water originating on or flowing across the property without inundating or damaging neighboring streets, roads, lots, or other properties. All systems shall be designed in accordance with specifications and comply with adopted City and state policies and ordinances, where applicable. 
b. Standards and Cost. 
Storm drainage facilities shall be installed at the developer’s expense in accordance with the City Engineer’s Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines and with Chapter 216 of the Code of the City of Hagerstown. 
c. Location and Design Conditions. 
See Section I of this Article (Site Plan Standards) for locational and design limitation regarding 
stormwater management facilities. 
6. Curbs and Gutters. 
Curbs and gutters shall be built in accordance with the City Engineer’s Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines or successor documents. 
7. Driveway Entrances, Sidewalks and Off-Street Yard Parking. 
Sidewalks and driveway entrances shall be constructed in accordance with the City Engineer’s Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines and with Chapter 216 of the Code of the City of Hagerstown. Sidewalks shall be provided on all streets. Pedestrian sidewalks and crosswalks shall be required to provide interior circulation and access to nearby schools, parks, and other community facilities in accordance with the design standards enumerated in Section E of these Regulations. 
Where the Planning Commission finds that sidewalks, in addition to those required parallel to streets, would provide safe, logical and convenient routing of pedestrian traffic, such sidewalks constructed in a manner appropriate to their purpose, may be required. Sidewalk handicapped ramps shall be provided at all intersections in accordance with adopted City State, and Federal ADA standards, as applicable. 
For all subdivided residential lots, the following off-street parking design requirements shall apply: 
a. 	
Parking areas shall be solid paved surfaces or permeable pavers; 

b. 	
Rear yard parking garages or parking pads are the preferred off-street parking system; 

c. 	
Driveways accessing the lot from a front or side street shall be one vehicle in width; 

d. 	
Driveways serving front-loaded garages from front and/or side streets shall be permitted to be as wide as the garage; 

e. 	
For lots without garages and without the ability to provide rear yard parking, front yard parking pads or turn-arounds of single-vehicle-width driveways shall be permissible provided the parking area does not exceed 50% of the front yard area. 


8. 	Wastewater System. 
Each subdivided lot, parcel, or site being created shall be connected and served by a separate wastewater line to the City’s wastewater system (unless alternative arrangements are made by the City for the subdivision to be served by County Wastewater System). This connection shall be located at or near the right-of-way line. However, townhouses, cluster-style development, condominium units, apartments, or commercial/industrial sites with greater than two units may be served by a single line with approval of the Department of Utilities. Homeowner association or commercial customer documents, showing method of cost sharing, shall accompany all requests. All wastewater systems shall be designed, constructed, inspected, and tested in accordance with City standards and any other appropriate governmental regulations. Allocation of capacity at the City Wastewater Treatment Plant to the subdivision shall be made in accordance with the currently adopted Sewer Capacity Allocation Program or such successor documents or practices in accordance with City Policy. 
9. 	Water Supply System. 
Every subdivision shall be provided with a public water supply system adequate for the type of development proposed and so related to existing or potential surrounding development as to form a logical part of a coordinated system minimizing potential water supply problems for the general area. 
Each subdivided lot, parcel, or site being created shall be connected and served by a separate metered connection to the municipal water system. This connection shall be located at or near the right-of-way line. However, townhouses, cluster-style development, condominium units, apartments, or commercial/industrial sites with greater than two units may be served by a single line with approval of the Department of Utilities. Homeowner association or commercial customer documents, showing method of cost sharing, shall accompany all requests. All water supply systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with City Standards and any other appropriate governmental regulations. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with appropriate governmental regulations. 
10. Open Space. 
Ownership, maintenance, and control of open space shall be the responsibility of a Homeowners Association, a private conservation organization, or the City of Hagerstown, upon its acceptance of the same. The Planning and Code Administration Department shall review and approve any documents deemed necessary to ensure that ownership and maintenance of such open space land by a responsible homeowners association is guaranteed prior to recording of the final plat. The date of acceptance and approval of the articles of incorporation of such property owners by the state Department of Assessments and Taxation shall be noted on the final plat prior to recording. 
11. Permanent Monuments. 
All monuments shall be installed in accordance with Maryland State Law (Real Property, Title 3, Section 108 of the Annotated Code) and shall be of concrete or stone and not less than six inches in diameter or four inches square and 36 inches long. The center shall be marked on the top by either a copper dowel, set flush with the top, 3/8 inch in diameter and 2½ inches long or by crossed scores at least ½-inch deep. Monuments shall be set so that the top is level with the adjoining established grade. 
The corners of all lots shall be marked by galvanized or wrought iron pipe, or steel bars at least two feet in length and not less than 5/8 inch in diameter, the top of the pipe or bar to be set level with the established grade adjoining it. 
12. Assurances and Guarantees. 
Before the Commission shall approve the Final Plat for any subdivision, they shall ascertain that one of the two following requirements have been adequately met by the developer: 
a. 	
All Required Improvements have been completed, inspected, and accepted by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with these Regulations and other applicable ordinances, statutes and regulations; or 

b. 	
Where Required Improvements have not been completed, that acceptable assurances have been made to the City of Hagerstown guaranteeing completion of all required improvements in accordance with all appropriate regulations. 


13. Performance Security. 
A performance surety, as referred to in these Regulations shall be a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, certified check, or any other similar collateral as approved by the City Attorney and/or City Engineer or their representative. Such surety agreement shall be required by the Planning Commission as acceptable guarantee for the installation and construction of required improvements where they have not been completed prior to Final Plat approval. The amount shall be sufficient as determined by the appropriate City official(s). 
The developer shall post such agreement with the City Clerk in the amount specified by the City Engineer or his or her representative, as may be necessary, providing acceptable guarantee to the City of Hagerstown that all Required Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with all appropriate regulations, necessary permits, and approved plans. 
Specifically, the developer shall be required in posting the Performance Security to cover the following items: 
a. 	
To construct and install or cause to be constructed and installed at his or her own expense, all streets, curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants, drainage facilities, street signs, monuments, water and wastewater facilities, street lights and other Required Improvements in strict accordance with the Development Plan, as approved, and in strict accordance with design standards and applicable regulations. 

b. 	
To maintain at his or her own cost said streets, curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants, drainage facilities, street signs, monuments, water and sewerage facilities, and other Required Improvements, until the same are accepted by the Mayor and City Council. 

c. 	
To post an acceptable Performance Surety to remain in effect until acceptance of Required Improvements by the Mayor and City Council for the purpose of assuring satisfactory construction. 

d. 	
Upon installation of the required improvements, as provided in the developer agreement, the developer may request the City to inspect the improvements prior to the release of surety. The developer’s agreement regarding the installation of improvements may provide that the developer may be partially released from the requirements of the developer’s agreement upon partial completion of the work upon satisfactory inspection. 


14. 	Public Acceptance of Required Improvements and Dedications. 
The installation of Required Improvements, in accordance with the terms of these Subdivision Regulations, shall in no way be construed as acceptance by the City or an acceptance of an offer of dedication. Same shall be considered only as an offer of dedication until formally accepted by the Mayor and City Council. 
All offers of dedication of rights-of-way, streets, alleys, open spaces, public area, or any other matter of whatsoever nature or kind shall be considered only an offer to dedicate and shall in no way be considered accepted by the City until action is taken in the manner prescribed by law. 
a. 	Manner of Acceptance of Dedication. 
All offers of dedication to the City of any Required Improvements, as set forth herein, shall only be considered accepted after all the following procedures have been completed: 
(1) 	
Upon completion of all construction within the existing and proposed rights-of-way and on the Developer’s request, the City Engineer’s Office shall make a final inspection. 

(2) 	
The developer shall prepare and submit as-built plans based on the direction and policies of the City Engineer’s Office. As-built plans shall consist of the original construction plans modified to show all differences between designed and constructed grades, dimensions and other features. The as-built plans shall also be accompanied with an AutoCAD file in the version specified by the City Engineer. 

(3) 	
Upon notification that the project has passed final inspection, the Developer shall cause the following documents to be delivered to the City Engineer: deeds to the streets, including the rights-of-way in fee simple, maintenance security, payment of signs, and proof of recordation of the associated subdivision plats. 

(4) 	
An offer of dedication has been made on the appropriate plat; 

(5) 	
Acceptance of same by a formal resolution of the Mayor and City Council; 

(6) 	
Conveyance to the City of the interest in question by applicable deed, or other instrument in writing with proper designation and description of same, and of specific reference to the formal acceptance; 

(7) 	
The signature of the Mayor affixed thereon showing formal acceptance; and 

(8) 	
The resale and deed of dedication or other applicable instructions be received and recorded among the Land Records of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Washington County, Maryland. 


After the date of adoption, under no circumstances shall implied acceptance of an offer of 
dedication be recognized by the City except as set forth herein. 
b. 	
The City will endeavor to act upon dedication within 60 days of said formal offer, provided the applicant furnishes the necessary dedication, in the proper form, subject to approval by the City Attorney. 

c. 	
A rejection of an offer of dedication shall not preclude re-application or re-offer to dedication either immediately or at any later date. 

d. 	
The maintenance guarantee, amounting to 20% of the Performance Security previously established, shall be, but not limited to performance bonds, surety agreement, escrow agreements, irrevocable letter of credit, or any other similar collateral or surety agreements. The maintenance security shall remain in effect for a maintenance period of one year following acceptance of Required Improvements by the Mayor and City Council for the purpose of assuring satisfactory construction. 


15. 	Release of Performance Security. 
The Performance Security or other sureties established in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations shall be released by the City of Hagerstown when the City Engineer certifies that the requirements set forth therein have been met and when the Required Improvements and offers to dedicate have been accepted by the City in accordance with Subsection 14.a. above. 
H. Required Dedication of Expanded and Planned Street Rights-of-Way. 
1. Required Dedication of Right-of-Way Along Existing Streets and Roads. 
When a proposed subdivision or site plan for the development of land fronts a public street right-of­way (improved or unimproved), the developer shall offer for dedication those additional lands necessary to widen existing rights-of-way to the current standards required by the City Engineer via the Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines maintained by his or her office. In the event of this requirement being made of a site plan, a separate plat of dedication may be necessary to complete the dedication. 
2. Required Dedication of Right-of-Way For Comprehensive Plan Street Rights-of-Way. 
When a proposed subdivision or site plan for the development of land involves land that is adjacent to, abuts, is bisected by, or otherwise is impacted by planned road alignments as delineated in the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Hagerstown, as may be amended and updated, the subdivision or land development will incorporate the right-of-way of that planned road into their design and that right-of-way shall be offered for dedication to the City of Hagerstown. In the event of this requirement being made of a site plan, a separate plat specifically for the purpose of right-of-way dedication may be necessary. The City may require such road to be constructed to City standards at the developer’s expense. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

I. Site Plan Standards. 
1. Thresholds of Site Plan Requirements and Exceptions. 
a. Construction – Less than 500 Square Feet in Area. 
All new construction involving 500 square feet or less of disturbed area shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator during the Building Permit review process. 
The building permit plan shall be drawn to scale and accurately and correctly represent the existing conditions and proposed improvements to the degree that the Zoning Administrator deems necessary for sufficient review of the proposal for zoning compliance. The Zoning Administrator may require a minor site plan in accordance with Subsection (b) below, when in his or her judgment the proposal is of such extent or complexity to warrant more detailed review and plans, or when the submission of successive plans under this subsection serves to circumvent the intent and need for site plans for significant construction. 
b. Construction – 501 Square Feet in Area to 5,000 Square Feet in Area. 
A minor site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for his or her approval for all new construction greater than 500 and less than 5,000 square feet, including disturbed area, involving all construction and land development, except for new single-family, two-family and semi-detached dwellings, additions thereto, and additions to townhouses. 
The minor site plan shall meet all those requirements made of site plans submitted under Subsections I.1.c and I.3 below for Planning Commission review, unless specific plan requirements are waived by the Zoning Administrator, given the simplicity of the proposal or plan. The Zoning Administrator or the applicant may require Planning Commission site plan review and approval as provided for in this Chapter. 
c. Construction – Greater than 5,000 Square Feet in Area. 
A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for approval by the Planning Commission for all new construction greater than 5,000 square feet, including disturbed area, involving all construction and land development, except for new single-family, two-family and semi-detached dwellings and additions thereto, and additions to townhouses. 
d. Design Principles and Standards. 
Where the submission of a site plan is required under this section, approval of the site plan shall be based upon design principles and standards and required improvements set forth in the City of Hagerstown Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Article 5, Sections E (Subdivisions) and I (Site Plans) of this Chapter], and other ordinances, regulations and policies established by the City. 
e. Exception for Certain Types of Dwellings. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the construction of single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings and single-family semi-detached dwellings and associated accessory structures thereof. 
2. Site Plan Submission Procedure. 
a. Preparation. 
Site Plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, registered landscape architect, registered land surveyor or professional planner (A.I.C.P.). 
Minor Site Plans may be prepared by a competent layperson, provided that all required information and materials are provided and the drawing is completed in a competent and understandable manner. The Zoning Administrator may waive information standards he or she deems unnecessary for a complete and competent review of the proposal. 
Building permit drawings for projects of less than 500 square feet may be completed by a competent layperson, however the Zoning Administrator shall require all such information as is necessary for a complete and competent review of the proposal. 
b. Preliminary Consultation. 
A preliminary consultation may be held with the Planning Commission to discuss the general concept, use and design of the proposal. If consultation is desired, a generalized sketch or plat of the proposed site plan shall be submitted with five copies at least one week prior to the scheduled consultation and shall consist of location map, boundary, topography, and general proposed land uses drawn to scale. 
c. Administrative Review Procedures. 
The site plan administrative review procedures shall be the same as those required for development plan review and approval pursuant to the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Article 5), including a sketch plan submittal and Planning Commission approval when necessary. 
d. Form and Number of Copies Required. 
The number and format of copies required shall be set by a policy adopted by the Planning and Code Administration Department, however additional copies shall be submitted as determined by the Planning and Code Administration Department in unusual situations. The Planning Commission shall notify the Zoning Administrator of its approval or disapproval of the site plan within 30 days from the date of formal submission to the Commission. However, failure to approve or disapprove a site plan within thirty (30) days shall not constitute approval. 
e. Exception. 
Site plan submission is not required for single-family or two-family dwelling units unless planned as part of a Planned Unit Development, or specifically required elsewhere in this chapter. 
f. Duration. 
The purpose of a site plan is to set the final approved development of the site until such later time that new or revised plans are submitted for additions or redevelopment of a site. All improvements, including but not limited to conditions of approval, site configuration, parking space, and landscaping required in accordance with this Article shall be maintained on an ongoing basis. Failure to maintain features and improvements shown on an approved site plan constitutes a violation of this Chapter. 
g. Expiration. 
Site plan approval shall be effective for a period of three years, and such additional three year 
periods as may be specifically approved in writing by the Commission. 
h. PDFs of Plans Required. 
The developer shall provide to the City electronic PDF copies (or other format acceptable to the City) of the plans as approved by the Planning Commission, and upon completion of the project, such copies of as built conditions as may be required by the City. 
i. Properties in Violation at Time of Application or Processing. 
When a property with an open violation case or known violation of this Land Management Code is submitted into the site plan process, the Zoning Administrator may suspend review and processing of the application pending resolution of the violation. Such suspension also suspends any review timing standards as set forth in this Chapter. 
3. Site Plan Information Requirements. 
The required site plan shall contain, at a minimum, the data listed in Article 5, Subsection F.1 of this Land Management Code. The developer or engineer shall furnish the City Engineer with “As Built” Mylar reproducible drawings at the completion of the project, if required. The City Engineer may also require electronic copies of the approved plans in a format set forth by the City Engineer by policy. 
4. Landscaping Plan and Parking Area Design Requirements. 
a. Intent. 
The applicant shall submit as part of the site plan, a comprehensive landscape master plan, identifying the location and size of both existing vegetation to be retained and proposed new vegetation, typical planting materials, the phasing of landscape installation, and planting methods. 
These regulations are established to protect and enhance the landscape of the City of Hagerstown and to ensure the appropriate use of plant material in new construction. It is the intent of these 
regulations to preserve natural tree cover where practicable and to include new landscape 
plantings with development in order to: 

(1) 
Reinforce community identity 

(2) 
Enhance scenic views 

(3) 
Increase building and property values 

(4) 
Reduce stormwater runoff and prevent soil erosion 

(5) 
Create shade and reduce radiant heat 

(6) 
Provide a visual buffer and separation of space, and 

(7) 
Reduce noise and shield glare, and 

(8) 
Enhance the beautification of the City. 


b. Applicability. 
These standards shall apply to any development or redevelopment proposals requiring approval by the Planning Commission (or by staff in the case of administrative approvals). Improvements associated with single-family residences, simplified plats, and minor subdivisions are exempt. 
c. Preservation of Existing Vegetation. 
Trees and other public landscaping shall be protected by means of suitable temporary barriers during construction. The Planning Commission, upon reviewing a site plan, shall have the authority to require existing landscaping and screening which meet the minimum standards of this Article to be preserved. In locations where healthy and mature shade trees currently exist, the requirements for new trees may be waived or modified, after review by the appropriate agencies, and approval by the Planning Commission. Where practicable and feasible, developers are encouraged to leave existing trees. 
d. Reforestation and Afforestation. 
Landscaping requirements, may at the review of the Planning Commission, be counted towards reforestation or afforestation requirements of the forest conservation program. The amount of the landscaped area to be credited for forest obligations shall be in accordance with Article 7. 
Landscaping used to fulfill forest conservation requirements shall be included in the required construction and post construction protection and management agreements. Areas shall be protected by binding, long-term protective agreements under the same terms that apply to other reforestation or afforestation areas. 
e. Modification of Landscape Standards. 
Alternative plans may be approved when unusual topographic constraints, sight restrictions, siting requirements, preservation of existing stands of trees, preservation of specimen trees, or when similar conditions prevent strict compliance with the landscape standards. Modifications to the tree cover, site landscaping, and parking lot landscaping standards contained in this section may be approved when the following conditions are met to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission: 
(1) 	
The landscape plan meets the stated intent of this section. 

(2) 	
The landscape plan provides plantings of similar character, density and screening impact to those required by the standards contained in this section. 

(3) 	
Topography, soil, vegetation or other unique site conditions make full compliance impossible or impractical and warrant some relief from the strict adherence to the standards contained in this section. 

(4) 	
Space limitations, unusually shaped lots, and existing conditions on adjacent properties may justify alternative compliance for infill sites, and for improvements or redevelopment of sites, particularly in the older, established sections of the city. 


f. Performance Criteria. 
(1) 	
The Planning and Code Administration Department shall require, as a condition of site plan approval, a guarantee of installation of landscaping and screening as required by this Article. 

(2) 	
In order for any landscaping to fulfill the purpose for which it was established, it must be properly maintained. The owner of the property where the landscaping is required will be responsible for the maintenance of all required landscaping materials. Maintenance includes actions necessary to keep screening materials healthy, neat and orderly in appearance and free of litter and debris. All landscaped areas must be protected from damage by motor vehicles or pedestrians, which could reduce the effectiveness of the landscaping. The Planning and Code Administration Department shall require the replacement of trees or the repair of buffers within six months if such trees or buffers die or are destroyed. 

(3) 	
It is also recognized that land development occurs continuously and that vegetation used in landscaping or screening should be planted at certain times of the year to ensure the best chance of survival. In order to ensure compliance with this Article and reduce the potential expense of replacing landscaping or screening materials that were installed in an untimely or improper fashion, the developer may provide, an adequately secured performance bond, cash bond, surety bond, or letter of credit or other security equal to 100% of the cost of materials and installation. Sample forms are found in Section 17 of the City of Hagerstown’s Public Ways, Construction Standards & Engineering Guidelines. However, all required landscaping and screening shall be installed within six months after the issuance of an occupancy certificate. Release of surety or bond will not be granted until all landscaping shown on the approved site plan has been completed. A qualified professional, 

(2) 	
If the parking stall provides an overhang not encroaching on a walkway, property line, or buffer area, as required in Article 5, the length of the stall may be reduced two feet. 

(3) 	
No off-street parking area shall be designed to permit direct parking space ingress and egress to a public road, except by way of a driveway. 

(4) 	
All off-street parking areas must be physically separated from property lines and public street rights-of-way by a landscaped buffer as specified in Article 5, Subsections I.4 and 

I.5. 

(5) 	
The use of employee, occupant, or similar numbers to determine parking space requirements shall be used only where the use of square footage or other measurement factors are not feasible. Employees shall mean the regular working staff (paid, volunteer, or otherwise) at maximum strength and in full-time equivalent numbers necessary to operate, maintain or service any given facility or use under normal levels of service. 

(6) 	
All off-street parking spaces in the CC-MU District must be located in the rear of the principal building or otherwise screened with landscaping to minimize the visual impact on adjacent public streets or residential zoning districts. 

(7) 	
All surface parking facilities, greater than seven spaces shall be landscaped to the minimum requirements as outlined as follows. Requirements shall be rounded up to the nearest whole planting. Trees shall be planted by the developer as part of the Conditions of Approval, for aesthetic reasons and for summer cooling. 


as defined in Article 4, Subsection S.2.b. (1) must submit written certification to the Planning and Code Administration Department that healthy plant materials were properly installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan.  
g.  Redevelopment.  
Landscape plans for redevelopment shall be consistent with the requirements of this section. The existing site shall be considered to be either the disturbed area of the new construction as shown on the proposed site plan, the area contained within a newly created subdivision related to the redevelopment, or the original parcel.  
h.  Parking Design and Landscape Standards.  
(1)  The following minimum parking space and drive aisle design standards shall be observed in off-street parking facilities:  

Design Standards Table  
A  B  C  D  E  
Parking Angle  Stall Width (feet)  Aisle Width (feet)  Stall Length (feet)  Bay Width for Double Aisle (feet)  
0°  9  12  22  29  
30°  9  11  18  45  
45°  9  13  18  52  
60°  9  18  18  59.5  
75°  9  22  18  62  
90°  9  24  18  60  


Minimum width of planting islands  8 feet  
Minimum number of trees per 8 parking spaces  One canopy or 2 understory  
Maximum number of contiguous spaces in a row  15  
Maximum number of contiguous spaces in a row for employee parking in the IR, IG, and I-MU  25  
Maximum number of rows without medians  3  
Minimum width of medians  8 feet  
Number of trees required per 45 feet of median  One canopy or 2 understory  

Each row shall begin and end with a landscaped island. 
(8) 	
A perimeter roadside buffer yard abutting a parking lot (between the street and parking lot) shall be required as follows: 

All portions of the roadside buffer yard not planted with trees or shrubs or covered by a wall or other barrier shall be planted with grass and/or flower beds. Landscaping and screening materials shall not obstruct the view of motorists using any road, driveway, or parking aisle. 

(9) 	
Parking facilities abutting a structure, unless located on or within a structure, shall be separated from the exterior wall of a structure, exclusive of paved pedestrian walks or vehicular loading areas, by a planting strip at least six (6) feet in width. The width may be adjusted by the Planning Commission based on unique site constraints and the nature of the business in relationship to the parking. Composition of the planting strip shall be either: 

(a) 	
A combination of flower beds and shrubs where the shrubs cover a minimum of 40% of the planting areas; or 

(b) 	
A combination of trees and flower beds so that there is a minimum of one tree per 25 linear feet of building wall abutting the planting area. A combination of shrubs, trees, and flower beds is also permissible. 



(10) 	
Every off-street parking area shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 

(a) 	
All off-street parking areas shall be paved with a stable, dust-free surface conforming to City standards or other method approved by the City Engineer. Any new commercial or residential driveway and/or parking area shall be improved with Asphalt, concrete, or similar solid (non-gravel) method approved by the City Engineer, when: 

(i) 
Located to the front or side of an existing or proposed use; 

(ii) 
Adjacent to a public street right of way, or 


(iii) The parking area is intended for the use of the public visiting such location. 

(b) 	
Lighting shall be provided for all parking areas which will receive night use. Such lighting shall be directed to the parking area and be shielded to prevent adverse glare on adjacent public streets and properties. Where proposed lighted parking areas are located adjacent to a residential district or residential use, lighting shall be of minimum intensity to assure safety and security and shall be well shielded from the adjacent property. However, security lighting within the aforementioned pedestrian areas used at night shall be illuminated at a level not less than 0.5 candle power. Upon review of the area to be illuminated, if it is classified as a Special Security area by the City, an increased level of illumination may be considered and studied. 

(c) 	
All off-street parking areas shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly, safe loading, unloading and parking of vehicles with individual parking spaces clearly defined, and directional arrows and traffic signs provided as necessary for traffic control. 

(d) 	
Pedestrian walkways and sidewalks shall be provided to and from all paved parking areas and shall be designed to serve on-site principally permitted uses and accessory 

uses for which there is pedestrian demand. Such walkways and sidewalks shall be protected from vehicular overhang and movement by curbs or other method approved by the City Engineer. Security lighting within the aforementioned pedestrian areas used at night shall be illuminated at a level not less than 0.5 candle power. Upon review of the area to be illuminated, if it is classified as a Special Security area by the City, an increased level of illumination may be considered and studied. 

(e) 	
Pedestrian walkways and sidewalks shall be provided between public sidewalks along public streets and the main pedestrian entrance of buildings or units of buildings. 

(f) 	
In order to allow for the passing of handicapped pedestrians and wheelchairs, pedestrian walkways shall be five feet in width. 




Minimum width of buffer (public right-of-way)  10 feet  
Minimum width of buffer (adjoining properties)  10 feet  
Minimum number of trees per 40 feet of road frontage  One canopy or 2 understory  
Shrubs required in buffer, planted on center (per 10 feet)  One  

i. Street Trees. 
(1) 	
All commercial, industrial, institutional, and residential development shall be required to have street trees along all public rights-of-way. This requirement does not apply to rear access lanes or alleys. Street trees shall conform to the requirements of the City of Hagerstown. See Plates M-010 through M-016 for construction standards and a street tree list, and also see Section 216-10, Trees, Code of the City of Hagerstown, for the conditions applying to the installation of street trees, located and detailed in the City Engineer’s Public Ways Construction Standards & Engineering Guidelines. 

(2) 	
Street trees shall be planted by the developer as part of the Conditions of Approval. They shall be placed along each side of all streets and shall be spaced at intervals no greater than 40 feet along both sides of each street. 

(3) 	
Street trees are required to be within a minimum five-foot planting strip located between the curb of the street and the sidewalk. Should there be an instance where no sidewalk is required, street trees shall still be required, within a defined street yard of at least five feet in width. 

(4) 	
Street trees shall be credited against buffering requirements as appropriate and may be credited toward compliance with the requirements of Article 7 (Forest Conservation) when within public street rights-of-way or protected by easement. 

(5) 	
Understory trees may be substituted for canopy trees if, upon review with the appropriate agencies, a conflict or potential exists with overhead utility lines. 


j. Buffer Landscape Standards. 
Landscaped buffer yards shall be provided and perpetually maintained along all property lines (not street rights-of-way) in accordance with the following table, when applicable: 
Proposed Use/Zoning  Adjacent Zoning **:  
All “R”  CL & CG  CC-MU  CR  IR & IG  
Multi-family, two-family, semi-detached, mansion house or townhouse development*  10 feet  10 feet  10 feet  10 feet  25 feet  
CL, CG, POM, INST, CC-MU and N-MU  10 feet  
CR  35 feet  
IR, IG, and I-MU  60 feet  25 feet  25 feet  25 feet  
* Optional at the discretion of the Planning Commission **When adjacent to the municipal boundary, apply the City’s zoning district that is comparable to the adjacent zoning outside of the municipal boundary.  

(1) Residential Buffers. 
Whenever multi-family, mansion house, two-family, semi-detached or townhouse residential dwelling units are proposed, the Planning Commission may require screening in accordance with the following standards: 
Trees per 100 feet of buffer yard  2 canopy and 3 evergreen and/or understory  
Shrubs per 100 feet of buffer yard  10 shrubs  

If more than 20 trees are required, no more than 60% shall be of any one type. 
(2) Commercial and Mixed-Use Buffers. 
Within the City’s commercial zoning districts, the CC-MU and N-MU Districts, and within residential districts when a proposed development is a commercial or institutional use, the following shall be required: 
Trees per 100 linear feet of buffer yard (except in the CR District)  3 canopy and 5 evergreen and/or understory  
Trees per 100 linear feet of buffer yard in the CR District  6 canopy and 10 evergreen and/or understory  
Shrubs per 100 linear feet of buffer yard  25 shrubs  

If more than four trees are required, no more than 60% shall be of any one type. 
(3) Industrial Buffers. 
Within the City’s industrial zoning districts, the use or development shall provide screening in accordance with the following standards, whenever bordering a commercial or residential zone: If more than 20 trees are required, no more than 60% shall be of any one type. 
Trees per 100 linear feet of buffer yard  6 canopy and 10 evergreen and/or understory  
Shrubs per 100 linear feet of buffer yard  15 shrubs  

(4) Ground Cover to be Planted in Landscaping Buffers. 
All portions of the buffer yards required in Subsections j(1) through j(3) above not planted with trees or shrubs or covered by a wall or other barrier shall be planted with grass, ground cover, and/or flower beds. 
(5) Adjacent Vacant Lots. 
Where vacant zoning lots are adjacent, the first zoning lot to be developed shall provide the buffer and screening required next to vacant land. At the time it is developed, if applicable, the second zoning lot shall also provide the buffer and screening required between the developed land uses. As long as the required buffer and screening is provided and maintained, a buffer may contain sidewalks, pedestrian and bicycle paths, and similar passive uses compatible with the general separation of land uses. 
(6) Buffers to be Located within Setbacks. 
Where possible the landscaped buffer area should be planted within the required building setback area. In such districts where zoning setbacks permit principal structures in closer proximity to property lines, the Planning Commission may approve a narrower landscaped buffer or a relocation of landscaping elsewhere on site. 
(7) Buffers To Be Kept Out of Rights-of-Way and Easements. 
Required buffers shall be located along the front, side, or rear lot lines nearest the adjacent streets, land uses, or zoning designations except where such lot lines are intersected by streets, access ways, or utility easements. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing or proposed street right-of-way. Buffers shall be permitted to intersect utility easements or run parallel with them, but utility easements shall not be permitted to run laterally within the buffer. 
(8) Exceptions. 
Where connectivity between subdivisions is appropriate for high-quality neighborhood design, the Planning Commission may reduce or waive the required buffer yard. Buffers are not required for internal property boundaries of a planned community with mixed uses but will be required to be placed at the perimeter of the project. 
(9) Reverse Frontage Lots. 
Reverse frontage lots, where the rear of the structure faces the public street, are discouraged. However, in the instance where the developer chooses to face the rear of the structure towards the street, the appropriate residential buffer requirements shall apply along the right-of-way, in addition to the requirements for street trees. 
(10) Substitution of Fences for Landscaping. 
In addition to the buffer screening required herein, and the landscaping required for off-street parking, all businesses’ service, repair, processing, storage, or merchandise display conducted outside of an enclosed building shall be screened from adjacent streets and properties by means of an effective screening device of a height not more than six feet, unless a variance is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Appropriate screening devices may include solid decorative brick walls, wood fences, berms, tight evergreen hedges which shall reach the necessary height within two years of planting, or a combination of the above. Dumpster enclosure requirements are outlined in Public Ways Construction Standards and Engineering Guidelines, Plate M-023. 
k. Materials Type. Species shall be selected according to the following general criteria: 
(1) 	
Cast moderate to dense shade in the summer. 

(2) 	
Survive more than 60 years. 

(3) 	
Tolerant of pollution and redirect or reflect heat. 

(4) 	
Require little maintenance by being mechanically strong (not brittle) and insect and disease resistant. 

(5) 	
Be able to survive two years with no irrigation after establishment. 

(9) 	
Recommended understory and evergreen trees include: American Hornbeam Eastern Red Cedar Norway Spruce American Holly Eastern White Pine Paperbark Maple Bark Dogwood Flowering Dogwood Washington Hawthorn Crepe Myrtle Leyland Cypress Yoshino Cherry Canada Hemlock Species specifically prohibited are Bradford Callery Pear and Female Ginkos. 


(6)  Preference given to species of native origin.  
(7)  Not drop fruit, etc., on sidewalks.  
(8)  Recommended canopy trees include:  
American Linden  Eastern Red Oak  Shingle Oak  
Black Oak  European Beech  Silver Linden  
Bur Oak  Little Leaf Linden  Sugar Maple  
Chestnut Oak  Pin Oak  Sycamore  
Chinese Scholar Tree  Red Maple  White Ash  
Common Hackberry  Sawtooth Oak  White Oak  
Crimean Linden  Scarlet Oak  Willow Oak  

(10)  Recommended shrubs include:  
Arborvitae  Japanese Greenleaf Barberry  Slender Deutzia  
Burkwood Viburnum  Junipers  Southern Bush- 
Honeysuckle  
California Privet  Leatherleaf Viburnum  Spirea  
Edward Goucher Abelia  Northern Bayberry  Spring Glory Forsythia  
Emerald Gaiety Euonymus  Old Fashioned Weigela  Winter Honeysuckle  
Fosters American Holly  Olympic Fire Laurel  Wintergreen Barberry  
Gnome Pyracanthia  Rutgers Pyracanthia  Yews  

l. Storm Water Management Control Facilities. 
Landscaping is a critical element to improve both the function and appearance of storm water management. Landscaping of storm water management facilities (ponds, retention, or detention basins), is required in all zoning districts, excepting projects in IR or IG districts where storm water management areas are not adjacent to residential zoning or a public road. The Storm Water Design Manual, Volumes I & II (Maryland Department of the Environment) shall be utilized during the design process. 
The following trees, at a minimum, measured from the contour at the top of the berm, based on the perimeter length of the pond or detention area: When adjoining a public right-of-way, such facilities shall be sited to allow for street trees and screening plantings, shall be aesthetically pleasing, and shall be designed to incorporate storm water best-management practices. 
Canopy tree  One per every 50 linear feet  
Evergreen tree  One per every 40 linear feet  
Small understory tree  Two per every 50 linear feet  

If a chain link fence is utilized for security purposes, it shall be sufficiently screened by plantings. Chain link shall not be permitted within the required building front yard setback for the district or development within which it is located. 
It is recommended that planting around storm water management areas be native vegetation. Plants that are associated with stream, pond, or wetland habitat provide an attractive character for such facilities if suited to site conditions. The plant material selected should be appropriate to the specific environmental conditions created. 
It is also recommend that Low Impact Development hydrologic design, utilizing integrated management practices (IMPs), be considered as an alternative to more conventional storm water management controls. This approach utilizes a more naturalized design the more typical “end of pipe” control, leaving as many undisturbed areas as practical to reduce runoff volume and runoff rates by maximizing infiltration capacity. The design goal is to create a hydrologically functional landscape, maintaining pre-development conditions with respect to storm water runoff while enhancing the aesthetic qualities of a site. 
Also see locational and design standards for storm water management facilities in Subsection 5, 
below. 
m. Sidewalks on Public Streets. 
In all site plan applications for development of 5,000 square feet or larger, sidewalks, designed and installed per standards set by the City Engineer, shall be installed along all improved public streets where sidewalks do not currently exist. Existing sidewalks shall be assessed for condition and repaired and/or replaced as necessary. This provision shall not be applied when in conflict with Section B.3 of the Policy of the Mayor and City Council of Hagerstown, dated September 23, 2003 (as may be amended and revised) regarding locations where sidewalks are not recommended. 
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Location and Design Standards. 
No stormwater detention or retention structure shall be constructed to front on any public street right­of-way or in any required buffer areas. Exceptions may be allowed with approval of the Planning Commission if site constraints dictate location of the stormwater structure in one of these areas. 
If a stormwater detention or retention structure is approved for location beside a public street right-of­way or within a required buffer area, the stormwater structure, including any required embankment protection zones, shall be set back from any public street right-of-way or property line by a ten-foot landscaped buffer, as prescribed in Article 5, Subsection I.4, and the stormwater structure shall be designed for an aesthetic outcome beyond a merely utilitarian function. 
6. 	Commercial Development and Multi-Family Design Standards. 
a. 	Intent. 
The following standards shall apply to any project or development hereinafter constructed or modified within the zoning districts described in this section. The intent of these design standards is to: 
(1) 	
Establish design standards that create highly attractive developments with plentiful greenery and orderly outdoor spaces; 

(2) 	
Design developments and buildings which are sustainable through tenant turnover; 

(3) 	
Minimize the visual impact of large commercial and multi-family buildings and parking facilities, especially when adjacent to existing residential neighborhoods; 

(4) 	
Improve the pedestrian experience moving within and through such developments; and 

(5) 	
Minimize sprawl and concentrate development through the use of multi-story structures where possible, and interconnected street networks within the development and to adjacent developments. This subsection shall apply to all developments (including but not limited to stores, shopping centers, office buildings and complexes, restaurants, and multi-family or multi-family/mixed-use complexes). 


b. 	Development, Design and Performance Standards. 
Construction of new buildings, including reuse or modification or renovation of an existing building or buildings and site improvements shall comply with the following performance standards: (X = Required in this District) 
(1) 	
Location of Buildings on Site. Principal use building(s) shall be oriented toward and located near the primary public street for the purpose of reducing the visual impact of an expansive parking area between the building and public streets. 

(2) 	
Parking. It is preferred that off-street parking spaces be located towards the sides and rear of the lot, behind any buildings and structures. In cases where parking is provided beneath an elevated structure, either underground or in parking decks, the street side portion of the building shall be available for usable office/commercial space excluding driveway and lobby areas. 

(3) 	
Public Amenities in Shopping Centers, Office Parks, and Multi-Family Developments. Projects containing groups of buildings shall incorporate amenity areas into the site design. Amenity areas include, but are not limited to, public plazas, courtyards, squares or small parks on the site. Design elements to be included in the amenity areas are seating walls, benches, outdoor dining/gathering areas, decorative fountains or water features, clock towers and/or garden areas. Since the purpose of these amenity areas is to serve as pocket recreational areas and to help foster a sense of community, additional elements shall be considered, if the applicant shows the design meets the intent of this section. 


RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  X  X  X  X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  X  X  X  X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X (CC-MU only)  X  X  X  X  

(4) 	Architectural Design. 
(a) 
The facade of a building shall present a public view to the street or pedestrian corridor. For large buildings, modulation shall be incorporated in building designs to reduce overall bulk and mass, with planes of exterior walls not running in one continuous direction more than one-hundred (100) feet without an offset or setback. All rooftop equipment shall be shielded so that it is full screened from public view. 

(b) 
The commercial building or shopping center (including buildings located on out lots) shall be constructed of high-quality natural materials finished in low reflectance, earth tone colors and finishes. Materials may include brick, wood, stone, tinted textured concrete masonry units, architectural concrete block or other material approved by the Planning Commission. Brighter colors may be used sparingly to accent architectural features and for signage. 

(c) 
It is preferred that new multi-family buildings be architecturally compatible with the existing structures and that the exterior wall surfaces of each individual building be similar in architectural treatment and materials. For large new buildings, modulation should be incorporated in building designs to reduce overall bulk and mass. All rooftop equipment shall be located, screened or shielded so that its visibility is minimized from public view. 

(d) 
Newly constructed multi-occupant commercial, institutional, and mixed-use buildings shall contain storefronts when located in the CC-MU zoning district. 

(e) 
Trash receptacle enclosures shall be architecturally compatible with the building(s) on site and constructed of the same building material. Non-enclosed areas for storage of pallets, recycling, temporary seasonal merchandise shall be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or fences and/or heavy evergreen landscaping consistent with materials and landscaping used throughout the project. 


RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  X  X  X  X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  X  X  X  

(5) 	
Outdoor Service and Storage. Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets, using materials and landscaping consistent with the rest of the project. 

(6) 	
Lighting. Lights illuminating off-street parking or loading areas shall be arranged and installed so that no material glare or direct light shall spill over into adjacent parcels. Light standards shall not exceed 20 feet in height and shall be of a directional type capable of shielding the light source from direct view. Spotlighting of buildings shall be from fixtures along the top of the building, directed downward. 

(7) 	
Vehicle Storage. For businesses that involve the temporary storage of unregistered or damaged vehicles, an area shall be designated for such storage and screened from surrounding properties in a manner acceptable to the Planning Commission. This provision shall not apply to the storage and display of for-sale or rent motor vehicles. 

(8) 	
Additional Development Design Standards for Destination Retail Uses. The following standards shall be applied to Destination Retail Use developments in the CR District in addition to the general standards found elsewhere in this chart. 

(a) 	
Height. The preferred design of a destination retail use shall be no less than two complete stories. The Planning Commission may waive this requirement if the stock-in-trade of the retailer proposed to occupy the site is not conducive to a multi-story layout. 

(b) 	
Location on Site. For the purpose of reducing the visual impact of an expansive parking area between the building and public streets, the destination retail use building(s) shall: 

(i) 
Be located as to place destination retail uses near the primary public street; or 

(ii) 
To the rear of a “main street” shopping center design. 



(c) 	
Architectural Design. Public-oriented facades and the roof line of the destination retail use shopping center or building and any facade that is located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district shall be articulated and constructed with architectural elements so as to appear as a series of smaller buildings. (Editor’s Note: See illustration below.) 




RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  X  X  X  X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  X  X  X  X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  


Sample of architectural articulation required of Destination Retail Use Buildings. The larger store on the left has architectural articulation as described. Compare this storefront with the smaller store on the right which is not articulated and appears proportionately larger. 
5­60 
(d) 	
Main Street Design. “Main Street” shopping center layouts are preferred. When the “main street” concept is not applied, shopping centers shall be designed so that the mass of a destination retail use is masked by the presence of smaller retail and service uses along the front of the building. 

(e) 
Landscaping and Pedestrian Circulation. For Destination Retail Uses, a landscaped plaza equal to 2.5% of the gross square foot area of the destination retail use shall be provided in front of that unit to serve as a visual focal point for the project. In no case shall the plaza be less than 2,000 square feet in area, and it may not be required to exceed 4,000 square feet in area. The plaza shall contain ornamental landscaping and paving, trees, benches and other amenities. The parking and circulation layout shall be designed to maximize pedestrian circulation throughout the site and to adjacent uses. 

(f) 
Redevelopment and Sketch Plan Requirements. For requirements for redevelopment and sketch plan requirements, see Subsection 8, below. 


RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  X  X  

(9) 	Open Space. Every multi-family development on a tract larger than 40,000 square feet in area and of a density of ten units per acre or greater shall dedicate a portion of such land for the purpose of open space and recreational equipment to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the development. Such open space may also be made available to the general public through dedication to and acceptance by the City. Such open space shall not be comprised of accumulations of leftover remnants of land on the site, but shall constitute meaningful contiguous areas of land which provide for the preservation of significant natural features, and/or provide recreational amenities. A minimum of 20% of the gross acreage of the development must be open space. No more than 25% of the required forest conservation area may be attributed towards this open space requirement. Stormwater management facilities which are not designed as natural features shall not be attributed towards this open space requirement. The following criteria shall be used to determine open space requirements within a subdivision: 
Maximum Percentage of Total Land Required for Open Space*  
Residential Density  % of Gross Land Area  
10-20 Units per Gross Acre  20%  
20 Units per Gross Acre or Greater  25%  
*For cluster development and Planned Unit Developments, the minimum percentage of land required for open space shall be in accordance with the respective provisions in Article 4.  

RH, RO, N-MU  CC-MU & PUD  CL  CG  CR  POM & INST  
X  

7. 	Waiver of Design Provisions. 
The Planning Commission may waive design provisions of this subsection, if requested in writing by the developer, when the Planning Commission is satisfied that an alternative proposed by the applicant meets the intent of this subsection. Documentation of and justification for any requested deviation from these standards shall be provided. The site plan for the proposed development and the buildings as constructed shall substantially conform with the sketch plan approved by the Planning Commission in cases where a sketch plan is required. 
8. 	Additional Requirements for Destination Retail Uses in the CR District and Multi-Family Developments in the RH, RO, N-MU, CC-MU and PUD Districts. 
a. 	Preliminary Consultation and Sketch Plan. 
A preliminary consultation shall be held between the Planning Commission and the applicant or developer of a proposed multi-family or destination retail use development (see references to amenities in Subsection I.6.b). The application shall be accompanied by a sketch plan prepared by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or landscape architect, or registered land surveyor. The sketch plan shall be to scale and contain sufficient information to establish the identity of proposed uses, grades and general dimensions and locations of proposed structures, streets, parking areas, walkways, easements and property lines. The sketch plan shall include a layout of the proposed development of the entire site (including out parcels) and preliminary sketches of the exterior treatment of the shopping center or destination retail use building, or multi-family dwelling buildings. 
b. Remodeling and Renovation of Existing Retail Centers and Multi-Family Developments. 
All provisions of this subsection shall apply to renovation plans for existing retail centers and/or multi-family developments that are improved to 1) introduce a destination retail use to the site and/or 2) result in an increase in the number of dwelling units. This includes circumstances when there is little to no ground disturbance. A site plan will be required. Depending upon the nature and arrangement of existing site improvements, the Planning Commission may treat such proposed renovation plans with leniency when reviewing plans submitted in accordance with this subsection. 
9. Individual Site Design Within Nonconforming Subdivisions in POM Zoning Districts. 
When a property that is located in the POM district is the subject of a development plan for subdivision that was approved prior to January 1, 2009, the design standards found in the chart in Subsection 6.b. shall be applied on a lot-by-lot basis. Site plans submitted for developments with multiple buildings on one lot shall be subject to these standards. All other general design guidelines relating to materials, outdoor uses, location of parking and other standards shall continue to apply. 
10. Design Standards in the I-MU Zoning District. 
a. Orientation. 
Structures should be located at the front of the site, oriented along the public street frontage. 
b. Parking. 
It is preferred that off-street parking spaces be located towards the rear of the lot, behind any buildings and structures. In cases where parking is provided beneath an elevated structure, either underground or in parking decks, the street side portion of the building shall be available for usable office/commercial space excluding driveway and lobby areas. 
c. Amenities. 
Projects containing groups of buildings to be devoted primarily to office and/or retail activities shall incorporate amenity areas into the site design. Amenity areas include, but are not limited to, public plazas, courtyards, squares or small parks on the site. Design elements to be included in the amenity areas are seating walls, benches, outdoor dining/gathering areas, decorative fountains or water features, clock towers and/or garden areas. Since the purpose of these amenity areas is to serve as pocket recreational areas and to help foster a sense of community, additional elements shall be considered if the applicant shows the design meets the intent of this section. 
d. Facade Orientation. 
The facade of a building shall present a public view to the street or pedestrian corridor. It should be architecturally compatible with the existing structures. The exterior wall surfaces of each individual building shall be similar in architectural treatment and materials. For large buildings, modulation shall be incorporated in building designs to reduce overall bulk and mass, with planes of exterior walls not running in one continuous direction more than 100 feet without an offset or setback. All rooftop equipment shall be shielded so that it is fully screened from public view. 
e. Lighting. 
Lights illuminating buildings, off-street parking or loading areas shall be arranged and installed so that no material glare or direct light shall spill over into adjacent parcels. Light standards shall not exceed 20 feet in height (including base) and shall be of a directional type capable of shielding the light source from direct view. Lighting of building facades shall be via units mounted at the cornice line, directed downward. 
f.  Outdoor Storage.  
There shall be no outside storage of any equipment, materials or supplies. Trash receptacle  
enclosures shall be architecturally compatible with the building(s) on site and constructed of the  
same building material.  
11.  Outdoor Storage of Inventory, Merchandise and Supplies.  
All outdoor storage of inventory, merchandise and supplies in the CL, CG, CR, INST, IR, IG, I­ 
MU and Conversion districts shall, at minimum, be located at least 10 feet from adjacent property  
lines and street rights of way, and buffered in accordance with the provisions of the section  
pertaining to the buffering of parking areas.  
This provision shall also be applied to properties and uses where a site plan is not required for a  
new or expanded use which introduces outdoor storage to an area, regardless of whether a site  
plan is required for the proposed use.  
12.  Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design Principles.  
All commercial and residential development should be designed to incorporate CPTED principles  
as a means of reducing opportunities for criminal activity to occur. Simple measures can be taken  
that will provide greater visibility through natural surveillance onto public spaces and areas,  
controlled access to private areas, and creating a sense of ownership of space. Through such  
measures, the built environment can be designed and managed to make it an undesirable place for  
criminal activity. Site engineers and building architects should consider the following CPTED  
design strategies when developing site plans and architectural plans for commercial and  
residential development in Hagerstown:  
a.  Allow natural observation from public and neighboring areas by orienting the building entrance  
towards the street, making landscape and fence materials near entrances and parking lots visibly  
permeable, and locating open space areas near streets or other areas visible to the public;  
b.  Prepare a lighting plan in accordance with Illuminating Engineering Society of America  
Standards and ensure that parking lots, pedestrian routes and building entrance areas are well lit;  
c.  Avoid blind corners and hidden recesses along pathways and beside building entrances;  
d.  Avoid placement of large trees, garages, utility structures, fences, and gutters next to second story  
windows or balconies;  
e.  Limb up trees and keep shrubs to 24 inches or lower around play areas and within street edge and  
driveway edge buffer areas to allow visibility into the site from public areas;  
f.  Where large expanses of parking are proposed, provide surveillance such as security cameras.  

J. Reserved. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

K. 	Land Development Protection of Human Burial Sites. 
1. 	Purpose. 
This section is for the purpose of fostering the preservation of human burial sites in the City of Hagerstown. Cemeteries are intrinsic landscape features that should be considered for retention when practical during the design of new developments. This section also serves as a means of protecting human burial sites from destruction or removal in preparation for the development review process. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to regulate, govern or interfere with the ongoing maintenance, use and enlargement of any existing public, private or commercial cemetery. 
2. 	Establishment of Inventory and Map. 
The Planning and Code Administration Department, in cooperation with the Human Burial Sites Preservation Advisory Board, shall maintain an inventory of: 
a. 	
all known human burial grounds in the city; 

b. 	
all sites containing suspected human remains based on the preponderance of information and evidence available, and 

c. 	
all sites of former human burial sites previously removed or relocated. 


The inventory shall include a description of the site, references to documentary evidence, geographical location of each, and a record of the owners of each location. The Planning and Code Administration Department shall maintain a current map which depicts the location of all known existing, suspected, and former human burial sites in the city based on the above inventory. 
3. 	Plan Requirements. 
All development plans shall state whether, to the best knowledge of the owner or developer, any human burial site is known to or believed to exist on the property. If a human burial site is known or believed to be present, its location shall be identified on the plan and copies of any available documentation shall be submitted as an addendum to the plan. 
4. 	Development of Properties Containing a Human Burial Site. 
When a property owner proposes to develop a property, through submission of a subdivision plan or site plan, on which is located a human burial site which is shown on the inventory map, the property owner shall: 
a. 	
Accommodate the human burial site with the development, by placing the human burial site in a non-buildable lot with a cemetery designation, by dedicating the lot to a homeowner’s association or a preservation, conservation or religious organization, by providing that the human burial site be used as a cemetery in perpetuity, and by providing public access to the lot. Any land placed on a non-buildable human burial site lot designation pursuant to this section may be counted toward open space requirements. Alternatively, a property owner may leave the deed to the human burial site in the private ownership and care of descendants of those interred in the human burial site. 

b. 	
Conduct a title search of the parcel extending back to the original patent to ascertain whether covenants, deed restrictions, or other instruments relating to the human burial site had been executed; and 

c. 	
Establish the boundaries of the human burial site as approved by the Planning and Code Administration Department whenever the human burial site boundaries are either not well defined or in dispute, using any or all of the following methods: 


(1) 
Historical documentation; 

(2) 
Professional archaeology; 

(3) 
Ground-penetrating radar; 

(4) 
Oral history, claims of descendants, vital records; 

(5) 
Proton magnetometry; and/or 

(6) 
Other approved nondestructive techniques. 


5. 	Human Burial Site Relocation. 
Should a human burial site, by its location, diminutive size in relationship to its location, or other factors, significantly impact the logical planning and development layout of a site or otherwise create practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in complying with this section, a developer may propose to the Planning Commission to relocate the human burial site, provided: 
a. 	
The relocation process shall be accomplished in accordance with all laws of the State of 
Maryland pertaining to the disinterment, removal and relocation of human remains; 


b. 	
The cemetery burial site to which the remains shall be relocated shall be identified on the 
subdivision or site plan; and 


c. 	
The developer shall permit, upon request, collegiate level or professional archeological study of the human burial site and the disinterment during the removal process. 


All cost for relocation shall be borne by the developer, except the developer is not required to pay for professional archeological study of the site. 
6. 	Discovery, Determination and Protection of Previously Unknown Cemeteries. 
a. 	Discovery. 
If any person discovers the existence of previously unknown human remains, tombstones, funerary objects, or other evidence of a human burial site which reasonably indicates the presence of a cemetery or human burial site in the course of grading, construction, or work of any kind, that person shall stop work immediately in the discovery area and shall give notice of its discovery within twenty-four (24) hours to the State’s Attorney for Washington County, the County Health Officer, the Hagerstown Planning and Code Administration Department and the 
Hagerstown City Engineer. All grading, site, zoning and building permits issued by the City shall  
be suspended and the property owner shall stop all work in the discovered area until a  
determination is made pursuant to Subsection 6.b, below.  
b.  Determination.  
The Planning and Code Administration Department, in consultation with the Human Burial Sites  
Preservation Advisory Board shall determine if the discovered area provided in Subsection a,  
above is a human burial site. In making this determination, the Planning and Code Administration  
Department, in consultation with the Human Burial Sites Preservation Advisory Board may  
require the property owner to comply with Subsection 4.b and c above. If it is determined that the  
area is not a human burial site, the stop work order shall be lifted and the suspended permits  
released by the City Engineer.  
c.  Protection.  
If it is determined that the discovered area is a human burial site, the property owner shall comply  
with the requirements of Subsection 4. However, this shall not preclude the developer from  
petitioning the Planning Commission for permission to relocate the cemetery in accordance with  
Subsection 5. Development plans, site plans and plats, as necessary shall be revised to reflect the  
newly discovered human burial site and any plan revisions necessary to accommodate or relocate  
the human burial site.  
7.  Removal Prior to Development and Failure to Report Previously Unknown Cemeteries.  
a.  If a property owner or developer removes human remains from a human burial site prior to  
entering the development or subdivision process, including the legal removal of a cemetery in  
accordance with the laws of the state of Maryland, any subsequent development of the area  
formerly occupied by the human burial site shall be placed in open space.  
b.  If a property owner or developer removes human remains from a previously unknown human  
burial site prior to or during the development process and does not report the discovery of the  
human burial site in accordance with Subsection 6.a, above, in addition to any criminal and civil  
violations and penalties that otherwise exist in state and County law, any subsequent development  
of the area formerly occupied by the human burial site shall be placed in open space.  


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 


C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
s 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

Sketch Plan Signature Block 
Reviewed by the Hagerstown Planning Commission on (insert date) and authorized to proceed to development plan or site plan phase of review, subject to any conditions set forth in the minutes of the Planning Commission and reflected in notations here-on. Review at this stage of development is conceptual. As such, approval of a sketch plan does not convey any vesting rights. The City of Hagerstown and other review agencies reserve the right to raise issues or concerns not detected in this sketch plan review. 
FOR THE HAGERSTOWN PLANNING COMMISSION 
_____________  _________________________________________  
Date  Name  
Planning and Code Administration Department  


Final Plat Certifications and Signature Blocks 
The following certifications and related information shall appear on the Final Plat: 
1. Certification of Individuals of Ownership and Dedication. 
I (We) do hereby certify, for ourselves and our personal representatives, heirs and assigns, that I (We) are the legal and true owner(s) of the property shown and described on this plat, and that I (We) hereby adopt the plan of subdivision shown hereon, hereby establish the minimum building restriction lines shown hereon, hereby dedicates to public use all utility and drainage easement areas and alley rights-of-way, hereby agree to keep open all spaces and recreation areas shown hereon, and hereby agree that said dedications shall not impose any responsibility on the City of Hagerstown regarding the subjects of such dedications until legal acceptance thereof by said City. 
I (We) hereby reserve the fee simple title to the land underlying said easements, rights-of-way, open spaces and recreation areas. I (We) hereby agree to convey the fee simple title for all public street rights­of-way to the City, without consideration, upon request. 
There are no suits, actions at law, leases, liens, mortgages, trusts, easements or rights-of-way affecting the property included in this plan of subdivision except the following: 
And all parties having an interest therein have hereunto affixed their signatures, including their assent to 

the plan of subdivision. 
This Certification of Ownership and Dedication of dedication shall be binding upon my (our) grantees, 
assigns, successors, heirs, and personal representatives and all parties and interests thereto have hereunto 
affixed their signatures indicating their assent to this Plan of Subdivision. 

WITNESS our hands and seals this day of 20 WITNESS: (SEAL) 
(SEAL) Owners 
2. Certification of Entities of Ownership and Dedication. 
hereinafter called “entity” by its duly authorized does hereby certify, that the entity is the legal and true owner of the property shown and described on this plat and that it hereby adopts the plan of subdivision shown hereon, hereby establishes the minimum building restriction lines shown hereon, hereby dedicates to public use all utility and drainage easement areas and alley rights-of-way, hereby agrees to keep open all spaces and recreation areas shown hereon, and hereby agrees that said dedications shall not impose any responsibility on the City of Hagerstown regarding the subjects of such dedications until legal acceptance thereof by said City. 
This entity hereby reserves the fee simple title to the land underlying said easements, rights-of-way, open spaces and recreation areas. This entity hereby agrees to convey the fee simple title for all public street rights-of-way to the City, without consideration, upon request. 
There are no suits, actions at law, leases, liens, mortgages, trusts, easements or rights-of-way affecting the property included in this plan of subdivision except the following: 
This Certification of Ownership and Dedication shall be binding upon the entity’s grantees, assigns, successors, heirs, and personal representatives and all parties and interests thereto have hereunto affixed their signatures indicating their assent to this Plan of Subdivision. 
WITNESS our hands and seals this day of , 20 . WITNESS: 
(SEAL) 
(SEAL) Owners 
3. Certificate of Accuracy. 
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is a true and correct survey to the accuracy required by the Hagerstown Planning Commission and that the monuments have been placed as shown hereon to the specifications of the Hagerstown Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
, 20 
Date Qualified Surveyor 
Maryland Registration No. 

4. Certification of Approval of Water and Wastewater System. 
I hereby certify that the water supply and wastewater disposal utility systems installed, or proposed for installation, in the subdivision plat entitled fully meet the requirements of the Maryland Health Department, and are hereby approved as shown. 
, 20 
Date County Health Officer or 
Authorized Representative 

5. Certification of Approval of Required Improvements. 
I hereby certify that streets and other Required Improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to the specifications of the Hagerstown Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance in the subdivision entitled . 
, 20 

Date City Engineer 
NOTE: If the improvements have not been completed or installed, a performance bond to the Mayor and City Council is required. (Use Certification No. 6, below) 
6. Certification of Performance Bond. 

I, , City Clerk, do hereby certify that a performance bond in the amount of ($) Dollars has been posted and is on file with the City of Hagerstown that guarantees completion of site development work, i.e., streets, water, wastewater, storm drainage, etc., in accordance with City of Hagerstown standards, and that said bond is written by an approved institution and that the amount of the bond is in accordance with City Engineer’s estimate of the cost of said proposed improvements. 
, 20 
Date City Clerk 

7. Certification of Joint Responsibility for Utilities. (for Simplified Plats only) 
The respective owners of and (street or address) shall be jointly and severally responsible for any and all expenses incurred in the operation and maintenance of common building sewers and/or any other utilities in common use. It is further agreed that this shall be considered and construed as a covenant running with the land. 
, 20 
Date Owner 

Owner 
8. Declaration of Intent of Subdivision. (for Simplified Plats only) 
I hereby certify that the intent of the Simplified Plat for Subdivision shown hereon is for acquisition of additional acreage for property enlargement, readjustment of property lines, and/or correction of deed discrepancies, or conveyance of an existing structure for residential purposes only and not for the development of same. Any plan for development of this land will be submitted to the Planning Commission in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City of Hagerstown. 
, 20 
Date Owner 

Owner 

9. 	Certificate of Approval. 
I do hereby certify that the Plan for Subdivision shown hereon complies with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, with the exception of such variances, if any, as noted on this Plat and in the minutes of the Hagerstown Planning Commission and is approved for recording in the Offices of the Register of Deeds. 
HAGERSTOWN PLANNING COMMISSION 
, 20 
Date Chair 

Void if not recorded in the Land Records Office of Washington County within 180 days of the above signature. The Clerk of the Court shall not record this document more than 180 days after the above date. 
10. Condominium Plat Signature Block. (for Staff) 
This condominium plat conforms with current applicable zoning requirements and/or is confirmed as nonconforming to those requirements due to the creation of existing uses or conditions prior to the adoption of the Hagerstown City Zoning Ordinance, or subsequent applicable amendment thereto. 
, 20 

Date 	Zoning Administrator 
11. 	Fee Simple Dedication of Open Space and Other Facilities to be Owned and Maintained by Property Owners Association. If dedication of open space, storm water management facilities or other lands to a property owners’ association is proposed, the developer shall provide documentation of the creation of the Property Owners’ Association and submit an original deed to the City prior to recordation of the final plat, granting good and sufficient fee simple title to all open space required to be dedicated to the Property Owners’ Association. 
Property Owners Association Note: 
A property owners’ association named the ______(proper name of the POA)______ has been created and property owners association covenants have been approved by the City of Hagerstown and recorded in the Land Records of Washington County, Maryland at Liber _____ Folio ____ on ____(insert date)______. Such property owners association shall be responsible for the maintenance of all common areas and storm water management facilities depicted in the area included in this plat, or otherwise identified on the plat and/or other improvement referred to in the covenants. 
Insert Name, President Insert Name of POA 

Site Plan and Development Plan Signature Blocks 
1. Commitment to Build in Accordance with Approved Plans. 
This site plan (or development plan) is approved for the improvements and proposed use or uses shown on the plan presented to and approved by the Hagerstown Planning Commission on . 
These plans are approved plans of development. Deviation from this plan is a violation of the Land Management Code, which may result in a stop work order being placed on the development, issuance of notices of violation and civil citations, a request for injunctive relief in the courts, or any combination thereof. 
Any desired deviation from this approved plan must be discussed with the City Planning Staff before implementing the change(s). Minor deviations may be administratively approved by the Planning Staff, but significant changes may require Planning Commission review and approval. 
This commitment is binding upon grantees, assigns, successors and heirs. 
, 20 
Date Owner/Developer 

2. Maintenance of Landscaping. 
As the developer/owner of this development, the undersigned agrees to install all landscaping in accordance with this approved plan (or any subsequent approved revision thereto) and binds himself and future owners, developers, successors and heirs to maintain said landscaping in substantial conformance with this approved landscaping plan. Failure to maintain landscaping in accordance with this approved plan (or subsequent approved amendment thereto) constitutes a violation of the approved site plan, subject to enforcement action, as allowed by law, to compel compliance with this plan. 
, 20 
Date Owner/Developer 

3. Site Plan Approval Signature Block. 
Certificate of Approval. The site plan shown hereon complies with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, and other applicable provisions of the Land management Code, with the exception of such waivers or variances, if any, as noted on this Plat and in the minutes of the Hagerstown Planning Commission and/or Board of Zoning Appeals. This approval is valid for three years from date of signature, and may be renewed by the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Land Management Code. This plan shall be void should requisite permits not be obtained and substantial construction occur within three years of the date of signature. 
All work shall be in accordance with this plan. Should the developer find need to deviate from this approved plan, the developer shall contact Planning staff for a determination whether the work is minor and can be approved by staff, or if the work is substantial enough to require revised plans and possible re-approval by the Planning Commission. 
FOR THE HAGERSTOWN PLANNING COMMISSION 
Date 	Name 
Planning and Code Administration Department 

4. Development Plan Approval Signature Block. 
Certificate of Approval. The Development Plan for Subdivision shown hereon complies with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for the City of Hagerstown, Maryland, and other applicable provisions of the Land management Code, with the exception of such variances, if any, as noted on this Plat and in the minutes of the Hagerstown Planning Commission and/or Board of Zoning Appeals. This approval is valid for three years from date of signature, and may be renewed by the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Land Management Code. This plan shall be void should requisite permits not be obtained and substantial construction occur within two years of the date of signature. 
All work shall be in accordance with this plan. Should the developer find need to deviate from this approved plan, the developer shall contact Planning staff for a determination whether the work is minor and can be approved by staff, or if the work is substantial enough to require revised plans and possible re-approval by the Planning Commission. 
FOR THE HAGERSTOWN PLANNING COMMISSION 
Date 	Name 
Planning and Code Administration Department 

ARTICLE 6 

Floodplain Management Ordinance 

Table of Contents 
Section Page 
A. General Provisions 6 -3 
B. Administration 6 -7 
C. Requirements in All Special Flood Hazard Areas 6 -17 
D. Requirements in All Flood Hazard Areas 6 -23 
E. Variances 6 – 31 
F. Enforcement 6 – 35 
G. Amendment and Effective Date 6 – 35 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

ARTICLE 6 
Floodplain Management Ordinance 

A. General Provisions. 
1. 	Findings. 
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has identified special flood hazard areas within the boundaries of the City of Hagerstown. Special flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. Structures that are inadequately elevated, improperly flood proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage also contribute to flood losses. 
The City of Hagerstown, by resolution, agreed to meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program and was accepted for participation in the program on April 17, 1978. As of that date all development and new construction as defined herein, are to be compliant with these regulations. 
2. 	Statutory Authorization. 
The Maryland General Assembly, in Md. Code Ann., Land use Article, Title 4, has established as policy of the state that the orderly development and use of land and structures requires comprehensive regulation through the implementation of planning and zoning control, and that planning and zoning controls shall be implemented by local government in order to, among other purposes, secure the public safety, promote health and general welfare, and promote the conservation of natural resources. Therefore, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Hagerstown does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
3. 	Statement of Purpose. 
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to: 
a. 	
Protect human life, health and welfare; 

b. 	
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future; 

c. 	
Minimize flooding of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal systems; 

d. 	
Maintain natural drainage; 

e. 	
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and its residents, by discouraging unwise design and construction of development in areas subject to flooding; 

f. 	
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 

g. 	
Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 

h. 	
Minimize damage to public facilities and other utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges; 

i. 	
Reinforce that those who build in and occupy special flood hazard areas should assume responsibility for their actions; 

j. 	
Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and near flood-prone areas; 

k. 	
Provide that the flood storage and conveyance functions of floodplains are maintained; 

l. 	
Minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of floodplains; 

m. 	
Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally incompatible; and 

n. 	
Meet the community participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) at 44 CFR, Section 59.22. 


4. 	Areas to Which These Regulations Apply. 
These regulations shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Hagerstown, and identified in Section A.5., below. 
5. 	Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas and Base Flood Elevations. 
a. 	
Minimum Basis. For the purposes of these regulations, the minimum basis for establishing special flood hazard areas and base flood elevations is the Flood Insurance Study for Washington County, Maryland and Incorporated Areas dated August 15, 2017 or the most recent revision thereof, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMs) and all subsequent amendments and revisions to the FIRMs. The FIS and FIRMs are retained on file and available to the public at the office of the Zoning Administrator, who shall serve as the Floodplain Ordinance Administrator. 

b. 	
Special Flood Hazard Areas. Where field surveyed topography or digital topography indicates that ground elevations are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard on the FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area. 

c. 	
Base Flood Elevations When Not on FIRM. To establish base flood elevations in special flood hazard areas that do not have such elevations shown on the FIRM, the Floodplain Ordinance Administrator may provide the best available data for base flood elevations, may require the applicant to obtain available information from federal, state or other sources, or may require the applicant to establish special flood hazard areas and base flood elevations as set forth in Subsection B.3., Subsection B.4., and Subsection B.5 of this Article. 


6. 	Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. 
These regulations are not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing regulations and ordinances, including subdivision regulations, zoning ordinances, building codes, or any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. 
7. 	Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions shall be: 
a. 	
Considered as minimum requirements; 

b. 	
Liberally construed to accomplish the intended purpose of these regulations; and, 

c. 	
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 


Notes referencing publications of the Federal Emergency Management Agency refer to the most recent edition of those publications, are intended only as guidance, and do not bind or alter the authority of the Floodplain Administrator to interpret and apply these regulations. 
8. 	Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside of the special flood hazard areas or uses that are permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. 
These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the City of Hagerstown, any officer or employee thereof, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) or the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), for any flood damage that results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
9. 	Definitions. 
The terms, as defined herein, shall be those found in Article 3 of this Chapter that are followed by the administrative note “(Floodplain)”. 
10. 	Severability. 
Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

B. Administration. 
1. 	Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may: 
a. 	
Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees. 

b. 	
Where in accordance with established City of Hagerstown procedures and standards, enter into a written agreement or written contract with another Maryland community or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. Section 59.22. 


2. 	Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but are not limited to: 
a. 	
Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located in flood hazard areas. 

b. 	
Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood elevation and flood hazard information. 

c. 	
Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the requirements of these regulations. 

d. 	
Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from the federal, state or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required; in particular, permits from MDE for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts, structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the 100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing non-tidal waters of the state. 

e. 	
Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent communities and MDE (NFIP State Coordinator), and have submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA. 

f. 	
Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areas if the provisions of these regulations have been met, or disapprove applications if the provisions of these regulations have not been met. 

g. 	
Inspect or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for which permits have been issued to determine compliance with these regulations or to determine if non­compliance has occurred or violations have been committed. 

(1) 	
Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to these regulations has either been assumed or relinquished through annexation; and 

(2) 	
If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption; such adoption shall take place within six months of the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to MDE (NFIP State Coordinator) and FEMA. 



p. 	
Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning participation in the NFIP which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the SFHA, number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for development in the SFHA. 


h.  Review Elevation Certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be corrected.  
i.  Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the City of Hagerstown, within six months after such data and information becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations or boundaries.  
j.  Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the administration of these regulations, including:  
(1)  Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Insurance Rate Maps (including historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps) and Letters of Map Change; and  
(2)  Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits, Elevation Certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been flood proofed, other required design certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these regulations.  
k.  Enforce the provisions of these regulations, investigate violations, issue notices of violations or stop work orders, and require permit holders to take corrective action.  
l.  Advise the Board of Zoning Appeals regarding the intent of these regulations and, for each application for a variance, prepare a staff report and recommendation.  
m.  Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings:  
(1)  Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged.  
(2)  Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct, and prohibit the noncompliant repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to prevent additional damage.  
n.  Undertake, as determined appropriate by the Floodplain Administrator due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit requests and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claims for Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC) coverage under NFIP flood insurance policies.  
o.  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Hagerstown have been modified and:  

3. 	Use and Interpretation of FIRMs. 
The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data: 
a. 	
Where field surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations: 

(1) 	
Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of these regulations; 

(2) 	
Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as a special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 



b. 	
In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, any other flood hazard data available from a Federal, State, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used. 

c. 	
Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reduced floodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations. 

d. 	
Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs. 

e. 	
If a Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map and/or a Preliminary Flood Insurance Study has been provided by FEMA: 


(1) 	
Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, if the preliminary flood hazard data is more restrictive than the effective data, it shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard data previously provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations. 

(2) 	
Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available data pursuant to Subsection A.5.c and used where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas are provided on the effective FIRM. 

(3) 	
Prior to issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary base flood elevations floodplain or floodway boundaries exceed the base flood elevations and/or designated floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA. 


4. 	Permits Required and Expiration. 
a. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to begin any development or construction which is wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any flood hazard area established in Subsection A.5., including but not limited to: 
(1) 	
Filling; grading; 

(2) 	
Construction of new structures; 

(3) 	
The substantial improvement of buildings or structures, including repair of substantial damage; 

(4) 	
Placement or replacement of manufactured homes, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of manufactured homes; 

(5) 	
Erecting or installing a temporary structure, or 

(6) 	
Alteration of a watercourse, 


until a permit is obtained from the City of Hagerstown. No such permit shall be issued until the requirements of these regulations have been met. This provision shall not prohibit work that involves the ongoing repair and maintenance of a building that does not meet the definition of “substantial improvement.” 
b. 	In addition to the permits required in Subsection a. above, applicants for permits in non-tidal waters of the state are advised to contact MDE. Unless waived by MDE, pursuant to Code of Maryland Regulations 26.17.04, Construction on Non-tidal Waters and Floodplains, MDE regulates the “100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing waters,” also referred to as non-tidal waters of the state. To determine the 100-year frequency floodplain, hydrologic calculations are based on the ultimate development of the watershed, assuming existing zoning. The resulting flood hazard areas delineated using the results of such calculations may be different than the special flood hazard areas established in Subsection A.5. of these regulations. A permit from the City of Hagerstown is still required in addition to any State requirements. 
c. 	A permit is valid provided the actual start of work is within 180 days of the date of permit issuance. Requests for extensions shall be submitted in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. The Floodplain Administrator may grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each and provided there has been no amendment or revision to the basis for establishing special flood hazard areas and BFEs set forth in Subsection A.5. 
5. 	Application Required. 
Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of the property or the owner’s authorized agent (herein referred to as the applicant) prior to the start of any work. The application shall be on a form furnished for that purpose. 
a. 	Application Contents. 
At a minimum, applications shall include: 
(1) 	
Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and existing and proposed topography of the area in question, and the location of existing and proposed structures, excavation, filling, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and other proposed activities. 

(2) 	
Elevation of the existing natural ground where buildings or structures are proposed, referenced to the datum on the FIRM. 

(3) 	
Delineation of flood hazard areas, designated floodway boundaries, flood zones, base flood elevations, and flood protection setbacks. Base flood elevations shall be used to delineate the boundary of flood hazard areas and such delineations shall prevail over the boundary of SFHAs shown on FIRMs. 

(4) 	
Where floodways are not delineated or base flood elevations are not shown on the FIRMs, the Floodplain Administrator has the authority to require the applicant to use information provided by the Floodplain Administrator, information that is available from federal, state, or other sources, or to determine such information using accepted engineering practices or methods approved by the Floodplain Administrator. [Note: See “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas: A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations” (FEMA 265).] 

(5) 	
Determination of the base flood elevations, for development proposals and subdivision proposals, each with at least five lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations are not shown on the FIRM; if hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses are submitted, such analyses shall be performed in accordance with the requirements and specifications of MDE and FEMA. 

(6) 	
Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses for proposals in special flood hazard areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but has not delineated a floodway; such 

analyses shall demonstrate that the cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot or a lower increase if required by MDE. 

(7) 	
For encroachments in floodways, an evaluation of alternatives to such encroachments, including different uses of the site or portion of the site within the floodway, and minimization of such encroachment. 

(8) 	
If fill is proposed to be placed for a purpose other than to elevate structures, the applicant shall indicate the intended purpose for the fill. 

(9) 	
For proposed buildings and structures, including substantial improvement and repair of substantial damage, and placement and replacement of manufactured homes, including substantial improvement and repair of substantial damage: 

(a) 	
The proposed elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, referenced to the datum on the FIRM and a signed Agreement to Submit an Elevation Certificate. 

(b) 	
The signed Declaration of Land Restriction (Non-conversion Agreement) that shall be recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, if the application includes an enclosure below the lowest floor or a crawl/underfloor space that is more than four feet in height. 

(c) 	
A written evaluation of alternative methods considered to elevate structures and manufactured homes, if the location is in non-tidal waters of the state and fill is proposed to achieve the elevation required in Section D.4.a or Section D.4.b. 



(10) 	
For accessory structures that are 300 square feet or larger in area (footprint) but no larger than 600 square feet in area (footprint) and that are below the base flood elevation, a Declaration of Land Restriction (Non-conversion Agreement) shall be recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 

(11) 	
For temporary structures and temporary storage, specification of the duration of the temporary use. 

(12) 	
For proposed work on existing buildings, structure, and manufactured homes, including any improvement, addition, repairs, alterations, rehabilitation, or reconstruction, sufficient information to determine if the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, including but not limited to: 

(a) 	
If the existing building or structure was constructed after April 17, 1978, evidence that the work will not alter any aspect of the building or structure that was required for compliance with the floodplain management requirements in effect at the time the building or structure was permitted. 

(b) 	
If the proposed work is a horizontal addition, a description of the addition and whether it will be independently supported or structurally connected to the base building and the nature of all other modifications to the base building, if any. 

(c) 	
Documentation of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or, if the work is repair of damage, before the damage occurred. 

(d) 	
Documentation of the actual cash value of all proposed work, including the actual cash value of all work necessary to repair and restore damage to the before-damaged condition, regardless of the amount of work that will be performed. The value of work performed by the owner or volunteers shall be valued at market labor rates; the value of donated or discounted materials shall be valued at market rates. 



(13) 	
Certifications and/or technical analyses prepared or conducted by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect, as appropriate, including: 

(a) 	
The determination of the base flood elevations or hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by a licensed professional engineer that are required by the Floodplain Administrator or are required by these regulations in: Subsection 

C.2 for certain subdivisions and development; Subsection D.3.a for development in designated floodways; Subsection D.3.c. for development in flood hazard areas with base flood elevations but no designated floodways; and Subsection D.3.e for deliberate alteration or relocation of watercourses. 

(b) 	
The Flood Proofing Certificate for nonresidential structures that are flood proofed as required in Subsection D.5.b. 

(c) 	
Certification that engineered flood openings are designed to meet the minimum requirements of Subsection D.4.c(3) to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces. 



(14) 	
For nonresidential structures that are proposed with flood proofing, an operations and maintenance plan as specified in Subsection D.5.b.(3). 

(15) 	
Such other material and information as may be requested by the Floodplain Administrator and necessary to determine conformance with these regulations. 


b. 	New Technical Data. 
(1) 	
The applicant may seek a Letter of Map Change by submitting new technical data to FEMA, such as base maps, topography, and engineering analyses to support revision of floodplain and floodway boundaries and/or base flood elevations. Such submissions shall be prepared in a format acceptable to FEMA and any fees shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. A copy of the submittal shall be attached to the application for a permit. 

(2) 	
If the applicant submits new technical data to support any change in floodplain and designated floodway boundaries and/or base flood elevations but has not sought a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, the applicant shall submit such data to FEMA as soon as practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes available. Such submissions shall be prepared in a format acceptable to FEMA and any fees shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 


6. 	Review of Application. The Floodplain Administrator shall: 
a. 	
Review applications for development in special flood hazard areas to determine the completeness of information submitted. The applicant shall be notified of incompleteness or additional information that is required to support the application. 

b. 	
Notify applicants that permits from MDE and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other state and federal authorities may be required. 

c. 	
Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been received from the federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits, including permits issued by: 

(1) 	
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act; 

(2) 	
MDE pursuant to COMAR 26.23 (Non-tidal Wetlands) and Section 401 of the Clean Water Act; and, 

(3) 	
MDE for construction on non-tidal waters of the State pursuant to COMAR 26.17.04. 



d. 	
Review applications for compliance with these regulations after all information required in Subsection B.5 of these regulations or identified and required by the Floodplain Administrator has been received. 


7. 	Inspections. 
The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections of development permitted in special flood hazard areas, at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance. Such inspections may include: 
a. 	
Stake-out inspection, to determine location on the site relative to the flood hazard area and designated floodway. 

b. 	
Foundation inspection, upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical construction, to collect information or certification of the elevation of the lowest floor. 

c. 	
Inspection of enclosures below the lowest floor, including crawl/underfloor spaces, to determine compliance with applicable provisions. 

d. 	
Utility inspection, upon installation of specified equipment and appliances, to determine appropriate location with respect to the base flood elevation. 

e. 	
Final inspection prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 


8. Submissions Required Prior to Final Inspection. 
Pursuant to the Agreement to Submit an Elevation Certificate submitted with the application as required in Subsection B.5.a(9), the permittee shall have an Elevation Certificate prepared and submitted prior to final inspection and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for elevated structures and manufactured homes, including new structures and manufactured homes, substantially improved structures and manufactured homes, and additions to structures and manufactured homes. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

C. Requirements in All Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
1. 	Application of Requirements. 
The general requirements of this section apply to all development proposed within all special flood hazard areas identified in Subsection A.5. 
2. 	Subdivision Proposals and Development Proposals. 
a. 	
In all flood zones: 

(1) 	
Subdivision proposals and site plan proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations. 

(2) 	
Subdivision proposals and site plan proposals shall have utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 

(3) 	
Subdivision proposals and site plan proposals shall have adequate drainage paths provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 

(4) 	
Subdivision proposals and site plan proposals containing at least five lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, that are wholly or partially in flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not provided by the Floodplain Administrator or available from other sources, shall be supported by determinations of base flood elevations as required in Subsection B.5 of these regulations. 

(5) 	
Public and private streets designed and constructed as part of the subdivision review process shall have the driving surface at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot. 

(6) 	
Private streets, driveways, alleys, other vehicular access and motor vehicle parking areas designed and constructed as part of the site plan review process shall have the driving surface at or above the base flood elevation, unless a variance to the provisions of this Ordinance is approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 



b. 	
In special flood hazard areas of non-tidal waters of the State: 

(1) 	
Subdivision proposals shall be laid out such that proposed building pads are located outside of the special flood hazard area and any portion of platted lots that include land areas that are below the base flood elevation shall be used for other purposes, deed restricted, or otherwise protected to preserve it as open space. 

(2) 	
Public and private streets designed and constructed as part of the subdivision review process shall have the driving surface at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot. 

(3) 	
Private streets, driveways, alleys, other vehicular access and motor vehicle parking areas designed and constructed as part of the site plan review process shall have the driving 




surface at or above the base flood elevation, unless a variance to the provisions of this Ordinance is approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
3. 	Protection of Water Supply and Sanitary Sewage Systems. 
a. 	
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 

b. 	
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems and discharges from systems into floodwaters. 

c. 	
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to or contamination from them during conditions of flooding. 


4. 	Buildings and Structures. 
New buildings and structures (including the placement and replacement of manufactured homes) and substantial improvement of existing structures (including manufactured homes) that are located, in whole or in part, in any special flood hazard area shall: 
a. 	
Be designed (or modified) and constructed to safely support flood loads. The construction shall provide a complete load path capable of transferring all loads from their point of origin through the load-resisting elements to the foundation. Structures shall be designed, connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanent lateral movement due to structural loads and stresses, including hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy, from flooding equal to the flood protection elevation or the elevation required by these regulations or the building code, whichever is higher. 

b. 	
Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 

c. 	
Use flood damage-resistant materials below the elevation of the lowest floor required in Subsection D.4.a or Subsection D.5.a. 

d. 	
Have electrical systems, equipment and components, and mechanical, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment located at or above the elevation of the lowest floor required in Subsection D.4.a. or Subsection D.5.a. Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located below elevation of the lowest floor provided they conform to the provisions of the electrical part of the building code for wet locations. If replaced as part of a substantial improvement, electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment shall meet the requirements of this section. 

e. 	
As an alternative to Subsection d, above, electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment are permitted to be located below the elevation of the lowest floor provided they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to that elevation. 

f. 	
Have the electric panelboard elevated at least three feet above the BFE. 

g. 	
Comply with the specific requirements of Section D. 

h. 	
Comply with the requirements of the most restrictive designation if located on a site that has more than one flood zone designation (A Zone, designated floodway). 


5. 	Placement of Fill. 
a. 	
Disposal of fill, including but not limited to earthen soils, rock, rubble, construction debris, woody debris, and trash, shall not be permitted in special flood hazard areas. 

b. 	
Fill proposed to be placed to elevate structures in flood hazard areas shall comply with the floodways requirements in Subsection D.3.a, Subsection D.3.b, and Subsection D.3.c and the limitations of Section D.4.b. 


6. 	Historic Structures. 
Repair, alteration, addition, rehabilitation, or other improvement of historic structures shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations if the proposed work is determined to be a substantial improvement, unless a determination is made that the proposed work will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure. The Floodplain Administrator may require documentation of a structure’s continued eligibility and designation as a historic structure. 
7. 	Manufactured Homes. 
a. 	
New manufactured homes shall not be placed or installed in floodways. 

b. 	
For the purpose of these regulations, the lowest floor of a manufactured home is the bottom of the lowest horizontal supporting member (longitudinal chassis frame beam). 

c. 	
New manufactured homes located outside of floodways, replacement manufactured homes in any flood hazard areas, and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing manufactured homes in all flood hazard area, shall: 

(1) 	
Be elevated on a permanent, reinforced foundation in accordance with Section D. of this Article; 

(2) 	
Be installed in accordance with the anchor and tie-down requirements of the building code or the manufacturer’s written installation instructions and specifications; and 

(3) 	
Have enclosures below the lowest floor of the elevated manufactured home, if any, including enclosures that are surrounded by rigid skirting or other material that is attached to the frame or foundation, that comply with the requirements of Section D. of this Article. 




For more information, see FEMA P-85 “Protecting Manufactured Homes from Floods and Other Hazards: A Multi-Hazard Foundation and Installation Guide.” 
8. 	Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall: 
a. 	
Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsection C.7.; or 

b. 	
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 

c. 	
Be on a site for less than 180 consecutive days. 


9. 	Critical and Essential Facilities. 
Critical and essential facilities shall be elevated to the higher of elevation required by these regulations plus one foot, the elevation required by the building code, or the elevation of the 0.2 percent chance (500-year) flood. 
10. 	Temporary Structures and Temporary Storage. 
In addition to the application requirements of Subsection B.5., applications for the placement or erection of temporary structures and the temporary storage of any goods, materials, and equipment, shall specify the duration of the temporary use. Temporary structures and temporary storage in floodways shall meet the limitations of Subsection D.3.a of these regulations. In addition: 
a. 	
Temporary structures shall: 

(1) 	
Be designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic loads and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood; 

(2) 	
Have electric service installed in compliance with the electric code; and 

(3) 	
Comply with all other requirements of the applicable state and local permit authorities. 



b. 	
Temporary storage shall not include hazardous materials. 


11. 	Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks. 
a. 	
Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. 

b. 	
Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to a supporting structure and elevated to or above the base flood elevation, or shall be anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. 

c. 	
In flood hazard areas, tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 


(1) 	
At or above the base flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the base flood; and 

(2) 	
Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. 


12. 	Functionally Dependent Uses. 
Applications for functionally dependent uses that do not conform to the requirements of these regulations shall be approved only by variances issued pursuant to Section E. If approved, functionally dependent uses shall be protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood, including measures to allow floodwaters to enter and exit, use of flood damage-resistant materials, and elevation of electric service and equipment to the extent practical given the use of the building. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

D. Requirement in All Flood Hazard Areas 
1. 	General Requirements. 
In addition to the general requirements of Section C., the requirements of this section shall: 

a. 	
Apply in flood hazard areas, including special flood hazard areas along non-tidal waters of the State. 

b. 	
Apply to all development, new construction, substantial improvements (including repair of substantial damage), and placement, replacement, and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of manufactured homes. 


2. 	Flood Protection Setbacks. 
Within areas defined by flood protection setbacks along non-tidal waters of the State: 

a. 	
No new buildings, structures, or other development shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that the site cannot be developed without such encroachment into the flood protection setback and the encroachment is the minimum necessary after consideration of varying other siting standards such as side, front, and back lot line setbacks. 

b. 	
Disturbance of natural vegetation shall be minimized and any disturbance allowed shall be stabilized with vegetation. 

c. 	
Public works and temporary construction may be permitted. 


3. 	Development that Affects Flood-Carrying Capacity of Non-Tidal Waters of the State. 
a. 	Development in Designated Floodways. 
For proposed development that will encroach into a designated floodway, Subsection B.5.a.(7) requires the applicant to submit an evaluation of alternatives to such encroachment, including different uses of the site or the portion of the site within the floodway, and minimization of such encroachment. This requirement does not apply to fences that do not block the flow of floodwaters or trap debris. 
Proposed development in a designated floodway may be permitted only if: 
(1) 	
The applicant has been issued a permit by MDE; and 

(2) 	
The applicant has developed hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and technical data prepared by a licensed professional engineer reflecting such changes, and the analyses, which shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator, demonstrate that the proposed activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation; or 

(3) 	
If the analyses demonstrate that the proposed activities will result in an increase in the base flood elevation, the applicant has obtained a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision from FEMA upon completion of the project. Submittal requirements and fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 


b. 	Development that Includes the Placement of Fill in Non-Tidal Waters of the State. 
For proposed development that includes the placement of fill in non-tidal waters of the State, other than development that is subject to Subsection 3.d., below, a hydraulically-equivalent volume of excavation is required. Such excavations shall be designed to drain freely. 
c. 	Development in Areas with Base Flood Elevations but No Designated Floodways. 
For development in special flood hazard areas of non-tidal waters of the State with base flood elevations but no designated floodways: 
(1) 	
The applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and technical data reflecting the proposed activity and shall submit such technical data to the Floodplain Administrator as required in Subsection B.5.a.(6). The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision upon completion of the project. Submittal requirements and fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 

(2) 	
The proposed development may be permitted if the applicant has received a permit by MDE and if the analyses demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and potential flood hazard area encroachments will not increase the base flood elevation more than 1.0 foot at any point. 


d. 	Construction of Roads, Bridges, Culverts, Dams and In-Stream Ponds. 
Construction of roads, bridges, culverts, dams, and in-stream ponds in non-tidal waters of the State shall not be approved unless they comply with this section and the applicant has received a permit from MDE. 
e. 	Alteration of a Watercourse. 
For any proposed development that involves alteration of a watercourse not subject to Subsection 3.c. above, unless waived by MDE, the applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and technical data reflecting such changes, including the floodway analysis required in Subsection B.5.a., and submit such technical data to the Floodplain Administrator and to FEMA. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by MDE and by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision and a Letter of Map Revision upon completion of the project. Submittal requirements and fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
Alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon submission, by the applicant, of the following: 
(1) 	
A description of the extent to which the watercourse will be altered or relocated; 

(2) 	
A certification by a licensed professional engineer that the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished; 

(3) 	
Evidence that adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and MDE have been notified of the proposal, and evidence that such notifications have been submitted to FEMA; and 

(4) 	
Evidence that the applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator may require the applicant to enter into an agreement with the City of Hagerstown specifying the maintenance responsibilities; if an agreement is required, the permit shall be conditioned to require that the agreement be recorded on the deed of the property which shall be binding on future owners. 


4. 	Residential Structures and Residential Portions of Mixed Use Structures. 
New residential structures and residential portions of mixed-use structures, and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing residential structures and residential portions of mixed-use structures shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section C. and this subsection. See Subsection D.6 for requirements for horizontal additions. 
a. 	
Elevation Requirements. 

(1) 	
Lowest floors shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. 

(2) 	
In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), the lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus one foot, or at least three feet if a depth number is not specified. 

(3) 	
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of Subsection 4.c., below. 



b. 	
Limitations on Use of Fill to Elevate Structures. 


Unless otherwise restricted by these regulations, especially by the limitations in Subsection D.3.a., Subsection D.3.b., and Subsection D.3.c., fill placed for the purpose of raising the ground level to support a building or structure shall: 
(1) 	
Consist of earthen soil or rock materials only. 

(2) 	
Extend laterally from the building footprint to provide for adequate access as a function of use; the Floodplain Administrator may seek advice from the State Fire Marshal’s Office and/or the local fire services agency; 

(3) 	
Comply with the requirements of the building code and be placed and compacted to provide for stability under conditions of rising and falling floodwaters and resistance to erosion, scour, and settling; 

(4) 	
Be sloped no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless approved by the Floodplain Administrator; 

(5) 	
Be protected from erosion associated with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood; unless approved by the Floodplain Administrator, fill slopes shall be protected by vegetation if the expected velocity is less than five feet per second, and by other means if the expected velocity is five feet per second or more; and 

(6) 	
Be designed with provisions for adequate drainage and no adverse effect on adjacent properties. 


c. 	Enclosures Below the Lowest Floor. 
(1) 	
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, crawl/underfloor spaces, or limited storage. 

(2) 	
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be constructed using flood damage-resistant materials. 

(3) 	
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be provided with flood openings which shall meet the following criteria: [Note: See NFIP Technical Bulletin #1, “Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures.”] 

(a) 	
There shall be a minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area; if a building has more than one enclosure below the lowest floor, each such enclosure shall have flood openings on exterior walls. 

(b) 	
The total net area of all flood openings shall be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area (non-engineered flood openings), or the flood openings shall be engineered flood openings that are designed and certified by a licensed professional engineer to automatically allow entry and exit of floodwaters; the certification requirement may be satisfied by an individual certification or an Evaluation Report issued by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. 

(c) 	
The bottom of each flood opening shall be one foot or less above the higher of the interior floor or grade, or the exterior grade, immediately below the opening. 

(d) 	
Any louvers, screens or other covers for the flood openings shall allow the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area. 

(e) 	
If installed in doors, flood openings that meet requirements of paragraphs (a) through (d), are acceptable; however, doors without installed flood openings do not meet the requirements of this section. 




5. 	Nonresidential Structures and Nonresidential Portions of Mixed Use Structures. 
New nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions of mixed-use structures, and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions of mixed-use structures shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section C. and the requirements of this section. See Subsection D.6 for requirements for horizontal additions. 
a. 	Elevation Requirements. 
Elevated structures shall: 
(1) 	
Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; or 

(2) 	
In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus one foot, or at least three feet if a depth number is not specified; and 

(3) 	
Have enclosures below the lowest floor, if any, that comply with the requirements of Subsection D.4.c.; or 

(4) 	
If proposed to be elevated on fill, meet the limitations on fill in Subsection D.4.b. 


b. 	Flood Proofing Requirements. 
(1) 	
Flood proofing of new nonresidential buildings is not allowed in non-tidal waters of the State (COMAR 26.17.04.11(B)(7)). 

(2) 	
Flood proofing for substantial improvement of nonresidential buildings is allowed in non-tidal waters of the State. 

(3) 	
If flood proofing is proposed, structures shall: 

(a) 	
Be designed to be dry flood proofed such that the building or structure is watertight with walls and floors substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood protection elevation plus 1.0 foot, or 

(b) 	
If located in an area of shallow flooding (Zone AO), be dry flood proofed at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified on the FIRM plus two feet, or at least four feet if a depth number is not specified; and 

(c) 	
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; 

(d) 	
Have flood proofing measures that are designed taking into consideration the nature of flood-related hazards; frequency, depth and duration of flooding; rate of rise and fall of floodwater; soil characteristics; flood-borne debris; at least 12 hours of flood warning time from a credible source; and time necessary to implement any measures that require human intervention; 

(e) 	
Have at least one door above the applicable flood elevation that allows human ingress and egress during conditions of flooding; 

(f) 	
Have an operations and maintenance plan that is filed with local emergency management officials and that specifies the owner/occupant’s responsibilities to 

monitor flood potential; the location of any shields, doors, closures, tools, or other goods that are required for implementation; maintenance of such goods; methods of installation; and periodic inspection; and 

(g) 	
Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect, through execution of a Flood proofing Certificate that states that the design and methods of construction meet the requirements of this section. The Flood proofing Certificate shall be submitted with the construction drawings as required in Subsection B.5.a(13). 




6. 	Horizontal Additions. 
a. 	
A horizontal addition proposed for a building or structure that was constructed after the date specified in Subsection A.1 shall comply with the applicable requirements of Subsection D.4 and this section. 

b. 	
In non-tidal waters of the State that are subject to the regulatory authority of MDE, all horizontal additions shall comply with the applicable requirements of Subsection D.4. and this section and: 

(1) 	
If the addition is structurally connected to the base building, the requirements of Subsection c., below, apply. 

(2) 	
If the addition has an independent foundation and is not structurally connected to the base building and the common wall with the base building is modified by no more than a doorway, the base building is not required to be brought into compliance. 



c. 	
For horizontal additions that are structurally connected to the base building: 

(1) 	
If the addition combined with other proposed repairs, alterations, or modifications of the base building constitutes substantial improvement, the base building and the addition shall comply with the applicable requirements of Subsection D.4 and this section. 

(2) 	
If the addition constitutes substantial improvement, the base building and the addition shall comply with all of the applicable requirements of Subsection D.4 and this section. 



d. 	
For horizontal additions with independent foundations that are not structurally connected to the base building and the common wall with the base building is modified by no more than a doorway, the base building is not required to be brought into compliance. 

e. 	
A horizontal addition to a building or structure that is not substantial improvement, and is not located in nontidal waters of the State, is not required to comply with this section. 


[Note: See “Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference”) (FEMA P-758).] 
7. 	Accessory Structures. 
a. 	Accessory structures shall be limited to no more than 300 square feet in floor area. 
b. 	Accessory structures shall comply with the elevation requirements and other requirements of Subsection D.4., the flood proofing requirements of Subsection D.5.b., or shall: 
(1) 	
Be useable only for parking of vehicles or limited storage; 

(2) 	
Be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials below the base flood elevation; 

(3) 	
Be constructed and placed to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 

(4) 	
Be anchored to prevent flotation; 

(5) 	
Have electrical service and mechanical equipment elevated to or above the base flood elevation; and 

(6) 	
Have flood openings that meet the requirements of Subsection D.4.c. 



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

E. Variances. 
1. 	General. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to consider and authorize or deny variances from the strict application of the requirements of these regulations. A variance shall be approved only if it is determined to not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations, an unnecessary hardship would result. 
Upon consideration of the purposes of these regulations, the individual circumstances, and the considerations and limitations of this section, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations. 
No variance shall be granted for an accessory structure exceeding 600 square feet. A signed Declaration of Land Restriction (Nonconversion Agreement) is required as a condition of receiving a variance. The Agreement must be recorded with the Deed. If a variance is granted and the accessory structure is not elevated or dry flood proofed, the conditions in Subsection D.7 apply. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify, in writing, any applicant to whom a variance is granted to construct or substantially improve a building or structure with its lowest floor below the elevation required by these regulations that the variance is to the floodplain management requirements of these regulations only, and that the cost of Federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk, with rates up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. 
A record of all variance actions, including justification for issuance shall be maintained pursuant to Subsection B.2.j. of this Article. 
2. 	Application for a Variance. 
a. 	
The owner of property, or the owner’s authorized agent, for which a variance is sought shall submit an application for a variance to the Floodplain Administrator. 

b. 	
At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information: name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and property owner; legal description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use; description of the proposed use; site map showing the location of flood hazard areas, designated floodway boundaries, flood zones, base flood elevations, and flood protection setbacks; description of the variance sought; and reason for the variance request. Variance applications shall specifically address each of the considerations in Subsection E.3. 

c. 	
If the application is for a variance to allow the lowest floor of a building or structure below the applicable minimum elevation required by these regulations, the application shall include a statement signed by the owner that, if granted, the conditions of the variance shall be recorded on the deed of the property. 


3. 	Considerations for Variances. 
The Floodplain Administrator shall request comments on variance applications from MDE (NFIP State Coordinator) and shall provide such comments to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
In considering variance applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider and make findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, requirements specified in other sections of these regulations, and the following factors: 
a. 	
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 

b. 	
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 

c. 	
The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents (if applicable) to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 

d. 	
The importance of the services to the community provided by the proposed development. 

e. 	
The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to, or are subject to less, flooding or erosion damage. 

f. 	
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable, or if the facility is a functionally dependent use. 

g. 	
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 

h. 	
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and hazard mitigation plan for that area. 

i. 	
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for passenger vehicles and emergency vehicles. 

j. 	
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 

k. 	
The costs of providing government services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 

l. 	
The comments provided by MDE (NFIP State Coordinator). 


4. 	Limitations for Granting Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make an affirmative decision on a variance request only upon: 
a. 	A showing of good and sufficient cause. Good and sufficient cause deals solely with the physical characteristics of the property and cannot be based on the character of the improvement, the 
personal characteristics of the owner/inhabitants, or local provision that regulate standards other than health or public safety.  
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant.  
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance for development within any designated floodway, or flood hazard area with base flood elevations but no designated floodway, will not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations.  
d.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws.  
e.  A determination that the building, structure or other development is protected by methods to minimize flood damages.  
f.  A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief, considering the flood hazard.  


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

F. Enforcement. 
Enforcement provisions of this Article shall be set forth in Article 8. 
G. Subsequent Amendments and Effective Date. 
1. Subsequent Amendments. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency. This ordinance shall be amended as required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations. All subsequent amendments to this ordinance are subject to the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Maryland Department of the Environment. 
2. Effective Date. 
This Floodplain Management Ordinance was adopted on April 3, 1978 to be effective on the same day, as subsequently amended. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

ARTICLE 7 
Forest Conservation Ordinance 

Table of Contents 
Section 	Page 
A. General Provisions 	7 -3 
B. General Requirements 	7 – 9 
C. Forest Stand Delineation 	7 – 11 
D. 	Forest Conservation Plan 7 – 13 
E. 	Express Procedures 7 – 17 
F. 	Afforestation and Retention 7 – 19 
G. 	Reforestation 7 – 21 Sequence, Priorities and Time Requirements for Afforestation 
H. 	7–23 
and Reforestation 
I. 	Payment-in-Lieu of Afforestation and Reforestation 7 – 25 
J. 	Recommended Tree Species 7 – 27 
K. 	Financial Security for Afforestation and Reforestation 7 – 29 
L. 	Standards for Protecting Trees from Construction Activities 7 – 31 
M. 	Variance, Appeals, and Penalties 7 – 33 Annual Report, Biennial Review by the Maryland Department of 
N. 	7-35 
Natural Resources Effective Date and Subsequent Amendments 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

ARTICLE 7 
Forest Conservation Ordinance 

A. General Provisions. 
1. 	
Title. 
This Article shall be known as the Forest Conservation Ordinance of the City of Hagerstown. 


2. 	
Definitions. Article 3 of the Land Management Code shall govern all definitions as they apply to this Article. 

3. 	
Application, Exemption, Declaration of Intent and Consideration of Non-City Forest 
Conservation Plans Affecting Lands Within City Jurisdiction. 



Except as provided in Subsection A.3.b of this Article, this Article applies to: 
a. 	
Application. A regulated activity as defined in Article 3 of this Code. 

b. 	
Exemptions. This Article does not apply to: 

(1) 	
Highway construction activities under Natural Resources Article, Section 5-103, Annotated Code of Maryland. 

(2) 	
Commercial logging and timber harvesting operations, including harvesting conducted subject to the forest conservation and management program under Tax-Property Article, §8-211, Annotated Code of Maryland, that are completed: 

(a) 	
before July 1, 1991; or 

(b) 	
after July 1, 1991, on property which: 

(i) 	
has not been the subject of application for a grading permit for development within five (5) years after the logging or harvesting operation, and 

(ii) 	
is the subject of a declaration of intent as provided for in Subsection A.3.c of this Article, approved by the Planning and Code Administration Department. 





(3) 	
Agricultural activities not resulting in a change in land use category, including agricultural support buildings and other related structures built using accepted best management practices, except that a person engaging in an agricultural activity clearing 40,000 square feet or greater of forest within a one-(1-) year period, may not receive an agricultural exemption, unless the person files a declaration of intent as provided for in Subsection 

A.3.c of this Article which includes: 
(a) 
a statement that the landowner or landowner's agent will practice agriculture on that portion of the property for five (5) years from the date of the declaration; and 

(b) 	
a sketch map of the property which shows the area to be cleared. 



(4) 	
The cutting or clearing of public utility rights-of-way licensed under Sections 1-101 and 2­101, et seq. Of the Public Utilities Companies Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland if: 

(a) 	
required certificates of public convenience and necessity have been issued in accordance with Natural Resources Article, §5-1603(f), Annotated Code of Maryland; and 

(b) 	
cutting or clearing of the forest is conducted to minimize the loss of forest. 



(5) 	
Routine maintenance or emergency repairs of public utility rights-of-way licensed under Sections 1-101 and 2-101, et seq. of the Public Utilities Companies Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland 

(6) 	
Except for a public utility subject to Subsection A.3.b.6 of this Article, routine maintenance or emergency repairs of a public utility right-of-way if: 

(a) 	
the right-of-way existed before the effective date of this ordinance; or 

(b) 	
the right-of-way's initial construction was approved under this ordinance. 



(7) 	
Residential construction activity that is constructed on a single lot of any size or a linear project if the activity: 

(a) 	
does not result in the cumulative cutting, clearing, or grading of more than 20,000 square feet of forest; 

(b) 	
does not result in the cutting, clearing, or grading of a forest that is subject to the requirements of a previous forest conservation plan approved under this ordinance; and 

(c) 	
is the subject of a declaration of intent filed with the Planning and Code Administration Department, as provided for in Subsection A.3.c of this Article, stating that the lot will not be the subject of a regulated activity within five (5) years of the cutting, clearing, or grading of forest. 



(8) 	
Strip or deep mining of coal regulated under Natural Resources Article, Title 7, Subtitle 5 or 5A, Annotated Code of Maryland. 

(9) 	
Non-coal surface mining regulated under Natural Resources Article, Title 7, Subtitle 6A, Annotated Code of Maryland. 

(10) 	
An activity required for the purpose of constructing a dwelling house intended for the use of the owner, or a child of the owner, if the activity: 

(a) 	
does not result in the cutting, clearing, or grading of more than 40,000 square feet of forest; and 

(b) 	
is the subject of a declaration of intent filed with the Planning and Code Administration Department, as provided for in Subsection A.3.c of this Article, which states that transfer of ownership may result in a loss of exemption. 



(11) 	
A preliminary plan of subdivision or a grading or sediment control plan approved before July 1, 1991. 

(12) 	
A planned unit development that, by December 31, 1991, has: 

(a) 	
met all requirements for planned unit development approval; and 

(b) 	
obtained initial development plan approval by the City of Hagerstown. 



(13) 	
A real estate transfer to provide a security, leasehold, or other legal or equitable interest, including a transfer of title, of a portion of a lot or parcel, if: 

(a) 	
the transfer does not involve a change in land use, or new development or redevelopment, with associated land disturbing activities; and 

(b) 	
both the grantor and grantee file a declaration of intent, as provided for in Subsection A.3.c of this Article. 



(14) 	
An activity on a previously developed area covered by impervious surface and located in the Priority Funding Area. 

(15) 	
A stream restoration project, as described in Article 3 of this Land Management Code, for which the applicant for a grading or sediment control permit has executed a binding maintenance agreement of at least five (5) years with the affected property owner or owners, or 

(16) 	
Maintenance or retrofitting of a storm water management structure that may include clearing of vegetation or removal and trimming of trees, so long as the maintenance or retrofitting is within the original limits of the disturbance for construction of the existing structure, or within any maintenance easement for access to the structure. 




c. 	
Declaration of Intent. 

(1) 	
The purpose of the declaration of intent is to verify that the proposed activity is exempt under this Article. 

(2) 	
A person seeking an exemption under Subsections 2, 3, 7, 10, or 13 of Subsection A.3.b above, shall file a declaration of intent with the Planning and Code Administration Department. 

(3) 	
The existence of a declaration of intent does not preclude: 

(a) 	
an exempted activity on the property subject to a declaration of intent, if the activity: 

(i) 	
does not conflict with the purpose of any existing declaration of intent, and 

(ii) 	
complies with the applicable requirements for an exempted activity; 



(b) 	
a regulated activity on the area covered by the declaration of intent, if the activity occurs within five (5) years of the effective date of the declaration of intent, in which case: 

(i) 	
there shall be an immediate loss of exemption, or 

(ii) 	
there may be a noncompliance action taken by the Planning and Code Administration Department, as appropriate, under this Article; or 



(c) 	
a regulated activity on that area of the property not covered under the declaration of intent if the requirements of this Article are satisfied. 



(4) 	
The Planning and Code Administration Department may require a person failing to file a declaration of intent or found in noncompliance with a declaration of intent to: 

(a) 	
meet the retention, afforestation and reforestation requirements established in this Article; 

(b) 	
pay a noncompliance fee of $0.50 per square foot of forest cut or cleared under the declaration of intent; 

(c) 	
be subject to other enforcement actions appropriate under this Article; or 

(d) 	
file a declaration of intent with the Planning and Code Administration Department. 



(5) 	
In its determination of appropriate enforcement action, the Planning and Code Administration Department may consider whether failure to file a declaration of intent by a person required to file is a knowing violation of this Article. 

(6) 	
The declaration of intent is effective for five (5) years from date of Planning Commission approval and shall be recorded immediately among the land records of Washington County. 



d. 	
Consideration of Non-City Forest Conservation Plans affecting Lands Within City Jurisdiction. 

(1) 	
When a development that is outside of the City is proposed to include dedication of lands within the corporate limits of the City of Hagerstown for forest conservation retention or reforestation, the plan shall be submitted to the Hagerstown Planning Commission for review and approval. The Planning Commission may reject the proposal if it finds that the proposal will interfere with the logical development of the balance of the property or surrounding lands, will not be the highest and best use of land, will be inconsistent with the policies and goals of the Hagerstown Comprehensive Plan, or it will remove from potential 

development lands the City views as valuable for economic development purposes. The Planning Commission may solicit the comments and opinions of adjacent property owners, the Department of Community and Economic Development and any other agency or organization the Commission identifies as having potential pertinent views on the proposal. Should the Commission approve such a plan, it may impose conditions necessary to protect the public interest from the City’s perspective. 

(2) 	
Should the County or State propose a public works project that will impact a property that is subject to a City-approved forest conservation plan, the new plan shall be submitted to the Hagerstown Planning Commission for review and approval. The plan shall contain proposals to offset any forest conservation measures lost by the proposal. Should the Planning Commission approve the proposal, the forest conservation plan file for the subject property shall be updated to reflect the approved change. 






T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

B. General Requirements. 
1. 	General. A person making application after the effective date of this Article, for a regulated activity shall: 
a. 	
Submit to the Planning and Code Administration Department a forest stand delineation and a forest conservation plan for the lot or parcel on which the development is located; and 

b. 	
Use methods approved by the City of Hagerstown, as provided in the City of Hagerstown Forest Conservation Technical Manual, to protect retained forests and trees during construction. 


2. 	Government Agency or Funding. If a local agency or person using state funds makes application to conduct a regulated activity, the provisions of COMAR 08.19.04.01D-G apply. 
a. 	
The plans for the regulated activity shall be submitted to the Planning and Code Administration Department; and 

b. 	
The Planning and Code Administration Department shall notify the Department of Natural Resources within 15 days of receipt of this plan or application. 

c. 	
Within 15 days of receipt of notice from the local authority, the Department of Natural Resources shall: 

(1) 	
determine whether the regulated activity has impact on significant forest resources; and 

(2) 	
notify the local authority whether the regulated activity is subject to the state program. 



d. 	
If the Department of Natural Resources determines that the regulated activity is subject to the state program, the: 

(1) 	
time limit for approval of the forest stand delineation and preliminary and final forest conservation plans shall begin when the Department of Natural Resources receives the necessary documents from the local authority; and 

(2) 	
local authority may not approve a regulated activity until the local authority receives notice from the Department of Natural Resources that the standards and requirements of the state program have been satisfied. 



e. 	
If the Department of Natural Resources determines the regulated activity need not be reviewed under the state program, the time limit from approval of the forest stand delineation and forest conservation plan under the local program begins when the local authority receives notice from the Department of Natural Resources. 



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

C. Forest Stand Delineation. 
1. 	Criteria. 
a. 	
When Submitted. A forest stand delineation shall be submitted before subdivision development plan or site plan approval, and before the issuance of any grading permit, sediment control plan approval or any other permit is issued for a regulated activity. 

b. 	
Qualified Professional. The delineation shall be prepared by a licensed forester, licensed landscape architect, or a qualified professional, as specified in COMAR 08.19.06.01A. 

c. 	
Components. The delineation shall be used during the preliminary review process to determine the most suitable and practical areas for forest conservation and shall be considered complete if it includes the following components: 

(1) 	
a topographic map delineating intermittent and perennial streams, and steep slopes over 25%; 

(2) 	
a soils map delineating soils with structural limitations, hydric soils, or soils with a soil K value greater than 0.35 on slopes of 15% or more; 

(3) 	
forest stand maps indicating species, location, and size of trees and showing dominant and codominant forest types; 

(4) 	
location of 100-year floodplains; 

(5) 	
information required by the City of Hagerstown Forest Conservation Technical Manual; and 

(6) 	
other information the City of Hagerstown determines is necessary to implement this Article. 



d. 	
Simplified Delineation. If approved by the Planning and Code Administration Department, a simplified forest stand delineation may be submitted for an area: 

(1) 	
when no forest cover is disturbed during a regulated activity; or 

(2) 	
all forest on the site is designated to be under a long-term protective agreement. 



e. 	
Components of Simplified Delineation. A simplified forest stand delineation shall be considered complete if it includes: 

(1) 	
all requirements under Subsection C.1.c (1), (2), (4), (5) and (6) of this Article (above); 

(2) 	
a map showing existing forest cover as verified by field inspection by City of Hagerstown personnel; and 

(3) 	
other information required by this Article. 



f. 	
Expiration of Plan. An approved forest stand delineation may remain in effect for a period not longer than five (5) years from the date of approval by the Planning and Code Administration Department. 


g. 	Time for Submittal. 
(1) 	
Within 30 calendar days after receipt of the complete forest stand delineation, the Planning and Code Administration Department shall notify the applicant whether the forest stand delineation is complete and correct. 

(2) 	
If the Planning and Code Administration Department fails to notify the applicant within 30 days, the delineation shall be treated as complete and correct. 

(3) 	
The Planning and Code Administration Department may require further information or provide for an additional 15 calendar days under extenuating circumstances. 

(4) 	
The 30-day review period may be extended in 15-day increments by the Planning and Code Administration Department upon appropriate notification of the applicant. 


D. Forest Conservation Plan. 
1. 	General Provisions. 
a. 	
Priorities. In developing a forest conservation plan, the applicant shall give priority to techniques for retaining existing forest on the site. 

b. 	
Plan Strategy. Except when using the Express Procedures described in Section E if existing forest on the site subject to a forest conservation plan cannot be retained, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission: 

(1) 	
how techniques for forest retention have been exhausted; 

(2) 	
why the priority forests and priority areas specified in Subsection F.2 of this Article cannot be left in an undisturbed condition; 

(a) 	
if priority forests and priority areas cannot be left undisturbed, how the sequence for afforestation or reforestation will be followed in compliance with Section H of this Article; and 

(b) 	
where on the site in priority areas afforestation or reforestation will occur in compliance with Section H of this Article. 



(3) 	
How the disturbance to the priority forests and priority areas as specified in Subsection F.2 of this Article qualifies for a variance. 



c. 	
Fee Contribution. Except when using the Express Procedures as described in Section E, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the requirements for afforestation or reforestation onsite or offsite cannot be reasonably accomplished if the applicant proposes to make a payment into the local forest conservation fund instead of afforestation or reforestation. 

d. 	
Discretion of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to determine if a payment instead of afforestation or reforestation is permitted and appropriate. 

e. 	
Non-Tidal Wetlands. A regulated activity under the local program is subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
For the purposes of delineation, permitting, and mitigation, areas determined to be non-tidal wetlands under Environmental Article, Title 9, Annotated Code of Maryland shall be regulated under Environmental Article, Title 9, Annotated Code of Maryland or this Article, whichever is more stringent. 

(2) 	
For the purpose of calculating reforestation mitigation under this Article, a forested non-tidal wetland permitted to be cut or cleared and required to be mitigated under COMAR 

08.05.04 shall be shown on the forest conservation plan and subtracted on an acre-for-acre basis from the total amount of forest to be cut or cleared as part of a regulated activity. 

(3) 	
Non-tidal wetlands shall be considered to be priority areas for retention and replacement. 

(4) 	
Forested non-tidal wetland identification and delineation should be included at the earliest stage of planning to assist the applicant in avoidance and reduction of impacts to the non-tidal wetlands and to avoid delay in the approval process. 



f. 	
On-site Compliance Spanning Residential Lots Discouraged. This Article discourages compliance plans that reserve portions of residential building lots for easements for retention, afforestation or reforestation in order to meet the requirements of this Article. Such proposals result in long-term conflicts with homeowners desiring to make reasonable use of their yard areas for customary residential accessory uses. This provision shall not prevent the Planning Commission from considering such concepts on a case-by-case basis. 


2. 	Preliminary Forest Conservation Plan. 
a. 	
Qualified Professional. A preliminary forest conservation plan shall be prepared by a licensed forester, a licensed landscape architect, or a qualified professional who meets the requirements stated in COMAR 08.19.06.01B. 

b. 	
Components. A preliminary forest conservation plan shall be submitted with the subdivision development plan or plan for a regulated activity and shall be considered complete if it includes the following components: 

(1) 	
The approved forest stand delineation for the site; 

(2) 	
Include a table that lists the proposed values of the following, in square feet: 

(a) 	
net tract area, 

(b) 	
area of forest conservation required, and 

(c) 	
area of forest conservation that the applicant proposes to provide, including both onsite and offsite areas; 



(3) 	
Include a clear graphic indication of the forest conservation provided on the site drawn to scale, showing areas where retention of existing forest or afforestation or reforestation is proposed; 

(4) 	
An explanation of how the provisions of Subsection D.1 of this Article have been met; 

(5) 	
In the case of afforestation or reforestation, a proposed afforestation or reforestation plan; 

(6) 	
A proposed construction timetable showing the sequence of forest conservation procedures; 

(7) 	
The proposed limits of disturbance; 

(8) 	
The proposed stockpile areas; 

(9) 	
A proposed two-(2-) year maintenance agreement that shows how areas designated for afforestation or reforestation will be maintained to ensure protection and satisfactory establishment; 

(10) 	
Information required in the City of Hagerstown Forest Conservation Technical Manual; and 

(11) 	
Other information the City of Hagerstown determines is necessary to implement this Article. 



c. 	
When Submitted. The review of the preliminary forest conservation plan shall be concurrent with the review of the site plan or subdivision development plan. 

d. 	
Modification During Staff Review. During the different stages of the review process, the preliminary forest conservation plan may be modified, as required by the Planning and Code Administration Department, prior to approval by the Planning Commission. 


3. 	The Final Forest Conservation Plan. 
a. 	
Qualified Professional. A final forest conservation plan shall be prepared by a licensed forester, a licensed landscape architect, or a qualified professional who meets the requirements stated in COMAR 08.19.06.01B. 

b. 	
Components. A final forest conservation plan shall be submitted with a final plan of subdivision, or plan for a regulated activity, and shall be considered complete if it includes the following components: 

(1) 	
Proposed locations and types of protective devices to be used during construction activities to protect trees and forests designated for conservation; 

(2) 	
In the case of afforestation or reforestation, an afforestation or reforestation plan, with a timetable and description of needed site and soil preparation, species, size, and spacing to be used; 

(3) 	
A binding two-(2-) year maintenance agreement specified in Section K of this Article and COMAR 08.19.05.01 that details how the areas designated for afforestation or reforestation will be maintained to ensure protection and satisfactory establishment, including: 

(a) 	
Watering, and 

(b) 	
A reinforcement planting provision if survival rates fall below required standards, as provided in the City of Hagerstown Forest Conservation Technical Manual; 



(4) 
A long-term binding protective agreement as specified in COMAR 08.19.05.02 that: 




(a) 	Provides protection for areas of forest conservation, including areas of afforestation, reforestation, and retention, and 
(b)  Limits uses in areas of forest conservation to those uses that are designated and consistent with forest conservation, including recreational activities and forest management practices that are used to preserve forest;  
(5)  The substantive elements required under Subsection D.2.b (1) through (4), (6) through (8), and (10) of this Article, as finalized elements of the forest conservation plan; and  
(6)  Other information the Planning and Code Administration Department determines is necessary to implement this Article.  
c.  Time for Submittal.  
(1)  Within 45 calendar days after receipt of a complete final forest conservation plan, the Planning Commission shall notify the applicant whether the forest conservation plan is approved.  
(2)  If the Planning Commission fails to notify the applicant within 45 calendar days, the plan shall be treated as complete and approved.  
(3)  The Planning Commission may require further information or extend the deadline for an additional 15 calendar days under extenuating circumstances.  
(4)  At the request of the applicant, the Planning Commission may extend the deadline under extenuating circumstances.  
d.  Concurrent with Final Plat. The Planning Commission's review and approval of a final forest conservation plan shall be concurrent with the review of the final subdivision or project plan, grading permit application, or sediment control plan approval associated with the project. The final forest conservation plan shall be approved prior to the issuance of any permits.  
e.  Revocation of Plan. The City of Hagerstown may revoke an approved forest conservation plan if it finds that:  
(1)  a provision of the plan has been violated;  
(2)  approval of the plan was obtained through fraud, misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, or omission of a relevant or material fact; or  
(3)  changes in the development or in the condition of the site necessitate preparation of a new or amended plan.  
f.  Stop Work Order. The City of Hagerstown may issue a stop work order against a person who violates a provision of this Article or a regulation, order, approved forest conservation plan, or maintenance agreement.  
g.  Notification. Before revoking approval of a forest conservation plan, the City of Hagerstown shall notify the violator in writing and provide an opportunity for a hearing.  

E. Express Procedures. 
1. 	Purpose and Intent. 
a. 	
Purpose. The purpose of an Express Procedure is to provide an alternate review and approval mechanism which will allow certain development activities to meet the intent of the Forest Conservation Ordinance through a review and approval process that is proportionate to the impact on forest resources. 

b. 	
Process. The Express Procedure allows the combination of the various steps in the review process that are described as separate in this Article. It will not require documentation of a progression through the sequence of priorities for afforestation and reforestation. 

c. 	
Intent. Certain development activities, such as those described in the eligibility standards contained in this Article, result in small afforested or reforested areas that may not be located in priority areas and provide little or no real benefit to improvements in water quality. The goal of the Express Procedure is to create significant-sized forest stands in priority areas where they will provide real benefits to improvements in water quality. This will occur through the aggregation and accumulation of payment-in-lieu of fees. The funds are expended by the City of Hagerstown on a schedule and in locations that will more closely meet the intent and purpose of this Article. 


2. 	Eligibility to Use Express Procedure. An application must meet the following criteria in order to use the Express Procedure. 
a. 	
Subdivisions of five lots or less when the afforestation or reforestation requirement as calculated from the worksheet is two acres or less; or 

b. 	
Where no subdivision is proposed, when the afforestation or reforestation requirements as calculated from the worksheet is two acres or less; and 

c. 	
There is no disturbance proposed in those priority areas described in Subsection F.2 and Subsections H.1.c, (1), (2), (4), (5), (6) and, (7). 


3. 	The Express Procedure. 
a. 	
Discretion of the Applicant. If the eligibility criteria are met, the applicant may choose to use the Express Procedure without prior approval by the Planning Commission. 

b. 	
Non-Exclusive. Nothing in this section shall prevent the applicant from using the procedures described elsewhere in this Article. 

c. 	
Simplified Format. The Forest Stand Delineation may be prepared in the simplified format as described in Subsection C.1.d. In addition, the Forest Stand Delineation shall identify those areas described in Subsection E.2.c. 

d. 	
Concurrence with Subdivision or Site Plan. The Forest Stand Delineation and Forest Conservation Plan may be submitted, reviewed and approved concurrently with the applicable subdivision or site plan. 

e. 	
Area Affected. The net tract area as requested on the worksheet and upon which calculations are based to determine afforestation and reforestation requirements shall be equal to the area of the proposed subdivided lots or the area of the entire parcel to be developed when no subdivision is proposed. 

f. 	
Discretion of the Applicant. The applicant may select the payment-in-lieu of fee to meet the requirements of afforestation or reforestation without prior approval by the Planning Commission. 

g. 	
Timing of Payment-in-Lieu. The payment-in-lieu of fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit to begin construction activity. 


4. 	Additional Guidelines. 
a. 	
Remaining Lands Not Eligible for Express Procedure. After an applicant has chosen to use the Express Procedure for an eligible subdivision, the remaining land of the original parcel is not eligible to use the procedure again. It shall be subject to the requirements of this Article as if the Express Procedure did not exist. 

b. 	
When in Variation with Other Provisions. Where the Express Procedures described in this Article vary from those described elsewhere in this Article, the Express Procedures may be followed without violation of the Article as long as the subdivision or site development proposal meets the eligibility requirements. 


F. Afforestation and Retention. 
1. 	Afforestation Requirement. Except for linear projects that involve no change in land use, a person making application for a regulated activity after the effective date of this Article shall: 
a. 	
Threshold Ratios. Conduct afforestation on the lot or parcel in accordance with the following: 

b. 	
Cutting Below Ratios. Comply with the following when cutting into forest cover that is currently below the afforestation percentages described in Subsection F.1.a of this Article: 

(1) 	
The required afforestation level shall be determined by the amount of forest existing before cutting or clearing begins; and 

(2) 	
Forest cut or cleared below the required afforestation level shall be reforested or afforested at a 2 to 1 ratio and added to the amount of afforestation necessary to reach the minimum required afforestation level, as determined by the amount of forest existing before cutting or clearing began. 




Category of Use  Afforestation Threshold Percentage  
(1)  Agricultural and resource areas  20%  
(2)  Medium density residential areas  20%  
(3)  Institutional development areas  15%  
(4)  High-density residential areas  15%  
(5)  Mixed-use and planned unit development areas  15%  
(6)  Commercial and industrial use areas  15%  

2. 	Retention – Priority. The following trees, shrubs, plants, and specific areas are considered priority for retention and protection and shall be left in an undisturbed condition unless the applicant has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission, that reasonable efforts have been made to protect them and the project plan cannot be reasonably altered: 
a. 	
Trees, shrubs, and plants located in sensitive areas including the 100-year floodplain, intermittent and perennial streams and their buffers, steep slopes, non-tidal wetlands, and critical habitats; 

b. 	
Contiguous forest that connects the largest undeveloped or most vegetated tracts of land within and adjacent to the site; 


3. 	Retention – Priority – Need for Variance. The following trees, shrubs, plants and specific areas are considered priority for retention and protection and shall be left in an undisturbed condition unless the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the applicant qualifies for a variance in accordance with Section M of this Article: 
a. 	
Trees, shrubs, or plants determined to be rare, threatened, or endangered under: 

(1) 	
The Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973 in 16 U.S.C.§§1531 through 1544 and in 50 CFR Part 7; 

(2) 	
The Maryland Nongame and Endangered Species Conservation Act, Natural Resources Article, §§10-2A-01 through 10-2A-09, Annotated Code of Maryland; and 

(3) 	
COMAR 08.03.08; 



b. 	
Trees that: 

(1) 	
Are part of an historic site, 

(2) 	
Are associated with a historic structure, or 

(3) 	
Have been designated by the state or the City of Hagerstown as a national, state, county or city champion tree; and 



c. 	
Any tree having a diameter measured at four and five tenths (4.5) feet above the ground of: 

(1) 	
30 inches or more; or 

(2) 	
75% or more of the diameter, measured at four and five tenths (4.5) feet above the ground, of the current state champion tree of that species as designated by the Department of Natural Resources. 




G. Reforestation. 
1. 	Forest Conservation Threshold. 
a. 	
Threshold. There is a forest conservation threshold established for all land use categories, as provided in Subsection b of this Section. The forest conservation threshold means the percentage of the net tract area at which the reforestation requirement changes from a ratio of one quarter (1/4) acre planted for each acre removed above the threshold to a ratio of two (2) acres planted for each acre removed below the threshold. 

b. 	
Reforestation for Cutting Below Threshold. After reasonable efforts to minimize the cutting or clearing of trees and other woody plants have been exhausted in the development of a regulated activity and implementation of the forest conservation plan, the forest conservation plan shall provide for reforestation, or at the option of the Planning Commission, payment into the forest conservation fund, according to the formula set forth in this Article and consistent with Subsection D.1 of this Article, and the following forest conservation thresholds for the applicable land use category: 


Category of Use  Conservation Threshold Percentage  
(1)  Agricultural and resource areas  50%  
(2)  Medium density residential areas  25%  
(3)  Institutional development areas  20%  
(4)  High-density residential areas  20%  
(5)  Mixed-use and planned unit development areas  15%  
(6)  Commercial and industrial use areas  15%  

c. 	Calculations. 
(1) 	
For all existing forest cover measured to the nearest one tenth (1/10) acre cleared on the net tract area above the applicable forest conservation threshold, the area of forest removed shall be reforested at a ratio of one quarter (1/4) acre planted for each acre removed. 

(2) 	
Each acre of forest retained on the net tract area above the applicable forest conservation threshold shall be credited against the total number of acres required to be reforested under paragraph (1) of this subsection. The calculation of the credit shall be according to the criteria provided in the City of Hagerstown Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 

(3) 	
For all existing forest cover measured to the nearest one tenth (1/10) acre cleared on the net tract area below the applicable forest conservation threshold, the area of forest removed shall be reforested at a ratio of two acres planted for each acre removed below the threshold and at a ratio of one quarter (1/4) acre planted for each acre removed above the threshold. 



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

H. Sequence, Priorities and Time Requirements for Afforestation and Reforestation. 
1. 	Sequence for Afforestation and Reforestation. 
a. 	
Sequence. After techniques for retaining existing forest on the site have been exhausted, the preferred sequence for afforestation and reforestation, as determined by the this Article, is as follows: 

(1) 	
Forest creation in accordance with a forest conservation plan using one or more of the following: 

(a) 	
Transplanted or nursery stock, 

(b) 	
Whip and seedling stock, or 

(c) 	
Natural regeneration where it can be adequately shown to meet the objective of the State Forest Conservation Technical Manual; 



(2) 	
Planting street trees for afforestation or reforestation with a mature canopy coverage may be granted full credit as a mitigation technique; 

(3) 	
Acquisition of an off-site protection easement on existing forested areas not currently protected in perpetuity as a mitigation technique, in which case the afforestation or reforestation credit granted may not exceed 50% of the area of forest cover protected; 

(4) 	
When all other options, both on-site and off-site, have been exhausted, landscaping as a mitigation technique conducted under an approved landscaping plan that establishes a forest at least 35 feet wide and covering at least 2,500 square feet of area. 



b. 	
Alternative Sequences. A sequence other than the one described in Subsection a. above may be used for a specific project, if necessary, to achieve the objectives of the City's forest conservation policies or to take advantage of opportunities to consolidate forest conservation efforts. 

c. 	
Priority. The following are considered a priority for afforestation and reforestation. 

(1) 	
Establish or enhance forest buffers adjacent to intermittent and perennial streams to widths of at least 50 feet; 

(2) 	
Establish forest or enhance non-forested areas on 100-year floodplains, when appropriate; 

(3) 	
Establish or increase existing forested corridors to connect existing forests within or adjacent to the site and where practical, forested corridors should be a minimum of 300 feet in width to facilitate wildlife movement; 

(4) 	
Establish or enhance forest buffers adjacent to critical habitats where appropriate; 

(5) 	
Establish plantings to stabilize slopes of 25% or greater and slopes of 15% or greater with a soil K value greater than 0.35 including the slopes of ravines or other natural depressions; 

(6) 	
Establish buffers adjacent to areas of differing land use when appropriate, or adjacent to highways or utility rights-of-way; 

(7) 	
Establish forest areas adjacent to existing forests to increase the overall area of contiguous forest cover, when appropriate; and 

(8) 	
Use native plant materials for afforestation or reforestation, when appropriate. 



d. 	
Time Frames for Planting. A person required to conduct afforestation or reforestation under this Article shall accomplish it following development project completion within one year or two growing seasons, whichever is a greater period of time. 


I. Payment-In-Lieu of Afforestation and Reforestation. 
1. 	Forest Conservation Fund. 
a. 	
Fund Created. There is established a forest conservation fund in the local program. 

b. 	
Fee Rate. If a person subject to this Article demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that requirements for reforestation or afforestation on-site or off-site cannot be reasonably accomplished or the person is eligible to use the Express Procedure as described in Section E, the person shall contribute money into the City of Hagerstown forest conservation fund at a rate of: 

(1) 	
$0.30 per square foot of the area of required planting until December 31, 2013, and 

(2) 	
adjusted for inflation as determined by the Planning and Code Administration Department annually after December 31, 2013. 




Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the City of Hagerstown from setting a fee rate that exceeds that set by the Department of Natural Resources for the State equivalent of this Article, and at no time shall the fee be set lower than the rate set by the State of Maryland. Planning Commission approval of the use of fee-in-lieu contribution shall be identified and measured in the amount of area subject to compliance. Payment of fee-in-lieu contributions will be made based on the amount of area approved by the Planning Commission and the rate in effect at the time the applicant remits payment. 
c. 	
Authority of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to determine if a payment instead of afforestation or reforestation is permitted and appropriate. 

d. 	
Discretion of Applicant When Using Express Procedure. When an applicant is eligible to use the Express Procedure described in Section E, the decision to select the payment-in-lieu of afforestation or reforestation shall not require prior approval by the Planning Commission. 

e. 	
Timing of Fee Payment. Money contributed instead of afforestation or reforestation under this Article shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit to begin the construction activity. Planning Commission approval of the use of fee-in-lieu contribution shall be identified and measured in the amount of area subject to compliance. Payment of fee-in-lieu contributions will be made based on the amount of area approved by the Planning Commission and the rate in effect at the time the applicant remits payment. 

f. 	
Time Frame for Planting. Money contributed under this Article shall remain in the fund for a period not to exceed two growing seasons. Money deposited in the local conservation fund may only be spent on the costs directly related to reforestation and afforestation, including site identification, acquisition, preparation, maintenance of existing forests and achieving urban canopy goals, and shall be deposited in a separate forest conservation fund and may not revert to the general fund. 

g. 	
Extensions. The time period specified in Subsection f above may be extended one time for an additional one year or two growing seasons by the Planning Commission with appropriate notification to the person who contributed the money. 

h. 	
When Planting Outside of City Limits. Except as provided in Subsection d. of this section, sites for the reforestation or afforestation requirement using fund money contributed under this Article shall occur in the city or, if outside the city, on any property owned by the City of Hagerstown. 


J. Recommended Tree Species. 
1. Native Species Preferred. 
Tree species used for afforestation or reforestation shall be native to the area, unless approved by the City, and selected from a list of approved species established by the City of Hagerstown. 
2. Tree Species List. 
The City of Hagerstown shall adopt a list of tree species to be used for any required afforestation or reforestation and incorporate it into the Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

K. Financial Security for Afforestation and Reforestation. 
1. 	Performance Bond or Other Acceptable Surety. 
a. 	
Security Required. A person required to conduct afforestation or reforestation under this Article shall furnish financial security in the form of a bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other security approved by the Planning Commission. The surety shall: 

(1) 	
assure that the afforestation, reforestation, and the associated maintenance agreement are conducted and maintained in accordance with the approved forest conservation plan; 

(2) 	
be in an amount equal to the estimated cost, as determined by the City of Hagerstown, of afforestation and reforestation; and 

(3) 	
be in a form and of a content approved by the City of Hagerstown. 



b. 	
Reduction of Security. After one growing season, the person required to file a bond under Subsection K.1.a of this Article may request reduction of the amount of the bond or other financial security by submitting a written request to the Planning and Code Administration Department with a justification for reducing the bond or other financial security amount, including estimated or actual costs to ensure afforestation or reforestation requirements are met. 

c. 	
City Review of Alternate Bond Amounts. The City of Hagerstown shall determine whether a lesser amount is sufficient to cover the cost of afforestation or reforestation, taking into account the following: 

(1) 	
the number of acres, 

(2) 	
the proposed method of afforestation or reforestation, 

(3) 	
the cost of planting materials or replacement materials, 

(4) 	
the cost of maintenance of the afforestation or reforestation project, and 

(5) 	
other relevant factors. 



d. 	
Release of Security. If, after one year or two growing seasons, whichever is greater, the plantings associated with the afforestation or reforestation meet or exceed the standards of the City of Hagerstown Forest Conservation Technical Manual, the amount of the cash bond, letter of credit, surety bond, or other security shall be returned or released. If the planted area does not meet survival requirements, the maintenance period shall be extended by an additional term. 



T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

L. Standards for Protecting Trees from Construction Activities. 
1. Standards Adopted. 
The City hereby adopts standards for the protection of trees from construction activity that are included in the City of Hagerstown Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 
2. Installation of Protective Devices Required. 
Before cutting, clearing, grading, or construction begins on a site for which a forest conservation plan is required by this Article, the applicant shall demonstrate to the City of Hagerstown that protective devices have been established. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

M. Variances, Appeals, Enforcement and Penalties. 
1. 	Variance Procedure. 
a. 	
Hardship. A person may request that a variance from this Article be granted by the Planning Commission if the person demonstrates that enforcement would result in unwarranted hardship. 

b. 	
Requirements. An applicant for a variance shall: 

(1) 	
describe the special conditions peculiar to the property which would cause the unwarranted hardship; 

(2) 	
describe how enforcement of these rules will deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by others in similar areas; 

(3) 	
verify that the granting of the variance will not confer on the applicant a special privilege that would be denied to other applicants; 

(4) 	
verify that the variance request is not based on conditions or circumstances which are the result of actions by the applicant; 

(5) 	
verify that the request does not arise from a condition relating to land or building use, either permitted or nonconforming, on a neighboring property; and 

(6) 	
verify that the granting of a variance will not adversely affect water quality. 



c. 	
Findings. The Planning and Code Administration Department shall make findings that the applicant has met the requirements in Subsections a. and b. of this Section before the Planning Commission may grant a variance. 

d. 	
Notice. Notice of a request for a variance shall be given to the Maryland Department of Natural Resources within 15 days of receipt of a request for a variance. 

e. 	
Department of Natural Resources. There is established by this Article the right and authority of the Department of Natural Resources to initiate or intervene in an administrative, judicial or other original proceeding or appeal in the state concerning an approval of a variance under Natural Resources Article, §§5-1601 through 5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland, or this Article. 


2. 	Appeals. 
The appeal procedure as applies to this Article shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 8 of this Code. 
3. 	Enforcement and Penalties. 
Enforcement of the provisions of this Article, and penalties for violation thereof shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 8 of this Code. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

N. 	Annual Report, Biennial Review by the Department of Natural Resources and Effective Date and Subsequent Amendments. 
1. 	Annual Report. 
On or before March 31 of each year, the Planning and Code Administration Department shall submit to the Maryland Department of Natural Resources Forest Service a report on: 
a. 	
The number, location, and type of projects subject to the provisions of this Article; 

b. 	
The amount and location of acres cleared, conserved, and planted in connection with a development project; 

c. 	
The amount of reforestation and afforestation fees and noncompliance penalties collected and expended; and 

d. 	
The costs of implementing the Forest Conservation Program; 

e. 	
The size, location and protection of any local forest mitigation banks which are created under a local or State program; 

f. 	
The number, location and type of violations and type of enforcement activity conducted in accordance with this subtitle; and 

g. 	
To the extent practicable, the size and location of all conserved and planted forest areas, submitted in an electronic geographic information system or computer aided design format. 


2. 	Biennial Review. 
The Planning and Code Administration Department shall submit the necessary documentation to comply with COMAR 08.19.02.04. 
3. 	Effective Date and Subsequent Amendments. 
This Article is hereby enacted and becomes effective May 21, 1999. This Article may be amended as required. All amendments to this Article are subject to the approval of the Department of Natural Resources. 

T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

ARTICLE 8 
Appeals, Violations, and Penalties 

A. 	General Provisions and Penalties. 
1. 	General. 
Appeals of decisions made in the administration of this Chapter shall be as outlined herein, unless specific appeals procedures and penalties are enumerated in the individual Articles of this Code. In such cases, the procedure enumerated in that Article/Ordinance shall control. 
2. 	Interference with City Employees or Agents. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, impede, hinder, or obstruct in any manner the servants, employees, officers, or agents of the City of Hagerstown while engaged in assigned duties. Any person violating this section, on conviction thereof, will be guilty of a misdemeanor as stated in Article II of the City Code and be punishable in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
3. 	Municipal Infractions and Penalties. 
In accordance with the Municipal Infractions Ordinance provided for under the City Code, the fine for violation of this Chapter shall be up to $500 dollars for each initial violation and $500 dollars for each day thereafter that the violation continues. Unless otherwise provided, each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. Each violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
4. 	Misdemeanor Offense for Unauthorized Demolition in an Historic District and Violation of the Floodplain Management Ordinance. 
Any demolition performed in an historic district or at a designated landmark without first obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of Hardship, or demolition of a potential landmark as identified in the Comprehensive Plan without first obtaining a demolition permit, shall be deemed a misdemeanor as stated in Article II of the City Code. 
Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of Article 6 (Floodplain Management) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as stated in Article II of the City Code. Any person responsible for a violation shall comply with the notice of violation or stop work order. Failure to comply shall be in accordance with Subsection A.3. above. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Hagerstown from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
5. 	Noncompliance with Forest Conservation Article. 
a. 	
Assessment of Penalty. In addition to the municipal infraction provisions of Subsection A.3. above, a person found to be in noncompliance with Article 7, regulations adopted under this Article, the forest conservation plan, or the associated two-year maintenance agreement, shall be assessed by the City of Hagerstown the penalty of 50 cents per square foot of the area found to be in noncompliance with required forest conservation. 

b. 	
Requirement for Use of Penalty Funds. Money collected under Subsection a of this Subsection shall be deposited in the forest conservation fund as required by Article 7, Section I. of this Chapter, and may be used by the City of Hagerstown for purposes related to implementing Article 7. 

c. 	
Injunctive Relief. In addition to the above-enumerated sanctions, the City of Hagerstown may seek an injunction requiring the person to cease violation of this Article and take corrective action to restore or reforest an area. 


6. 	Noncompliance with Floodplain Management Article. 
a. 	Compliance Required. 
(1) 
No building, structure, or development shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, improved, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged, or altered without full compliance with these regulations and all other applicable regulations. 

(2) 
Failure to obtain a permit shall be a violation of these regulations and shall be subject to penalties in accordance with Subsections A.3. and A.4 of this Article. 

(3) 
Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the specific activities set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction of such specific activities that are contrary to that authorization shall be deemed a violation of these regulations. 


b. 	Notice of Violation and Stop Work Order. 
If the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a violation of any provision of these regulations, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such violation to the owner, the owner’s authorized agent, and the person responsible for such violation, and may issue a stop work order. The notice of violation or stop work order shall be in writing and shall: 
(1) 
Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of these regulations that have been violated; 

(2) 
Order remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations; 

(3) 
Specify a reasonable period of time to correct the violation; 

(4) 
Advise the recipients of the right to appeal; and 

(5) 
Be served in person; or 

(6) 
Be posted in a conspicuous place in or on the property and sent by registered or certified mail to the last known mailing address, residence, or place of business of the recipients. 


7. Revocation of Zoning Approval. 
Per Article 1, Section J and Article 2, Section E.2, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to revoke a zoning certificate or other zoning approval in accordance with the requirements of Article 4, Section S.1.g. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 

B. 	Judicial Appeal. 
1. 	
Parties and Judicial Appeal. Any person or persons or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the City, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Commission, Historic District Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or by an action of the Mayor and Council in the administration of this Chapter may appeal the same to the Circuit Court of Washington County, Maryland. Such appeal shall be taken according to the Land Use Article, Section 4-401 to 4-406 of the Annotated Code of Maryland as then in force, within 30 days of the date of the decision appealed. The decision of the Circuit Court may be appealed to the Court of Special Appeals. 

2. 	
Issues Under this Chapter Have Preference. All issues in any proceeding under this Chapter shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. 

3. 	
Costs Not Allowed Against Board; Exception. Costs shall not be allowed against the Board of Zoning Appeals, Planning Commission, Historic District Commission, the Mayor and City Council, or any City agency unless it shall appear to the Circuit Court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. 

4. 	
Decision of Circuit Court; Appeal to Court of Special Appeals; Costs. Upon its determination of the case, the Circuit Court shall file a formal order embodying its final decision. An appeal may be taken to the Court of Special Appeals of Maryland during the period and in the manner prescribed by rules of the Court of Appeals from any decision of the Circuit Court. In such cases, the award of costs shall be subject to the discretion of the Court of Special Appeals. 


T
h
i
s 
p
a
g
e 
i
n
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
l
y 
l
e
f
t 
b
l
a
n
k
. 


