Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-16-1993 byOrd. No. 231]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances of the Town of Hampstead of a general and permanent
nature, adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hampstead, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General
Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through 136, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of
Hampstead," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance of the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after February 16, 1993.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf or post binder form serially numbered No. 1
has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance,
and if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by
the Clerk of the Town of Hampstead by impressing thereon the Seal of the
Town, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Town, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while the Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Mayor and
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of Hampstead"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf or post binder book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication and filing.
The Town Clerk of Hampstead, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published,
in the manner required, a notice of the passage of this ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. Publication of such notice coupled
with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Mayor
and Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of
Hampstead to be misrepresented thereby. Any violation of this section shall
be punishable as a misdemeanor, the penalty for which shall be a fine not
to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
§ 1-6 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 1-11
1:4
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-12
of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to September 21, 1992.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provisions or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
E.
Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
F.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Town's indebtedness.
G.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-15. Deposit of copies with state agencies.
Pursuant to § 9A of Article 23A of the Maryland Code, a copy of the Code of
the Town of Hampstead containing the Charter shall be deposited with the
Maryland Department of Legislative Reference.
§ 1-16. Emergency adoption.
Upon the affirmative vote of four members of the Council, the ordinance is
hereby declared to be an emergency measure effective upon approval by
the Mayor or passage over any veto.
Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries
or compensation of officers and employees, establishing workdays and
working hours of certain employees and providing for holidays and
vacations for employees and keeping of employment records.
K.
L. All ordinances pertaining to Zoning Map changes.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Mayor and Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
A.
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
B.
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-14B, the following sections or chapters were added or
amended: §§ 25-1, 25-3, 44-3, 44-7, 44-11, 47-7, 65-2, 70-8, 73-11, 76-3, 79-4, 82-2, 88-18,
90-6, 95-4, 100-2, 103-7, 116-2, 127-11D, 127-13. The following original sections were
deleted: Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 191.
§ 1-13 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 1-16
1:6
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)
§ 1-17. (Reserved).
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:7

ARTICLE III
Exemption From County Legislation
[Adopted 4-17-1989 by Ord. No. 219; amended in its entirety
4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 413]
§ 1-18. Exemption authorized; exceptions.
The Town of Hampstead shall be generally exempt from all legislation of
Carroll County, Maryland, which involves matters over which the Town
has been granted authority pursuant to Article 23A of the Annotated
Code of Maryland or pursuant to public general law or its Charter. This
exemption shall extend to all legislation in existence or such legislation
as may be passed from time to time by the County Commissioners of
Carroll County, provided that this exemption shall not apply to any
of the Chapters of the Carroll County Maryland Code of Public Local
Laws and Ordinances, as adopted and amended from time to time,
as enumerated below: [Amended 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 430;
7-14-2015 by Ord. No. 511]
(1) Chapter 90, Animals.
(2) Chapter 111, Cable Television.
(3) Chapter 170, Construction Codes.
(4) Chapter 53, Environmental Management of Storm Sewer Systems.
(5) (Reserved)2
Chapter 150, Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resource
Conservation.
(6)
(7) Chapter 152, Grading and Sediment Control.
(8) Chapter 134, Landscape Enhancement of Development.
(9) Chapter 171, Livability Code.
(10)Chapter 151, Stormwater Management.
A.
Where the Town determines any administrative approval or permission
granted under the Ordinances listed herein may be deleterious to the
public health, safety or welfare of the citizens of Hampstead, the Town
shall retain the authority to stay the approval or permission for up to
90 days. The purpose of such stay shall be to allow the Town Council
to conduct hearings, subpoena testimony, gather information and take
any other actions deemed necessary to determine if the approval or
permission constitutes a risk to the public health, safety or welfare and
to make any appeal available under the ordinance or the Town-County
Agreement. The enactment of such stay shall require the majority
B.
2. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(5), Chapter 153, Floodplain Management, was
repealed 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 512.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
vote of the Council and be communicated to the Carroll County
Commissioners within five days of passage.
§ 1-18 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 1-18
1:10
ARTICLE IV
Legislation Adopted During Codification
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:11
[An
ordinance
to
enact
certain
changes
to
Chapter
135,
Zoning,
is
proposed
before
the
Mayor
and
Council.
The
amendments
effected
by
this
ordinance
are
noted
as
"amended
during
codification;
see
Ch.
1,
General
Provisions,
Art.
IV."
Upon
adoption
of
this
ordinance,
the
pertinent
historical
information
will
be
inserted
throughout
§ 1-18 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 1-18
1:12
the
course
of
routine
supplementation.]
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:13
Chapter 4
(RESERVED)
Chapter 9
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Registration, nominations and
elections — See Charter, Art. V.
§ 1-18 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 1-18
4:14
ARTICLE I
Voter Registration; Conduct of Elections
[Adopted 9-20-1982 as Ord. No. 187]
§ 9-1. Supplemental registration. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. 234]
§ 9-2. (Reserved)3
§ 9-3. Method of registration; application forms; duties of
Secretary.
In addition to registration for municipal elections as provided for by
state law, the Town shall maintain a supplemental voter registration list.
For that purpose, the Town Manager may continuously register voters
during regular business hours at the Town office and the Board of
Supervisors of Elections shall cause applications to be made available
upon request in order to permit registration by mail; provided, however,
that no person may so register within 30 days prior to any Town
election.
A.
Persons shall be eligible for registration, provided that they meet the
constitutional qualifications of a voter as provided for by state law, as
now or hereafter in force, and reside within the Town limits.
B.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall have supervision over
supplemental registrations and shall be responsible for the preparation
or approval of all forms for registration and the format of the
supplemental registration list.
C.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall have the duty of keeping
the supplemental registration list current by removing therefrom the
names of persons known to have died, to have moved outside of the
Town limits or to have become constitutionally unqualified to vote. Said
Board shall give notice of the removal of any voter as required by state
law.
D.
There shall be a continuous registration of qualified persons, except
that no registration application may be accepted within 30 days of the
date of any special or general election. Registration may be applied for
in person at the Town office at any time during regular business hours,
and the Board of Supervisors of Election shall cause applications to be
made available upon request in order to permit registration by mail.
[Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. 234]
A.
It shall be the duty of said Board to prepare suitable forms for
application for registration, which shall be identical whether the
application is filed in person or by mail. Such form shall contain the
full name, residence address, date of birth and a statement that the
B.
3. Editor's Note: Former § 9-2, Notice of reregistration, was repealed 3-15-1993 by Ord. No.
234.
§ 9-1 ELECTIONS § 9-3
9:15
§ 9-4. Permanent registration.
Any person who registers or reregisters after the enactment of this article
shall not be required to register again unless his or her registration shall
be canceled as hereafter provided or unless, by ordinance, the Council
requires another reregistration of all voters.
§ 9-5. Cancellation of registration.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections may undertake to cancel the
registration of any voter upon being informed or learning that the voter
is dead or is no longer a resident of the Town. Before canceling any
registration, the Board shall cause to be mailed to the address of said voter,
as it appears on the registration records, a notification of its proposed
action requiring the voter to show cause within two weeks after mailing why
the registration should not be canceled. If no sufficient cause is shown, the
Board shall thereupon cancel the registration of such person.
§ 9-6. Records.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections is authorized to maintain registration
records in loose-leaf book form, bound form or card form as it may
determine and shall see that a duplicate registration record is maintained
safely at all times.
§ 9-7. Preparation of ballots. [Amended 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 362]
applicant will have resided within the corporate limits of the Town for
at least 30 days preceding the next scheduled election. The application
shall also contain a written affirmation under the penalties of perjury,
signed by the applicant, that the information contained thereon is true
and correct.
All applications for registration shall be submitted to the Clerk to said
Board, who, upon being satisfied that the same is correct, is authorized
to register such persons. If the Clerk to said Board is not satisfied for
any reason as to the correctness of the application or the eligibility
of the applicant, the Clerk shall refer the same to said Board, which
shall thereupon decide to register the applicant or refuse to register
the applicant, subject to the right of appeal provided for in § C5-7 of the
Charter. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. 234]
C.
Promptly, following the close of nominations for office, the Board of
Supervisors of Elections shall cause to be prepared such number of
ballots as shall be not fewer than the then-total number of registered
voters, with the names of candidates in alphabetical order for the
office sought. All ballots shall be delivered to the Board or the Board's
representative and secured until the opening of the polls on the election
day, at which time they shall be delivered to said Board.
A.
§ 9-3 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 9-7
9:16
§ 9-8. Absentee ballots.
Each ballot shall contain a number of blank lines equal to the number
of open seats to provide for write-in candidates. To be counted, a vote
for a write-in candidate must be legible, contain the first and last name
of the candidate and be written upon a ballot judged to be valid by the
Board of Supervisors of Elections.
B.
Any person desiring to vote by absentee ballot may apply therefor
in person or in writing to the Secretary to the Board, and, if the
application is in writing, it shall state the voter's home address. The
Secretary, upon being satisfied that the applicant is a registered voter,
shall deliver personally or by mail to the applicant one of the ballots
prepared by the Board, upon which the Secretary shall affix by a stamp
to be provided by the Board the legend "absentee ballot." The Secretary
shall provide an envelope of sufficient size so as to contain the ballot,
upon the face of which there shall appear the following: "I , do
hereby swear or affirm that I am a voter legally qualified to vote in the
election to be held for the Town of Hampstead on ; that I
am legally registered in said Town and that the within ballot was by
me marked, folded, enclosed and sealed in this ballot envelope." Said
envelope shall also contain on its face a statement to the effect that the
ballot shall only be counted if it is delivered in person to the Secretary
or to the Board of Supervisors of Election on or before the close of the
polls on the date of the election or is mailed to the attention of the
Board of Supervisors of Elections, Town Hall, Hampstead, Maryland, in
sufficient time to have been actually received prior to the close of polls
on the election date.
A.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall not open or unfold any
absentee ballot prior to the closing of the polls and the beginning of the
vote count. Said Board shall separately count and certify all absentee
ballots which it received prior to the closing of the polls. No such ballot
shall be rejected except by unanimous vote of the entire Board. All
such ballot envelopes and ballots shall be kept separate and apart from
ballots cast at the regular voting place or places and shall be preserved
for at least six months from the date of the election.
B.
Any absentee ballot voted in favor of a person who has ceased to be a
candidate shall not be counted for such candidate but the remainder of
the ballot shall not be invalidated.
C.
Whenever said Board shall determine that any person who voted by
absentee ballot died before the day of the election, the Board shall not
count the ballot.
D.
If there is more than one absentee ballot in any envelope, all shall be
rejected. Absentee ballots may be marked by any kind of pencil or ink.
E.
Any person who obtained an absentee ballot and envelope may
nonetheless vote in person, provided that he or she presents his
F.
§ 9-7 ELECTIONS § 9-8
9:17
§ 9-9. Poll watchers.
Each candidate shall have the right to designate in writing one person, who
is a registered voter of the Town, to serve as a poll watcher on his behalf.
Such watcher shall be entitled to be in the polling area in such a position to
see each person who offers to vote, and following the closing of the polls,
the Board of Supervisors of Elections shall, upon request of any watcher,
exhibit any ballot cast in such a manner that the same may be read and
examined, but said Board shall not permit ballots to be taken from their
hands. It shall be unlawful for any watcher to inquire or ascertain for what
candidate or candidates any voter may intend to vote or has voted or the
position or vote of any voter on any ballot question or to attempt to assist
any person in the preparation of a ballot, and any watcher attempting to do
any of said acts may lawfully be ejected by said Board.
absentee ballot and envelope and the same are destroyed in the
presence of at least two members of said Board, which fact shall be
noted by the Secretary to the Board on a list to be maintained by him of
all absentee ballots issued.
Under no circumstances shall the Secretary to the Board deliver or mail
more than one absentee ballot or envelope to the same voter.
G.
§ 9-8 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 9-9
9:18
ARTICLE II
Tie Votes
[Adopted 5-2-1983 byOrd. No. 191]
§ 9-10. Primary elections.
§ 9-11. General elections; special runoff elections.
If, at any primary election, two or more candidates for the office of
Mayor shall tie for the second highest number of votes, such persons as
well as the candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall all be
named and considered as nominees at the general election following.
A.
In any primary election for Councilmen, the number of nominees to be
chosen for the general election shall be twice the number of Council
seats to be filled. For two seats, there shall be four nominees chosen,
and for three seats, there shall be six nominees. If at any primary
election there shall be a tie vote for the fourth or sixth nominee
position, as the case may be, then all of those so tied shall be named
and considered as nominees at the general election following, together
with those persons who received a higher number of votes.
B.
If, at any general election, there shall be a tie vote among those
receiving the highest number of votes for Mayor, there shall be a special
runoff election between the tied candidates.
A.
If, at any general election where two Council seats are to be filled,
there is a tie between two persons receiving the highest number of
votes, those two shall be deemed elected, but if there is a tie between
persons receiving the second highest number of votes, there shall be
a special runoff election between those persons only for the second
position. If, at such general election, three Council seats are to be filled
and two nominees shall tie for the highest number of votes, they shall
be elected, and the person receiving the second highest number of
votes shall be elected, but if there also is a tie for the second highest
number of votes, there shall be a special runoff election between such
persons for the third Council seat; and if there is no tie between persons
receiving the first or second highest number of votes but a tie for
the third highest number of votes, there shall also be a special runoff
election between those so tied for the third Council seat.
B.
Any special runoff election shall be held on the second Tuesday in
June following the general election and advertised as required by the
Charter.4 [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. 234]
C.
4. Editor's Note: Original Section 3, which immediately followed this section and dealt with
the 1983 primary election for Councilmen, was deleted 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 231.
§ 9-10 ELECTIONS § 9-11
9:19

ARTICLE III
Certification of Candidates
[Adopted 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 362]
§ 9-12. Requirements to be met by candidates.
§ 9-13. Hearing and appeal.
Within seven days after the filing deadline for any election, the Board
of Supervisors of Elections shall certify that all applicants filing a
certification of nomination meet the requirements of the Charter and
Town Code with respect to election to municipal office.
A.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall request and review all
documents necessary to show the applicant's identity, age, voter
registration and maintenance of a primary residence within the
municipal limits for one year prior to the election and/or any other
requirements as specified by the Charter or the Town Code.
B.
In the event the Board determines an applicant does not meet the
requirements for nomination, the Board shall notify the applicant
immediately that the certification of nomination has been denied. If any
person is aggrieved by the Board's decision regarding such nomination,
the person may request a public hearing before the Board. Such
hearing will be held within seven days of the written petition to the
Board.
A.
Upon receipt of a written petition for such appeal, the Board shall fix a
time and date for a hearing and provide public notice. At the hearing,
any party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or attorney.
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings and shall keep records of all its official
actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Board and shall
be a public record. Upon hearing of testimony, the Board shall render
a decision in writing to the appellant. The decision of the Board may
be appealed to the Circuit Court of Carroll County; however, any such
appeal shall not delay any scheduled election unless injunctive relief is
granted by the Court.
B.
§ 9-12 ELECTIONS § 9-13
9:21
Chapter 13
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 9-13 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 9-13
9:22
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 13-1. Purpose.
It is the intent of this chapter that public officials and public employees
avoid any action that might result in or create the appearance of the
following:
§ 13-2. Applicability.
A. Using public office for private gain;
B. Impeding government efficiency or economy; or
Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the
government.
C.
The provisions of this chapter apply to the following persons who are
elected or appointed, or employed by the Town of Hampstead: the
Mayor, members of the Council, employees and members of all boards,
and commissions of the Town. For the purpose of this chapter, "public
employee" or "Town official" shall mean any person who is subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
A.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to supersede, or conflict
with, any of the provisions of the Law Enforcement Officer’s Bill of
Rights, Md. Code Ann., Public Safety Article, §§ 3-101 through 3-113
(2009). In the event a conflict arises between this chapter and any
provision of LEOBR, the provisions of LEOBR shall be controlling.
B.
§ 13-1 ELECTIONS § 13-2
9:23

ARTICLE II
Ethics Commission
§ 13-3. Ethics Commission; membership.
§ 13-4. Powers and responsibilities; removal from office.
There shall be a Hampstead Ethics Commission, which shall consist
of three members; appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Council. All members of the Ethics Commission shall reside within the
corporate limits of the Town of Hampstead.
A.
All appointees shall be appointed for a term of three years from the date
of appointment or until their successors are appointed, with such terms
staggered as to provide for the orderly transition of new members. No
member shall participate in any matter concerning his or her conduct.
B.
No member of the Commission may be:
(1) A Town official or spouse of a Town official;
(2) A Town employee or spouse of a Town employee;
(3) An elected public official;
(4) A candidate for elected public office;
(5) A lobbyist;
Anyone having any financial interest with any Council member or
the Mayor;
(6)
Anyone who has been a paid campaign worker or paid political
consultant for any Town Council or mayoral candidate within the
past three years; or
(7)
(8) Currently doing business with the Town.
C.
The Commission shall be advised by the Town Attorney or an attorney
selected by the Commission and shall have the following powers and
responsibilities:
To establish, amend, and rescind rules and procedures governing
its own internal organization and operations in a manner and form
consistent with this chapter;
(1)
(2) To meet as often as necessary to fulfill its responsibilities;
To receive from the Town Manager or designee such staff support
as necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission;
(3)
(4) To prepare, receive and maintain all forms required by this chapter;
A.
§ 13-3 ELECTIONS § 13-4
9:25
§ 13-5. Jurisdiction.
To provide written advisory opinions to persons subject to this
chapter as to the applicability of the provisions of this chapter to
them;
(5)
(6) To review, index, maintain on file, and dispose of complaints;
(7) To interpret and apply the meaning and intent of this chapter;
To make findings of fact as necessary for the disposition of a
complaint;
(8)
To make notifications, extend deadlines, and conduct
investigations;
(9)
To call such witnesses and documents as the Commission deems
relevant, and to administer oaths and affirmations;
(10)
(11)To impose sanctions under §§ 13-12 and 13-13; and
To conduct public information programs regarding the purpose and
application of this chapter.
(12)
Removal from office.
The Town Council or the Mayor may initiate the removal of a
member of the Ethics Commission from office for:
(a) Neglect of duty;
(b) Misconduct in office; or
(c) Violation of the law.
(1)
The Council or the Mayor must give the member written notice of
the reason(s) for removal.
(2)
The member is entitled to a hearing before the Mayor and Town
Council. The Mayor shall preside over the hearing unless the Mayor
has initiated the removal. In such instance, the Vice President of
the Council shall preside over the hearing. The member may be
removed after the hearing upon a vote of the Mayor and at least
three votes of the Town Council or at least four votes of the Town
Council without the concurrent vote of the Mayor.
(3)
A member may request judicial review of a final decision for
removal in accordance with the Maryland Administrative
Procedure Act.
(4)
B.
All decisions by the Commission pursuant to this chapter shall be by
majority vote.
C.
The Ethics Commission shall have jurisdiction to review and make
findings concerning any alleged violation of this chapter by any person
A.
§ 13-4 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 13-5
9:26
subject to its provisions, including, but not limited to, current Town
officials and public employees, former Town officials and former public
employees pursuant to § 13-5B, and persons doing business with the
Town, if a complaint is filed within two years after:
(1) The date of the alleged violation; or
The complainant learned or should have learned of facts that would
lead a reasonable person to conclude that a violation occurred.
However, a complaint may not be filed more than three years after
the alleged violation occurred.
(2)
The termination of a Town official's or public employee's duties does
not affect the jurisdiction of the Ethics Commission with respect to
alleged violations occurring prior to the termination of the official's or
employee's official duties.
B.
§ 13-5 ELECTIONS § 13-5
9:27

ARTICLE III
Rules
§ 13-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any corporation, limited liability company, general
or limited partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, unincorporated
association or firm, institution, trust, foundation, or other organization,
whether or not operated for profit.
COMPENSATION/EARNED INCOME — Money or anything of value,
regardless of form, received or to be received for service rendered. If
lobbying is only a portion of a person's employment, "compensation" means
a prorated amount based on the time devoted to lobbying compared to
the time devoted to other employment duties. For reporting purposes, a
prorated amount shall be labeled as such.
DOING BUSINESS WITH — Being party to or negotiating any transaction
with the Town that involves at least $1,000 during a year, or is worth at
least $20,000 in total, or being actively regulated by the Town, or being
registered as a lobbyist in accordance with § 13-9 of this chapter.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Ownership of any interest as the result of which
the owner has received, within the past three years, or is presently
receiving, or in the future is entitled to receive, more than $1,000 per year.
A financial interest also means ownership of more than 3% of a business
entity, and may include a loan or loan guarantee if, under the circumstances,
the loan or loan guarantee has a direct and material financial impact on a
public employee or Town Official, their immediate family, or any business
with which they are affiliated, as distinguished from the public generally.
GIFT — The transfer of anything of economic value, regardless of the form,
without adequate and lawful consideration. For purposes of this chapter, a
gift does not include a transfer regulated by state or federal law governing
political campaigns or elections.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Family members who are the spouse, parent, child,
sibling, or mother-in-law and/or father-in-law of the individual.
INTEREST — Any source of income or any other legal or equitable economic
interest, whether or not subject to an encumbrance or a condition, which is
owned or held, in whole or in part, jointly or severally, directly or indirectly
by any person subject to this chapter. An interest does not include:
An interest in a time deposit or demand deposit in a financial
institution, a money market fund, investment account, mutual fund or
deposit-type account.
A.
An interest held in the capacity of a personal agent, representative,
custodian, fiduciary or trustee, unless the holder has an equitable
interest therein.
B.
§ 13-6 ELECTIONS § 13-6
9:29
PERSON — Includes an individual or business entity.
§ 13-7. Conflicts of interest.
Except as permitted by the Ethics Commission pursuant to § 13-10, persons
holding positions described in § 13-2 shall not:
An interest in an insurance policy, endowment policy, annuity contract,
or an interest in either a deferred compensation plan or a common
trust fund that has more than 25 participants and which the IRS has
determined qualifies as a trust under the appropriate provisions of the
Internal Revenue Code.
C.
Participate on behalf of the Town in any matter in which they have a
financial interest and which would, to their knowledge, have a direct
and material financial impact, as distinguished from the public
generally, on them, their immediate family, or any business entity with
which they are affiliated. This provision does not apply to the exercise
of an administrative or ministerial duty which does not affect the
disposition or decision with respect to that matter.
A.
Employment restrictions:
Be employed by, or have a financial interest in, any entity subject
to his or her authority or that of the Town agency, board, or
commission with which he or she is affiliated or any entity which
is negotiating or has entered a contract with that agency, board or
commission; or
(1)
Hold any other employment relationship which would impair the
impartiality or independence of judgment of the official or
employee.
(2)
These prohibitions do not apply to:
An official or employee who is appointed to a regulatory or
housing authority pursuant to a requirement that persons
subject to the jurisdiction of the authority be represented in
appointments to it;
(a)
Subject to other provisions of the law, a member of a
commission in regard to a financial interest or employment
held at the time of appointment, provided it is publicly
disclosed to the appointing authority and the Commissions; or
(b)
An official or employee whose duties are ministerial, if the
private employment of financial interest does not create a
conflict of interest of the appearance of a conflict of interest.
(c)
(3)
B.
C. Represent any party, for a fee, before any Town body.
Within one year following termination of Town employment or service,
act as a compensated representative of another in connection with any
D.
§ 13-6 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 13-7
9:30
specific matter in which he or she participated substantially as a Town
official or employee.
Solicitation or acceptance of gifts:
(1) An official or employee may not solicit any gift.
No official or employee may knowingly accept any gift, directly or
indirectly, from any person that he or she knows or has the reason
to know:
Is doing business with the Town Council, as to members
thereof, or, as to other officials or employees, with their office,
agency, board or commissions; or
(a)
Has financial interests that may be substantially and materially
affected, in a manner distinguishable from the public generally,
by the performance or nonperformance of his or her official
duty.
(b)
(2)
Unless a gift of any of the following would tend to impair the
impartiality and the independence of judgment of the official or
employee receiving it or, if of significant value, would give the
appearance of doing so, or, if of significant value, the recipient
official or employee has reason to believe that is it designed to do
so, this subsection shall not apply to:
Meals and beverages consumed in the presence of the
donor(s).
(a)
Ceremonial gifts or awards which have insignificant monetary
value.
(b)
Unsolicited gifts of nominal value or trivial items of
informational value.
(c)
Reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, and scheduled
entertainment of the official or the employees for a meeting
which is given in return for participation in a panel or speaking
engagement at the meeting.
(d)
Gifts of tickets or free admission extended to an elected official
from the person sponsoring or conducting the event, as a
courtesy or ceremony to the office, to attend an intercollegiate
sporting event, charitable, cultural, or political event.
(e)
A specific gift or class of gifts which the Council or the
Commission exempts from the operation of this subsection
upon a finding, in writing, that acceptance of the gift or class of
gifts would not be detrimental to the impartial conduct of the
business of the Town and that the gift is purely personal and
private in nature.
(f)
(3)
E.
§ 13-7 ELECTIONS § 13-7
9:31
§ 13-8. Financial disclosure.
Gifts from a person related by blood or marriage, or spouse,
child, ward, financially dependent parent, or other relative who
shares the official's or employee's legal residence, or a child,
ward, parent, or other relative over which whose financial
affairs the person has legal or actual control.
(g)
Use the prestige of their office or position for their own benefit or that
of another.
F.
Use confidential information acquired in their official Town position for
their own benefit or that of another.
G.
Use an official position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance
of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him
or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom a public
official has business or financial interest.
H.
Use the attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the Town for
personal or private business without paying just compensation.
I.
Use Town property for personal benefit or official position to request or
require an employee to:
Do work on behalf of his or her family, business, social, church or
fraternal interests;
(1)
Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or
political purposes.
(2)
J.
The Mayor, members of the Town Council, the Town Manager, the
Assistant Town Manager, the Chief of Police, members of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, members of the Board of Zoning Appeals,
members of the Ethics Commission and others whom the Council may
designate from time to time by resolution, shall file, annually not later
than February 15 of each calendar year during which they hold such
position, a statement with the Ethics Commission disclosing any gifts
having a value over $25 or a series of gifts with a cumulative value
of $100 or more during the preceding calendar year from any person
doing business with the Town. The statement shall identify the donor of
the gift and its approximate retail value at the time of receipt.
A.
Such persons shall also file a statement with the Ethics Commission
disclosing any financial interest in an entity doing business with,
registered as a lobbyist with, or regulated by the Town, or which would
otherwise result in disqualification pursuant to § 13-7A of this chapter
from participation in any decision, proceeding, investigation or any
other activity in his or her capacity as a public employee or Town
official. Such persons shall submit a schedule of such interests held at
any time during the year for which the statement is filed.
B.
§ 13-7 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 13-8
9:32
§ 13-9. Lobbying disclosures.
Such persons shall also file a statement with the Ethics Commission
disclosing any liabilities to persons doing business with, registered as
a lobbyist with, or actively regulated by the Town. Such persons shall
submit a schedule of such liabilities owed to any person at any time
during the year for which the statement is filed where such person has
direct approval authority of the liability referred to herein, excluding
retail credit accounts owed by the person making the statement, or
by a member of his or her immediate family if the person making the
statement was involved in the transaction giving rise to the liability.
C.
All candidates for election to the office of Mayor or to the Council shall
file statements consistent with the requirements of Subsections A and
B of this section within 14 days of their having accepted nomination for
such office.
D.
Statements filed pursuant to this section shall be maintained by the
Ethics Commission as public records available for public inspection and
copying.
E.
The statements submitted pursuant to this section shall be reviewed
by the Ethics Commission and if directed by the Commission, the
Town Attorney for compliance with the provisions of this section and
Town officials and public employees shall be notified of any omissions
or deficiencies. The Town Attorney shall refer evidence of any
noncompliance to the Commission for appropriate action.
F.
If a statement submitted pursuant to this section reveals an actual or
potential violation of any provision of this chapter, the Commission shall
notify the Town official or public employee. If the Town official or public
employee has not corrected the violation within 10 business days of
notification, the Commission shall, within 30 days thereafter, either:
Issue an exemption, modification or advisory opinion pursuant to
§ 13-10; or
(1)
(2) Initiate a complaint procedure pursuant to § 13-11.
G.
Any person who communicates with a Town official or employee with
intent to influence that person in the performance of his official duties
and who, in connection with such intent, is compensated, including
a prorated part of a salary or fee for services, at least $1,000 in
connection with this activity, or expends or reasonably expects to
expend in a given calendar year in excess of $100 on food,
entertainment or other gifts for such Town officials or public
employees, shall file a registration statement with the Ethics
Commission not later than February 15 of the calendar year or within
five business days after first making such communication.
A.
The registration statement shall include complete identification of the
registrant and of any other person on whose behalf the registrant acts.
B.
§ 13-8 ELECTIONS § 13-9
9:33
It shall also identify the subject matter on which the registrant proposes
to make such appearances.
Registrants under this section shall file a report, within 30 days after
the end of any calendar year during which they were registered,
disclosing the value of compensation received, and/or the date and
nature of food, entertainment or other gift provided to any Town official
or employee. Where a gift or series of gifts to a single Town Official or
public employee exceeds $100 in value, the official or employee shall
also be identified.
C.
Registration and reports filed pursuant to this section shall be
maintained by the Ethics Commission as public records available for
public inspection and copying.
D.
The provisions of this section do not apply to the following acts:
Professional services in drafting bills or in advising and rendering
opinions to clients as to the construction and effect of proposed
or pending Council actions when these services do not otherwise
constitute lobbying activities.
(1)
Appearances before the Council upon its specific invitation or
request, but only if the person engages in no further or other
activities in connection with the passage or defeat of Council
actions.
(2)
Appearances as part of the official duties of a duly elected or
appointed official or employee of the state or a political subdivision
of the state, or of the United States and not on behalf of any other
entity.
(3)
Actions of a publisher or working member of the press, radio, or
television in the ordinary course of business of disseminating news
or making editorial comment to the general public who does not,
however, engage in further or other lobbying that would directly
and specifically benefit the economic, business, or professional
interests of himself or his employer.
(4)
Appearances by an individual before the Council at the specific
invitation or request of a registered lobbyist, provided no other
lobbying act is undertaken, and provided the witness identifies
himself to the Council as testifying at the request of the lobbyist.
(5)
The representation of a bona fide religious organization solely for
the purpose of protecting the right of its own members to practice
the doctrine of the organization.
(6)
Appearances as part of the official duties of an officer, director,
member, or employee of an association engaged exclusively in
lobbying for counties and municipalities and not in behalf of any
other entity.
(7)
E.
§ 13-9 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 13-10
9:34
§ 13-10. Exemptions, modifications and advisory opinions.
The Ethics Commission may grant exemptions to the provisions of
§§ 13-7 and 13-8 of this chapter if it makes specific written findings that
the application of those provisions would:
(1) Constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy;
Significantly reduce the availability of qualified persons for public
service; and
(2)
(3) Not be required to preserve the purposes of this chapter.
A.
The decision of the Ethics Commission to grant an exemption or
modification hereunder shall be in writing and shall be maintained as a
public record available for public inspection and copying.
B.
Any person subject to this chapter may, upon written request, ask the
Ethics Commission for an advisory opinion concerning the meaning or
application of this chapter. Such opinion shall be issued as promptly
as practicable. Before any such opinion is made public, any material
which may identify a person who is the subject of the opinion shall
be deleted or redacted to the fullest extent possible, and the identity
of such person shall not be revealed unless the subject of the opinion
authorizes disclosure. Unless the Ethics Commission otherwise directs,
such person may rely upon the opinion of the Commission unless that
opinion is plainly inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
C.
§ 13-10 ELECTIONS § 13-10
9:35

ARTICLE IV
Complaints
§ 13-11. Complaints.
Receipt of complaint.
Any person may file under oath a written, signed complaint with
the Commission alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter.
If such a complaint is not under oath or is not signed, or does not
allege facts that would support a reasonable person in concluding
that a violation of this chapter may have occurred, the Commission
shall dismiss the complaint. The Commission shall inform the
complainant of its decision to dismiss the complaint within 120
days of receiving a complaint.
(1)
The Commission may issue a complaint on its own motion alleging
a violation of this chapter. The complaint must be investigated by
the Town Attorney upon request of the Commission before any
additional action is taken.
(2)
After the Commission completes its review of a complaint under
§ 13-11A(1), any complaint, unless dismissed under Subsection
A(1) above, shall be provided by the Commission to the person
who is under investigation or subject of the complaint ("the
respondent").
(3)
An independent attorney, referred to herein as Ethics Counsel,
may be appointed by the Commission to advise the Commission
at any stage of the complaint, investigation and hearing process.
Ethics Counsel must be separate from the attorney investigating
and presenting a case before the Commission.
(4)
A.
Content. The complaint shall:
Identify the person or persons who allegedly committed the
violation;
(1)
Provide a statement of the facts on which the complaint is based
and that, if proven true, would constitute a violation of the
provisions of this chapter;
(2)
To the extent possible, identify the ethics rule or rules allegedly
violated; and
(3)
Identify sources of evidence, if any, that the complainant
recommends should be considered by the Ethics Commission.
(4)
B.
Confidentiality.
Once a complaint that is signed under oath alleging a violation of
this chapter is filed with the Commission, the complaint, including
the identity of the complainant and the respondent, and all
(1)
C.
§ 13-11 ELECTIONS § 13-11
9:37
proceedings, meetings and activities of the Ethics Commission and
its agents or employees relating thereto are confidential and may
not be disclosed, unless or until:
(a) The Ethics Commission makes a final determination; or
The respondent agrees in writing to the release of the
confidential information.
(b)
At the request of the respondent at any time, the Ethics
Commission shall disclose the identity of the complainant to the
respondent.
(2)
Procedure.
Any complaint not summarily dismissed pursuant to Subsection
A(1) shall be referred to the office of the Town Attorney. Through
interaction with the complainant and respondent as necessary,
the attorney shall collect evidence relating to the allegations of
the complaint and refer that evidence to the Commission for
disposition.
When the subject of a complaint to the Ethics Commission
is a law enforcement officer but not the Chief of Police, the
Town Attorney shall refer the complaint to the Hampstead
Police Department for investigation and possible hearing to
be conducted in accordance with LEOBR. Without violating
the confidentiality provisions of LEOBR, the Hampstead Police
Department shall keep the Ethics Commission informed as
to the disposition of the complaint and the outcome of any
investigation or hearing.
(a)
(1)
Prior to referring evidence to the Commission, the Town Attorney
shall notify the complainant and respondent. If, within 15 days of
the notice, the respondent takes an action which may be available
to cure all alleged violations, the complaint shall be dismissed by a
signed order if the Commission finds such action is not contrary to
the purposes of this chapter and is consistent with applicable law.
(2)
Preliminary inquiry. If, upon review of the evidence collected by
the Town Attorney, which must include any facts or defenses raised
by the respondent after proper notice by the Town Attorney, the
Commission determines that the evidence does not merit further
proceedings, the complaint shall be dismissed by the Commission
in a signed order. An order of dismissal shall be sent to the
complainant and to the respondent forthwith.
(3)
D.
Hearing.
If the complaint is not dismissed pursuant to Subsection D(2) or
(3), the respondent shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing
before the Commission. The hearing shall be conducted within 60
(1)
E.
§ 13-11 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 13-11
9:38
days, or as soon thereafter as practical, following the preliminary
inquiry and a determination by the Commission that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this chapter has
occurred. The respondent and complainant will be notified in
writing at least 30 days prior to the hearing date. The preliminary
findings of the Commission will be forwarded to the respondent
and complainant at the same time as notice of the hearing. The
Commission may grant a postponement to either party upon good
cause shown.
At the hearing, the Town Attorney shall present to the Commission
all evidence available relating to the complaint. All witnesses shall
make their statements under oath. The respondent may be
represented by counsel or another advisor, and the proceeding
shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the
Administrative Procedure Act to the extent that Act is consistent
with this chapter. The respondent charged in the complaint has the
right to attend the hearing, the right to make a statement, the right
to be present and cross-examine witnesses. Ethics Counsel may
recommend to the Commission such disposition of the complaint
as appears appropriate. An audio or video recording of the hearing
shall be retained by the Commission.
(2)
After consideration of all the evidence, the Commission shall issue
a written decision, within 30 days, in which it shall make findings
of fact and conclusions of law with respect to each of the alleged
violations.
(3)
If the Commission concludes that the respondent has not violated
any of the provisions of this chapter, the Commission shall enter
an order dismissing the complaint and shall advise the complainant
and respondent.
(4)
If the Commission decides that the respondent has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter, the Commission may issue an order
of compliance to cease and desist from the violation or take other
enforcement action as authorized by this chapter.
(5)
If aggrieved by the final order of the Commission, the respondent
may request judicial review in accordance with the provisions of
the Maryland Administrative Procedure Act.
(6)
The final order of the Commission shall be stayed automatically
until the time for seeking judicial review has expired. If a timely
appeal for judicial review is filed, the final order shall be further
stayed until the final disposition of the matter by the Court.
(7)
The Commission may seek judicial relief as provided in § 13-12 of
this chapter.
(8)
If the Commission, in the course of considering a complaint, finds
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent
(9)
§ 13-11 ELECTIONS § 13-11
9:39
§ 13-12. Enforcement.
If the Ethics Commission determines that a violation has occurred, it shall
proceed with enforcement in compliance with the procedures established in
this chapter.
may have committed a criminal offense, the matter shall be
referred promptly to an appropriate prosecuting authority. The
Commission shall make available to the prosecuting authority all
pertinent evidence under its control.
Ex parte communications. Ex parte communications by or to members
of the Ethics Commission are prohibited by this chapter. All attorney
work product and attorney-client papers are confidential, and related
communications to a complaint are confidential as provided in
Subsection C herein.
F.
Duty to cooperate. All Town officials and employees shall cooperate
with the Ethics Commission and shall supply requested testimony or
evidence to assist the Commission in carrying out its charge.
G.
Notification. Copies of the findings and decision must be forwarded to
the complainant and the respondent. The findings and decision of the
Commission are subject to the confidentiality provisions of Subsection
C of this section.
H.
Similar charges. Except Under § 13-11A(1), if the complaint is
dismissed because the evidence failed to establish a violation of this
chapter, the Ethics Commission shall not entertain any other similar
complaint against the respondent based on substantially the same
evidence.
I.
A letter of notification shall be the appropriate sanction when the
violation is clearly unintentional or when the official's or employee's
conduct complained of was made in reliance on written opinion of
the Town Attorney. A letter of notification shall advise the official or
employee to whom it is directed of any steps to be taken to avoid future
violations. The Commission may direct a letter of notification to any
official or employee covered by this chapter.
A.
A letter of admonition shall be the appropriate sanction in those cases
in which the Commission finds that the violation is minor and/or may
have been unintentional, but calls for a more substantial response than
a letter of notification. The Commission may admonish any official or
employee covered by this chapter.
B.
A reprimand shall be the appropriate sanction when the Commission
finds that a violation has been committed intentionally or through
disregard of this chapter. The Commission may reprimand any Town
official or public employee covered by this chapter. A reprimand
directed to an appointed or elected Town official shall also be sent to
the Town Council. A reprimand directed to an employee shall be sent
C.
§ 13-11 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 13-12
9:40
§ 13-13. Disqualification from contracting.
to the Town Manager or Chief of Police as appropriate and included in
said employee's personnel file.
A recommendation of removal or suspension from office or a letter of
censure shall be the appropriate sanction when the Commission finds
that a serious or repeated violation of this chapter has been committed
intentionally or through culpable disregard of this chapter.
A recommendation of removal or suspension from office for an
appointed official shall be transmitted to the Mayor and Town
Council. The final authority to carry out such recommendations to
remove from office or suspend from office and the length of the
suspension shall be with the Mayor and Town Council.
(1)
A recommendation of suspension of Town employees shall be
directed from the Commission to the Town Manager or Chief of
Police as appropriate. In such cases the final authority to carry
out such recommendations to suspend from employment and the
length of suspension shall be with the Town Manager or Chief of
Police, as appropriate.
(2)
A letter of censure shall be the appropriate sanction when the
Commission finds that a serious or repeated violation of this
chapter has been committed intentionally or through culpable
disregard of this chapter by an elected official.
(3)
A letter of censure directed to an elected official shall be
transmitted to the Town Manager, published in a local newspaper
of the largest general circulation and shall be sent to the Mayor
and Town Council.
(4)
D.
The Ethics Commission may issue a cease-and-desist order against
any person found to be in violation of this chapter and may seek
enforcement of such order in the Circuit Court for Carroll County.
E.
Any person who has been found by the Ethics Commission to have
intentionally or knowingly violated any provision of this chapter may be
prohibited by the Town Council from entering into any contract with the
Town for a period of two years.
A.
It is a violation of this chapter:
For a person debarred from entering into a contract with the Town
to enter or attempt to enter into a contract with the Town during
the period of disqualification from contracting; or
(1)
For a Town official or employee to knowingly assist in a violation of
Subsection B(1) of this section.
(2)
B.
§ 13-12 ELECTIONS § 13-13
9:41
§ 13-14. Records.
All statements filed pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in Town
Hall and shall be made available during normal business hours for
examination by the public, subject to the fees and administrative
procedures as the Town Council may establish and be amended from time
to time. The forms shall be retained for four years from the date of receipt.
Any person examining or copying this statement shall be required to record
his name, home address and the name of the person whose disclosure
statement was examined or copied.
§ 13-15. Exceptions.
If any disqualification pursuant to § 13-7 leaves anybody with less than
a quorum capable of acting, or if the disqualified official or employee
is required by law to act or is the only person authorized to act, the
disqualified person shall disclose the nature and the circumstances of the
conflict of interest and may participate or act.
Nothing in this section prohibits any person from receiving
a Town service or benefit, or from using a Town facility,
according to the same terms generally available to the public.
(a)
A business entity may be disqualified from contracting with the
Town based on the conduct of the entity's employee or agent,
if the conduct occurred within the scope of employment or
agency with the entity.
(b)
Violation of any provision of § 13-13 of this chapter shall be a municipal
infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
C.
§ 13-13 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 13-15
9:42
Chapter 25
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development impact fees — See Ch. 134. Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 25-1. Re-creation; territorial jurisdiction. [Amended 2-16-1993 by
Ord. No. 231]
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Hampstead,
hereinafter referred to as the "Commission," is hereby re-created. Its
territorial jurisdiction shall extend over the incorporated area of the Town
of Hampstead.
§ 25-2. Powers and authority. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 236]
The powers and authority of said Commission shall be in accordance with
those set forth in Article 66B of the Maryland Code as now in force or
hereafter amended or recodified from time to time.
§ 25-3. Membership; residency requirements. [Amended 2-16-1993
by Ord. No. 231; 10-10-1995 by Ord. No. 278]
The Commission shall consist of five members, each to serve for five years
or until his successor takes office, except that the terms of members first
appointed shall be staggered so that the first member appointed serves
for one year, the second member appointed serves for two years, the third
member appointed serves for three years, the fourth member appointed
serves for four years and the fifth member appointed serves for five years.
All members of the Commission shall reside within the corporate limits of
the Town of Hampstead.
§ 25-4. Compensation; removal; reappointment.
All members of the Commission shall serve with such compensation as the
Mayor and Council deem appropriate and may be removed by the Mayor
and Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. All
members shall be eligible for reappointment.
Chapter 28
(RESERVED)
Chapter 30
§ 13-15 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION § 25-4
25:43
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT OF
TOWN CODE
§ 25-4 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 25-4
30:44
ARTICLE I
Introduction and Process
§ 30-1. Introduction.
§ 30-2. Overview of process.
It is the purpose and intent of the Town Council to establish
administrative procedures for obtaining prompt compliance in the
correction of both major and minor violations of the Hampstead Town
Code.
A.
The procedures established in and through this chapter may cross
reference, consolidate or incorporate by reference, as applicable,
enforcement methods established elsewhere in the Town Code, in order
to create a uniform process for prompt Code compliance,
administrative due process and effective enforcement.
B.
The Town Manager and the Town Attorney are each authorized to
utilize and initiate the procedures established in this chapter and in
the Town Code. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or
constrain in any way the powers of the Hampstead Chief of Police or
any sworn law enforcement officer to enforce any criminal violations of
local, county or state law.
C.
The procedures in this chapter may be used as a supplement to criminal
or judicial enforcement action, or both, or in lieu thereof. Selection
of one method shall not preclude the use of any other method or
combination of methods when appropriate.
D.
Violations of the Town Code including those affecting uses of or
conditions upon real property may be corrected through the issuance
of a notice of violation to the responsible party. The notice shall specify
any required actions necessary to come into compliance with the Town
Code. The responsible party will be allowed a reasonable period of
time in which to correct the violation. In violations pertaining to real
property, the owner(s) of the property shall be considered the
responsible party. The time to respond is normally determined by the
chapter of the Town Code that governs the violation. Absent a specific
statutory time period, the time to respond shall not be less than 10
calendar days. Failure to comply within the time prescribed can result
in the issuance of a municipal citation in accordance with the Town
Code or any other method or combination of methods deemed
appropriate. The Town Manager and Town Attorney shall have the
discretionary authority to extend the time to respond or the time to
correct a violation for good cause.
A.
A municipal citation is a notice to the responsible party which mandates
the corrective action and establishes a fine as a penalty for the prior
noncompliance of the notice of violation. Subsequent citations may be
issued with increased penalty. Corrective action that may be required
B.
§ 30-1 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR § 30-2
30:45
of a responsible party includes, but is not limited to, the removal of
encroachments into public property, the mitigation or restoration of
land or adjoining property, the removal or modification of blockages
of ways and the removal of structures to rectify any code violation
or the abatement of any hazardous condition. Corrective action also
may include any other process necessary for abatement of a violation.
In addition, the responsible party can be made subject to an order of
abatement through which the corrective work will be undertaken by the
Town and the cost will be imposed as a lien against the property if the
responsible party fails to respond and fully correct the violation.
Each day a violation exists is a continuing and additional violation, and
all remedies, penalties and assessments are cumulative.
C.
In addition to a notice of violation, a cease-and-desist order can be
issued to one or more responsible parties or other persons who perform
work in violation of a permit or without a required permit. Violation
of the cease-and-desist order is a separate misdemeanor. A responsible
party or any person on scene actively conducting the violation under
the direction of a responsible party is subject to arrest without a
warrant for continuing work in violation of the cease-and-desist order,
as well as for the actions constituting the original violation. A
responsible party can be required to obtain necessary permits, restore
the property, or both, and correct or mitigate the consequences of
the violation. Municipal citations can also be issued assessing
administrative fines for both the creation of and the continuance of the
violation.
D.
If the responsible party fails or refuses to correct the violation,
proceedings may be undertaken to abate any existing or resulting
nuisance. Abatement orders authorize a municipal employee or
authorized private contractor to enter upon property and correct the
violation or condition, or the removal of encroachment upon public
property. Enforcement costs may be imposed against the responsible
party and noncomplying property.
E.
During the inspection and enforcement process, cost recovery can be
imposed for the cost of reinspection and the costs of Town services
to abate a violation. These costs may be recorded as a lien against
the property following the procedures under this chapter or the waiver
thereof by the responsible party.
F.
Various steps or procedures under this chapter may require notice
and a hearing. When appropriate, notice and hearing requirements for
separate administrative actions may be consolidated.
G.
§ 30-2 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 30-2
30:46
ARTICLE II
Administrative Warrants
§ 30-3. Right of entry for inspections.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any municipal
ordinance or other applicable statute or regulations, or whenever there
is reasonable cause to believe there exists a violation in any building
or upon any premises or property within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Hampstead, any authorized official of the Town may, upon presentation
of proper credentials, enter such building, premises or property at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed
upon him or her by municipal ordinance or other applicable statute
or regulations. Except in emergency situations or when consent of the
owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained,
the authorized official of the Town shall give the owner and/or
occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, at least 24
hours' written notice of the Town official's intention to inspect.
A.
The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the
property owner and/or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that
in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon
issuance of an administrative warrant by the Circuit Court of Carroll
County. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after
such request has been made, the Town Manager and/or Town Attorney
are hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent
jurisdiction in obtaining an inspection warrant for such entry. It is
a misdemeanor to willfully refuse access after an inspection warrant
has been duly issued. The above twenty-four-hour notice requirement
shall not apply to any inspection where the authorized official conducts
the observations and inspection while within the public right-of-way or
within the unobstructed walkway between such right-of-way and the
front entry of any residence.
B.
§ 30-3 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR § 30-3
30:47

ARTICLE III
Notice
§ 30-4. Service of notices.
Except as provided herein, whenever a notice is required to be given
under the Town Code for the enforcement of a proposed order or
for hearing or appeals purposes, the notice shall be served by any
of the following methods, unless different provisions are otherwise
specifically stated to apply:
(1) Personal service upon the responsible party; or
Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
Simultaneously, a duplicate notice may be sent by regular mail,
postage prepaid. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned
unsigned, service shall be deemed effective pursuant to service of
the duplicate notice by regular mail; provided, that the duplicate
notice sent by regular mail is not returned as undeliverable. Notice
shall be mailed to the last address shown on the county Tax
Assessor's records if the notice concerns real property, and to the
last known address of any other party to the proceeding shown in
official records of the Town of Hampstead;
(2)
(3) Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property.
A.
Posting a notice or duplicate service by regular mail in the manner
described above shall be deemed effective on the third day after mailing
or posting; service by certified mail shall be effective as of the date of
signed receipt.
B.
The service of an initial notice of violation may also be sent by regular
mail. Service of a notice of violation by regular mail is effective on the
third day after mailing.
C.
Service of notice through which a lien will be placed upon real property
will be in accordance with applicable regulations.
D.
The failure of any party or person with an interest in the property
or the proceeding to receive any notice which has been duly sent or
posted in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any
proceedings taken under this Code.
E.
§ 30-4 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR § 30-4
30:49

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 30-5. Nonissuance of permits.
After a notice of violation has been recorded against the property pursuant
to the Town Code, Town manager shall withhold the issuance of any
municipal permits as allowed by law upon that property, save for those
permits necessary to correct the violation(s). A party whose permits are
to be withheld shall be given notice as part of the administrative process
outlined in this chapter.
§ 30-6. Cease-and-desist orders.
§ 30-7. Municipal citations.
The Town Manager and/or Town Attorney are authorized to issue
personally, or to serve in accordance with the Hampstead Code, a
written cease-and-desist order upon any person violating a provision
of the Town Code through which work is being performed without a
permit, if required, or in violation of an issued permit.
A.
It is unlawful for any responsible party or any other person to whom a
cease-and-desist order has been personally issued or served to continue
to perform work or use property in violation of the terms of that order.
B.
Prosecution under this section does not bar prosecution or
administrative enforcement, or both, of the previous underlying
violations for any or all days the violation had been in existence, or for
the continuance of the underlying violation.
C.
The Town Manager and Town Attorney may initiate other administrative
enforcement and compliance methods in accordance with this chapter.
D.
A municipal citation can be issued to a responsible party for violation of
a regulatory provision of the Town Code or other law, statute, ordinance
or regulation where the Town of Hampstead has delegated authority,
and the responsible party be required to pay an administrative fine.
A.
A municipal citation may be issued in lieu of the initiation of a criminal
action for the same violation. However, in particularly egregious cases,
criminal enforcement may be appropriate for continuing violations if
the administrative citation is ignored by the responsible party.
B.
The amount of a municipal citation that may be imposed for each
separate violation of the same code section is specified by specific
chapters of the Town Code. Where a specific statutory limit is not
imposed, the administrative fine imposed by a municipal citation shall
not exceed $500 per violation.
C.
Issuance of a municipal citation and payment of the fine does not
excuse compliance and corrective action regarding the violations.
D.
§ 30-5 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR § 30-7
30:51
Although continuing violations of the municipal code are separate
offenses, the responsible party shall be allowed a reasonable time in
which to correct the violation before a second or subsequent municipal
citation may be issued except as otherwise authorized by the Town
Code.
The municipal citation shall contain the information as required by
Maryland State law.
E.
Municipal citations may be appealed under the rules of Circuit Court of
Carroll County.
F.
§ 30-7 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 30-7
30:52
ARTICLE V
Cost Recovery
§ 30-8. Recovery of costs.
Costs and penalties that may be recovered and enforced against responsible
parties under this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following:
§ 30-9. Confirmation of costs.
Following the conclusion of the Town's remediation, abatement or
corrective actions, the Town Manager shall notify the property owner and
appropriate responsible parties of a proposed assessment of costs against
each individually and as a lien or assessment against the real property that
was the subject of abatement or corrective action.
§ 30-10. Collection of costs.
The Town's direct cost for abatement of nuisances, together with
applicable overhead;
A.
Costs of salary and applicable overhead of those Town employees and
contract personnel involved in the investigation, enforcement and
remediation or abatement of a nuisance;
B.
C. Town costs for equipment use or rental;
D. Attorney's fees;
E. Court costs and witness fees;
F. Costs of engineering and other technical services and studies;
Administrative fines and civil penalties imposed pursuant to this
chapter; and
G.
Any other fee, cost, or expense reasonably and rationally related to the
Town's enforcement efforts to abate a nuisance or correct a violation of
this Code or applicable state law.
H.
The Town Manager or Town Attorney, or both as appropriate, may
enforce the confirmation of costs as follows:
(1) As a personal obligation against a responsible party; and
Either:
As a recorded lien with the priority of a judgment lien in
the real property records of Carroll County against any real
property which was the subject of abatement or corrective
action; or
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 30-8 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR § 30-10
30:53
§ 30-11. Satisfaction of lien or obligation.
Upon payment in full by one or more responsible parties for all costs
of enforcement and the satisfactory completion of all corrective action
required, the Town Manager shall promptly issue to all responsible parties
a notice of compliance. The notice of compliance will be signed and identify
the affected real property by address and be recorded in the real property
records of the county by the Town Manager if a lien was recorded.
As an assessment against the property which was subject to
abatement or corrective action, to be collected in the same
manner as municipal taxes.
(b)
The Town Manager or Town Attorney are authorized to obtain judicial
enforcement for the foreclosure of the lien, where appropriate.
B.
§ 30-10 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 30-11
30:54
Chapter 32
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
§ 32-1. Public records; where available; custodian.
All records of the Mayor and Council as described in Subtitle 6 of the State
Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland as now in force and
as hereafter amended and recodified, except those specifically exempted
therein, are hereby declared to be public records and are available in the
office of the Town of Hampstead, and the Clerk or anyone designated by the
Clerk is and shall be the official custodian of such public records.
§ 32-2. Hours for inspection of records.
Such public records are available for inspection during regular office hours.
§ 32-3. Costs.
Such public records, specifically requested, are available to those of interest
at a cost as set by the Clerk from time to time.
§ 32-4. Regulations.
The Town Clerk is authorized, subject to applicable provisions of state law,
to adopt reasonable rules or regulations governing the timely production
and inspection of public records. If adopted, a copy of such rules or
regulations shall be available without charge to anyone requesting the
same.
Chapter 35
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 44
(RESERVED)
Chapter 47
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 73.
Obstruction to vision of drivers — See Ch.
127, § 127-12.
Traffic visibility across corner lots — See Ch.
135, § 135-22.
§ 30-11 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 32-4
32:55
§ 47-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OCCUPANT — Any person in possession or occupancy of any property,
including tenants under any form of lease.
OWNER — A person with any ownership interest in property other than
a remainder interest. "Owner" includes the owner of a condominium unit
with respect to common elements and includes any type of homeowner's
association with respect to space under its control.
PERSON — Any adult individual or any corporation, partnership, joint
venture or other entity.
§ 47-2. Declaration of nuisance.
The presence of weeds, grass or plants in the Town of Hampstead, other
than trees, flowers, ornamental shrubs and bushes and agricultural plants,
in excess of 12 inches in height is hereby found and declared to be a
nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and general welfare
of the citizens of the Town.
§ 47-3. Height restrictions.
No person who is the owner or occupant of any property within the
corporate limits shall permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees,
flowers, ornamental shrubs and bushes and agricultural plants, to grow to
or remain on such property in excess of 12 inches height.
§ 47-4. Trimming required at certain times.
Every such owner and occupant shall cause such weeds, grass and plants
to be trimmed or cut at least twice a year, once on or before June 15 and
once on or before August 15, and at such other times as may be necessary
in order to comply at all times with the provisions of § 47-3.
§ 47-5. Notice of violation; abatement by Town; costs; civil suit.
When any condition exists on any such property which violates § 47-3,
it shall be lawful for the Town Manager or such other person as may be
designated by the Mayor and Council to give written notice to comply
with said section within seven days of the date of such notice. Such
notice may be delivered personally to the owner and/or the occupant
or sent by registered or certified mail, and if mailed to any owner,
the owner's address as shown on the tax rolls shall be deemed to be
correct. Any postal receipt for the mailing of such notice shall create
a prima facie presumption that the notice was received in due course.
[Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 238]
A.
§ 32-4 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 47-5
47:56
§ 47-6. Obligations of owner and occupant.
Where property is not occupied solely by the owner, the obligations under
this chapter are imposed jointly and severally against the owner and the
occupant. Failure of either to comply with this chapter shall not relieve
the other of compliance regardless of any agreement between them to the
contrary. If there is more than one owner or more than one occupant, each
owner and each occupant is jointly and severally subject to the terms of this
chapter.
§ 47-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
231; 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 238; 11-11-2003 by Ord. No. 380]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
municipal infraction and shall be subject to a fine of not to exceed $100. The
fines are in addition to liability for cost under § 47-5 hereof.
Chapter 49
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 132. Zoning — See Ch. 135.
If such notice is given and neither the owner nor the occupant complies
therewith, the Town may immediately cause such weeds, grass and
plants to be cut, trimmed, burned or otherwise removed. Any burning
hereunder shall be under the immediate supervision and control of
the Hampstead Volunteer Fire Company. Once written notice has been
provided of a violation of this chapter, any further violations on the
property during the same growing season shall be subject to immediate
enforcement without the written notice required in § 47-5A. [Amended
11-11-2003 by Ord. No. 380]
B.
If the Town proceeds to act under Subsections A and B of this section,
the general administrative expense of inspection, issuing notice and
performing work under Subsection B will require a charge of $50 per
property which is hereby declared and established to be a cost of such
work. Said sum, together with any additional costs actually incurred
in excess thereof, as certified by the Town Manager, shall constitute a
lien against the property and may be collected in the same manner as
Town taxes are collected. In addition, the Town Attorney is authorized
to institute a civil suit against the owner and/or occupant for recovery
of such costs. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 238]
C.
§ 47-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 49-1
47:57
§ 49-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidelines regarding the National
Flood Insurance Program, adopting by reference revised Flood Insurance
Study and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and floodplain management
regulations.
§ 49-2. Basis for establishing areas for floodplain management.
Those public records entitled "Flood Insurance Study for Carroll County,
Maryland and Incorporated Areas" with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, copies of
which shall be kept on file in the Town office of the Town of Hampstead,
are hereby adopted by reference, as the basis for establishing the special
flood hazard areas for floodplain management in the Town of Hampstead.
The special flood hazard areas documented in the Flood Insurance Study
and Flood Insurance Rate Maps are the minimum area of applicability of the
floodplain management regulations and may be supplemented by studies for
other areas as allowed in the regulations.
§ 49-3. Basis for implementing floodplain management.
That public record designated as the floodplain management regulations
for Carroll County known as Chapter 153, Floodplain Management, of
the Carroll County Code and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions,
copies of which shall be kept on file in the Town office of the Town of
Hampstead, is hereby adopted as the legal basis for implementing
floodplain management in the Town of Hampstead.
§ 49-4. Delegation of floodplain management; enforcement;
penalties.
Chapter 58
The Town of Hampstead delegates the responsibility of floodplain
management to Carroll County as provided in Resolution No. 2015-03.
Per Section 44 CFR Part 59.22(b), the Town Manager is designated
as the official responsible for the implementation of floodplain
management for the Town of Hampstead and will serve as the
community point of contact on National Flood Insurance Program
issues for County, State and Federal officials.
A.
Carroll County shall have the right and authority to fully enforce the
provisions of this chapter within the corporate limits of the Town of
Hampstead.
B.
Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of the Floodplain Management Ordinance shall be subject
to the penalties as outlined within Chapter 153 of the Carroll County
Code.
C.
§ 49-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 49-4
58:58
(RESERVED)
Chapter 65
FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 65-1. Prohibited acts; exceptions. [Amended 11-29-1993 by Ord.
No. 257]
§ 65-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
231; 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 239]
Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of the aforegoing section
shall be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500.
A person may not discharge or shoot off any firearm, rifle, shotgun,
revolver, pistol, air gun, air rifle, bow and arrow, cross-bow or any
similar mechanism that is designed to expel a projectile by the action
of any explosive, gas, compressed air, spring or elastic within the
corporate limits of the Town of Hampstead whether such mechanism is
loaded with blank or live cartridges or projectiles of any kind.
A.
Subsection A above does not apply to:
The discharge of any mechanism on any target, trap or skeet range
or shooting area which is a permitted use or approved conditional
use in the zoning district in which it is located and for which a
site plan has been approved by the Town of Hampstead Planning
Commission.5
(1)
The discharge of any such mechanism where necessary to protect
life or property or to kill any dangerous animal.
(2)
Any duly authorized police officer acting in the proper performance
of his official duties.
(3)
The discharge of blank cartridges in theatrical performances or
sporting events.
(4)
(5) The firing of ceremonial salutes.
B.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Zoning.
§ 49-4 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES § 65-2
65:59
Chapter 68
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 65.
Loitering — See Ch. 90.
Nuisances — See Ch. 95.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 100.
Public gatherings — See Ch. 103.
§ 68-1. Provisions adopted by reference.
The Town adopts and incorporates by reference the provisions of Annotated
Code of Maryland, Environment Article, § 3-401, and the regulations
promulgated to implement that provisions which are codified in Title 26 of
the Code of Maryland Regulations, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 68-2. Violations and penalties.
In addition to all other remedies provided by law, any violation of this
chapter shall be punished as a municipal infraction. The penalty for
violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense. Each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, the Town
may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any violation
of this chapter.
Chapter 70
PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES
§ 70-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide Town law enforcement personnel
with the authority to enforce prohibitions on the manufacture, distribution,
sale, possession or use of certain substances, to protect the health, safety
and well-being of the citizens of the Town.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANNABIMIMETIC AGENT — Any substance, of whatever name called,
that is a cannabinoid receptor Type 1 (CB1, receptor) agonist as
demonstrated by binding studies and functional assays within the structural
classes identified below:
§ 65-2 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 70-2
68:60
HALLUCINOGENIC CHEMICAL SUBSTANCE — Any product or substance,
of whatever name called, that contains one or more of the following
chemical compounds:
2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl) phenol with substitution of the 5-position of the
phenolic ring by alkyl or alkenyl, whether or not substituted on the
cyclohexyl ring to any extent.
A.
3-(1-naphthoyl) indole or 3-(1-naphthyl) indole by substitution at the
nitrogen atom of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted
on the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the
naphthoyl or naphthyl ring to any extent.
B.
3-(1-naphthoyl) pyrrole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the
pyrrole ring, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any
extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthoyl ring to any extent.
C.
1-(1-naphthylmethyl) indene by substitution of the 3-position of the
indene ring, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any
extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent.
D.
3-phenylacetylindole or 3-benzoylindole by substitution at the nitrogen
atom of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted in the indole
ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the phenyl ring to any
extent.
E.
5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol
(CP-47,497).
A.
5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol
(cannabicyclohexanol or CP-44,497 C8-homolog).
B.
C. 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-018 and AM678).
D. 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-073).
E. 1-hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-019).
F. 1-[2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl]-3-(1-napthoyl) indole (JWH-200).
G. 1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacety) indole (JWH-250).
H. 1-pentyl-3-[1-(4-methoxynaphthoy) indole (JWH-081).
I. 1-pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-122).
J. 1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-398).
K. 1-(5-fluoropentyl)-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (AM2201).
L. 1-(5-fluoropentyl)-3-(2-iodobenzoyl) indole (AM694).
M. 1-pentyl-3-[(4-methoxy)-benzoyl] indole (SR-19 and RCS-4).
N. 1-cyclohexylethyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole (SR-18 and RCS-8).
§ 70-2 NOISE § 70-2
68:61
SALVIA — A material, compound, mixture or preparation in any form that
contains the component salvinorin A, and is known variously as "Salvia,"
"Salvia divinorum," "Ska Pastora," "Diviner's Mint," "SallyD," "Lady Salvia"
or any other name.
SALVIA PARAPHERNALIA — Equipment, a product, or material that is
used, intended for use, or designed for use, in: i) planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging
repackaging, storing, containing, or concealing salvia; or ii) injecting,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing salvia into the human body, as
defined and set forth in § 5-101 of the Criminal Law Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and as from time to time amended pursuant to the
factors set forth in § 5-619 of said Criminal Law Article.
SYNTHETIC DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — Equipment that is used, intended
for use, or is designed for use in: i) manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, or concealing a cannabimimetic agent or
hallucinogenic chemical substance; or ii) injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing a cannabimimetic agent or hallucinogenic chemical
substance into the human body as defined and set forth in § 5-101 of the
Criminal Law Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and as from time
to time amended pursuant to the factors set forth in § 5-619 of said Criminal
Law Article.
§ 70-3. Prohibited acts.
O. 1-pentyl-3-(2-chlorophenylacetyl) indole (JWH-203).
A. It shall be unlawful to possess, or administer to another, salvia.
B. It shall be unlawful to manufacture, distribute, or dispense salvia.
It shall be unlawful to distribute or attempt to distribute a
noncontrolled substance: i) that the person represents is salvia; ii)
that the person intends for use or distribution as salvia; or iii) under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that the
noncontrolled substance will be used or distributed for use as salvia.
C.
It shall be unlawful to possess or purchase a noncontrolled substance
that the person reasonably believes is salvia.
D.
It shall be unlawful to use, or possess with intent to use, salvia
paraphernalia.
E.
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale, deliver, sell or distribute salvia
paraphernalia.
F.
It shall be unlawful to own, rent or otherwise utilize a store, dwelling,
building or other facility for: i) the purpose of administering, selling,
displaying, distributing, possessing, or dispensing salvia; or ii)
G.
§ 70-2 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 70-3
68:62
manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, storing or concealing salvia
paraphernalia.
It shall be unlawful to possess, or administer to another, a
cannabimimetic agent.
H.
It shall be unlawful to manufacture, distribute, or dispense a
cannabimimetic agent.
I.
It shall be unlawful to distribute or attempt to distribute a
noncontrolled substance: i) that the person represents is a
cannabimimetic agent; ii) that the person intends for use or distribution
as a cannabimimetic agent; or iii) under circumstances where one
reasonably should know that the noncontrolled substance will be used
or distributed for use as a cannabimimetic agent.
J.
It shall be unlawful to possess or purchase a noncontrolled substance
that the person reasonably believes is a cannabimimetic agent.
K.
It shall be unlawful to possess, or administer to another, a
hallucinogenic chemical substance.
L.
It shall be unlawful to manufacture, distribute, or dispense a
hallucinogenic chemical substance.
M.
It shall be unlawful to distribute or attempt to distribute a
noncontrolled substance: i) that the person represents is a
hallucinogenic chemical substance; ii) that the person intends for use
or distribution as a hallucinogenic chemical substance; or iii) under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that the
noncontrolled substance will be used or distributed for use as a
hallucinogenic substance.
N.
It shall be unlawful to possess or purchase a noncontrolled substance
that the person reasonably believes is a hallucinogenic chemical
substance.
O.
It shall be unlawful to use, or possess with intent to use, synthetic drug
paraphernalia.
P.
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale, deliver, sell or distribute synthetic
drug paraphernalia.
Q.
It shall be unlawful to own, rent or otherwise utilize a store, dwelling,
building or other facility for: i) the purpose of administering, selling,
displaying, distributing, possessing, or dispensing a cannabimimetic
agent or a hallucinogenic chemical substance; or ii) manufacturing,
distributing, dispensing, storing or concealing synthetic drug
paraphernalia.
R.
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale, deliver, sell, or distribute any
product that contains a synthetic drug or is chemically enhanced, by
S.
§ 70-3 NOISE § 70-3
68:63
§ 70-4. Violations and penalties.
A person who is convicted of any prohibited act under this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to imprisonment for up to six
months or fined up to $1,000, or both.
§ 70-5. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
§ 70-6. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portion of this chapter, it being the intent of the Town
that this chapter shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof.
§ 70-7. Section headings; chapter headings; titles.
Section headings, chapter headings, titles, etc., are for the purpose of
description or ease of use and do not form a part of the text of this chapter
or any code or text adopted hereby.
§ 70-8. Interpretation.
In interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
whatever name called, without having appended thereto a list of
ingredients and chemical compounds.
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale, deliver, sell, or distribute any
product which is promoted or otherwise marketed to produce physical
and/or psychological effects.
T.
Any patient lawfully prescribed medical marijuana for treatment
purposes by a certified and registered physician, as regulated by
Maryland State House Bill 881.
A.
Any patient lawfully prescribed cannabinoid receptors for treatment
purposes by a certified and registered physician.
B.
Any patient lawfully participating in a registered clinical trial for
medical marijuana or cannibinoid receptors as regulated by a fully
licensed and certified clinical provider or accredited research entity.
C.
Any person or business engaged in legal activities for which they are
fully licensed or otherwise permitted by legislation enforceable within
the Town.
D.
§ 70-3 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 70-8
68:64
safety, and general welfare. This chapter shall be construed broadly in favor
of the Town of Hampstead to promote the purpose for which it is adopted.
§ 70-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
Chapter 73
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 47.
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Nuisances — See Ch. 95.
§ 73-1. Purpose and authority.
§ 73-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
Public provisions. This chapter is not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or
other provision of law except as provided in these regulations. Where
any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provision
which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control.
A.
Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction,
provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement
or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, or private agreement
impose duties and obligations more restrictive than these regulations,
and the private provisions are not inconsistent with these regulations,
then the private provisions shall be operative and supplemental.
B.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the
public health, safety and the general welfare by establishing
requirements and procedures relating to the collection, recycling and
disposal of solid waste in the Town of Hampstead.
A.
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Article 23A of the Annotated
Code of Maryland and the Town Charter authorize the Town to enact
ordinances for the protection and promotion of public safety, health,
morals and welfare.
B.
§ 70-8 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 73-2
73:65
BULK TRASH — Large items of refuse, including but not limited to
appliances, furniture, large auto parts, branches and stumps, construction
and remodeling waste which cannot be handled by normal municipal waste
processing, collection or disposal methods.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONDOMINIUM — A multi-unit structure with ownership in common, such
as an apartment house.
CONTAINER — A portable device in which solid waste is held for storage or
transportation.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in such a manner that the solid
waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted
into the air or is discharged to the waters.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, life care
communities, care homes and schools.
MULTIFAMILY UNITS — A building containing two or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting
from residential and municipal activities.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS — Units that normally have more than 96
gallons of refuse per week.
POLLUTION — The contamination of air, water, land or other natural
resources which will create or is likely to create a public nuisance or to
render such air, water, land or other natural resources harmful, detrimental
to public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, municipal, commercial,
industrial, agriculture, recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses or to
livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other life.
PROCESSING — Technology used for the purpose of reducing volume or
bulk of municipal or residual waste or technology used to convert part or
all of the waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include but
are not limited to transfer facilities, composting facilities, incinerators and
resource recovery facilities.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be
disposed of or processed as municipal waste.
REFUSE — All materials which are discarded as useless. Such materials
include but are not limited to cardboard, paper, bottles, cans, clothing,
plastic containers, gutter and down spouting, lumber scraps, paint cans,
screens and storm windows, rug scraps, newspapers, telephone books and
§ 73-2 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 73-2
73:66
magazines which can be handled by normal municipal waste processing,
collecting or disposal methods.
RESIDENTIAL UNITS — Single-family detached, single-family
semidetached and single-family attached residential housing units and
apartments, including garden apartments and condominiums, that have no
more than 96 gallons of refuse per week, per unit.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including
but not limited to solid, semisolid, liquid and contained gaseous materials
resulting from municipal, industrial, commercial, agriculture and
residential units.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The entire process or a part thereof of
storage, collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of
solid wastes by a person engaging in the process.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STORAGE — The containment of waste on a temporary basis which does not
constitute disposal of the waste.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Manager of the Town of Hampstead,
Maryland.
UNIT — As defined in the Hampstead Code for the purpose of water billing.
6
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed of.
The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, hedge clippings, tree branches smaller
than four feet in length and less than two inches in diameter, leaves and
other waste as may be generated from a residential gardening operation.
§ 73-3. Administration.
This chapter shall be administered by the Town Manager. The Town
Manager, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Town Council, may
establish regulations regarding the collection and disposal of solid waste.
These regulations may include, among other subjects, the days, hours and
routes for the collection of solid waste; the specifications for solid waste and
recycling containers and the times and manner in which they shall be set
out for pickup of the contents thereof by the collectors and removal of such
containers after they have been emptied; preventing the mixture of certain
types of solid waste in any one container; and limiting the amount of solid
waste or the number of containers that may be set out for any one premises
at any one time. Copies of any such regulations shall be maintained in the
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 132, Water.
§ 73-2 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 73-3
73:67
Town Office and shall be available for inspection during regular business
hours.
§ 73-4. Containers. [Amended 6-7-2005 by Ord. No. 416]
Each owner, occupant or other responsible person using or occupying any
building or other premises within this municipality where refuse
accumulates or is likely to accumulate shall provide and keep covered an
adequate number of refuse containers. These refuse containers shall be
strong, durable and rodent- and insectproof. They shall each have a capacity
of not less than 20 nor more than 32 gallons, except that this maximum
capacity and weight shall not apply to the larger containers (toters) which
are handled mechanically. Furthermore, each unit shall not put out for
pickup, at any one time, more than 96 gallons of refuse. The weight of the
refuse container and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. If the amount
of refuse exceeds the ninety-six-gallon limit for any single unit, it shall be
the responsibility of the owner or occupant to contract to have the refuse
removed. No refuse shall be placed in a refuse container until such refuse
has been drained of all free liquids. Trash placed at curbside shall be in a
lined container with lid or in heavy-duty black plastic bags. Lids must be
placed securely on containers and all bags must be tied.
§ 73-5. Location of containers. [Amended 6-7-2005 by Ord. No. 416;
10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 421]
Where alleys are used by the refuse collectors, containers shall be placed
on or within six feet of the alley line in such a position as not to intrude
upon the traveled portion of the alley. Where streets are used by the refuse
collectors, containers shall be placed adjacent to and back of the curb, or
adjacent by and back of the ditch or street line if there is no curb, or as
prescribed by the contracted hauler for the Town of Hampstead no more
than 24 hours before the time scheduled for the collection of refuse. Within
24 hours after such containers have been emptied, they shall be removed
by the owner and stored within the premises or outside the premises behind
the front building line until the next scheduled time for collection. Except
when placed along the street or alley for collection, all refuse containers
shall be stored in such a place and manner as to be not readily visible from
the street or alley. Refuse containers placed near the alley or street outside
of the hours allowed for collection defined herein may be considered trash
subject to immediate removal and disposal by the Town and subject to the
penalties authorized in § 73-14.
§ 73-6. Residential collection.
Under the direction of the Town Manager, the Town shall maintain
standard refuse and recycling collection and disposal services
consisting of one collection per week for each residence. Commercial
establishments will be eligible for collection under this section if they
meet the requirements of § 73-4.
A.
§ 73-3 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 73-6
73:68
§ 73-7. Nonresidential collection.
The collection and disposal of solid waste from nonresidential units shall
be at the cost and expense of the owner of the property. Such include,
but are not limited to, industrial uses, commercial uses, mixed units of a
commercial/residential use, institutional establishment or any combination
thereof. Such premises shall have on-site containers as required by this
chapter, or as permitted by regulations adopted hereunder. Additionally, the
owners of said premises shall cause solid waste to be removed from the
premises at regular intervals as determined by these regulations.
§ 73-8. Bulk trash pickup.
The Town of Hampstead, based on estimated revenues for any fiscal year,
may enter into a contract with a private contractor to collect bulk trash.
Collection days shall be established by the Town Manager, limited to no
more than four collections per year.
§ 73-9. Yard waste.
Yard waste shall not be treated as residential waste and will not be picked
up as part of the standard refuse and recycling collection. Yard waste
shall not be mixed with other residential waste. The Town Manager shall
establish regulations as to the type of containers, amounts and size limits of
yard waste to be collected.
§ 73-10. Maintenance of premises.
Owners and occupants of occupied premises and owners and persons in
charge of unoccupied premises, including vacant lots, within the Town are
hereby charged with the duty of maintaining such premises at all times in
a sanitary, clean and tidy condition and so as to prevent the accumulation
thereof of solid waste which constitutes a nuisance or fire hazard.
§ 73-11. Responsibility of owners and occupants.
Regular collection service shall not include removal of items such as
tires, refrigerators, air-conditioning units, furniture, pipe, auto parts,
trees, yard waste and other like items.
B.
Under the direction of the Town Manager, the Town shall maintain
standard yard waste collection and disposal services for each residence
as may be required by the Town Manager.
C.
Residential units. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner/
occupant to provide a sufficient number of containers for the storage
of solid waste to prevent overflow between times of collection in
residential units and to maintain the premises in accordance with the
standards of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant
of such private property to fail to provide such containers.
A.
§ 73-6 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 73-11
73:69
§ 73-12. On-site disposal.
On-site disposal of solid waste by burial in a pit or open trench or by burning
is prohibited.
Multifamily units. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
multifamily units to provide a sufficient number of containers for the
storage of solid waste to prevent overflow between times of collection
and to maintain the premises in accordance with the standards of this
chapter. It shall be unlawful for the owner of such a multifamily unit to
fail to provide such containers.
B.
Garden apartments or condominiums. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner or the association to provide an area to locate the dumpsters
provided by the contractor for the collection of refuse. The area shall be
maintained in accordance with the standards of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for such owner or association to fail to maintain the premises
in such a manner.
C.
Institutional establishments. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
and not the occupants of institutional establishments to provide a
sufficient number of containers for the storage of solid waste to prevent
overflow between times of collection and to maintain the premises in
accordance with the standards of this chapter. It shall be unlawful
for the owner of such institutional property to fail to provide such
containers.
D.
Commercial and industrial land or buildings. It shall be the joint
responsibility of the owner/occupants of the commercial and industrial
land or buildings to provide a sufficient number of containers for the
storage of solid waste to prevent overflow between times of collection
and to maintain the premises in accordance with the standards of
this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the owner and occupant of such
commercial and industrial land or buildings to fail to provide such
containers.
E.
Shopping centers. In addition to the responsibilities provided in
Subsection E hereof, the owner and occupants of all shopping centers
are hereby required to install and maintain trash receptacles on the
edge of the pedestrian walkway areas within such shopping centers.
They shall be of a type and size and placed at such location as may be
required and clearly designated as receptacles for solid waste.
F.
Deficiencies. Deficiencies observed in violation of the standards of this
chapter or the regulations adopted hereunder shall constitute prima
facia evidence that the required maintenance is not adequate.
G.
Violation. A violation of this section is declared to be a municipal
infraction.
H.
§ 73-11 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 73-13
73:70
§ 73-13. Protection of wells, springs and watercourses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any solid waste, including yard
waste, in or to knowingly pollute or contaminate any wetland, one-hundredyear
floodplain, watercourse, body of water, spring, well or other source of
water in the Town.
§ 73-14. Violations and penalties.
In addition to all other remedies provided by law, any violation of this
chapter shall be punished as a municipal infraction. The penalty for
violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offence. Each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offence. Additionally, the Town
may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any violation
of this chapter.
Chapter 76
GO-CARTS, MOTORIZED SCOOTERS AND ALL-TERRAIN
VEHICLES
§ 76-1. Operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use and operate on any public
sidewalk, street or way within the corporate limits of the Town of
Hampstead any small-engine or electric-motor-propelled vehicle, commonly
called "go-carts," "motorized scooters" or "all-terrain vehicles."
§ 76-2. Exceptions.
For the purpose of this chapter, "all-terrain vehicle" shall be defined as
a motor-driven, off-road, recreational vehicle capable of cross-country
travel on land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain. It
includes, but is not limited to, multitrack, multiwheel or low-pressure
tire vehicles ("ATVs"), off-road motorcycles ("dirt bikes"), or belt-driven
vehicles ("snowmobiles").
A.
For the purpose of this chapter, motorized scooters shall be defined
as a two-wheel, small engine (less than 50 cc) or electric-motor-driven
scooters more commonly known by the manufacturer's name of "Razor
Scooters" or "Go-Peds."
B.
Mopeds and motor scooters, as defined in the State of Maryland
Transportation Article, shall be allowed on public streets when
operated by a person with a valid driver's license.
A.
Motorized golf carts may be operated any licensed public or private golf
course. Operation of golf carts on public ways is prohibited except as
necessary in the normal operation of a licensed golf course.
B.
§ 73-13 GO-CARTS, MOTORIZED SCOOTERS AND ALL- § 76-2
76:71
§ 76-3. Use of land for operation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit any person
to operate said go-carts, motorized scooters, or all-terrain vehicles upon any
parcel of land owned by them or under their control within the corporate
limits of said Town.
§ 76-4. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction
subject to a fine not to exceed $500. In the event a person less than 18 years
of age is apprehended operating a go-cart, motorized scooter, all-terrain
vehicle or other small-engine or electric-motor-powered vehicle in violation
of this chapter, the vehicle may be impounded until such time as the fine
and all towing and storage fees are paid by the person's parent or legal
guardian.
Chapter 79
HAWKING AND PEDDLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 88. Loitering — See Ch. 90.
§ 79-1. License required.
No person shall hawk, peddle, vend, solicit or canvass any goods, wares or
merchandise of any description upon the streets, alleys or highways of the
Town, nor shall any itinerant peddler go from house to house to vend or sell
any goods, wares or merchandise, either by sample or otherwise, without
having first applied to the Clerk of the Town of Hampstead and taken out a
license therefor as provided in the following.
§ 79-2. Definitions.
When used in chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ITINERANT MERCHANTS, TRANSIENT VENDORS AND SALESPERSONS
— In the category of peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor or canvasser, as set
forth below.
Mobility devices for disabled persons including electric-motor-driven
wheelchairs and scooters are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter.
C.
All-terrain vehicles used by government agencies in the performance of
official duties are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
D.
§ 76-2 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 79-2
79:72
PEDDLER, HAWKER and VENDOR — Includes any person, whether a
resident of the Town of Hampstead or not, traveling either by foot, vehicle
or any other type of conveyance, who goes from house to house, from place
to place or from street to street conveying or transporting goods, wares or
merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale or making sales and
delivering articles to purchasers, or who engages in any of the foregoing
activities from a stationary location on the street or other public places.
PERSON — Includes any partnerships, partner, corporation or corporations
or persons.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Includes any person, whether a resident of
the Town of Hampstead or not, who goes from house to house, from place
to place or from street to street soliciting or taking or attempting to take
orders for the sale or services to be performed in the future, whether or not
such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject for
such order and whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such
orders, or who engages in any of the foregoing activities from a stationary
location on the street or other public places.
§ 79-3. Nonapplicability to judicial process sales.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to sales made
under any judicial process as to any sales made by auctioneers.
§ 79-4. Application for license.
Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file with the Town Manager
a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Town
Manager, which shall give the following information:
A. The name and description of the applicant.
The permanent home address and local mailing address, if any, of the
applicant.
B.
A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold and the name and address of the principal office of their
manufacturer, as well as the name and address of the agent designated
to receive service of process in the State of Maryland.
C.
D. If employed, the name and address of the employer.
E. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior
to the date of filing of the application.
F.
The applicant shall be fingerprinted at the request of the Town
Manager.
G.
A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of a crime, misdemeanor or violations of any municipal ordinance,
H.
§ 79-2 HAWKING AND PEDDLING § 79-4
79:73
§ 79-5. Hours.
The time of solicitation, peddling, hawking, vending and canvassing shall be
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
§ 79-6. Investigation of applicant; approval or denial of application.
other than a traffic violation, and the nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty assessed thereafter.
Whether or not orders are to be solicited or taken for future delivery of
goods or performance of services.
I.
The names and addresses of at least three persons who have known
the applicant for at least one year and from whom the applicant or
registrant is willing that inquiry may be made to verify the facts stated
by the applicant or registrant.
J.
The applicant's Maryland state retail sales tax number; the address of
any permanent place of business in the Town or the State of Maryland
or, if there is no permanent place of business in the State of Maryland,
a copy of a certificate from the State Department of Assessments and
Taxation evidencing the fact that the dealer has qualified to do business
in the State of Maryland and the name and address of its agent for
the service of process in this state if the same is a corporation, limited
partnership or such other legal entity. If the applicant is an individual
or partnership, the same shall be required to provide proof that he or it
is qualified to do business and has obtained all necessary permits and
licenses required by the State of Maryland and the county requisite for
the operation of said business.
K.
Upon receipt of such application, the Town Manager shall cause to be
made such investigation of the applicant's criminal background and
business practices as he or she deems necessary for the protection of
the public welfare.
A.
If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's background or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Town Manager
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for
the same and shall notify the applicant that his application is
disapproved.
B.
If the results of such investigation are found to be satisfactory, the Town
Manager shall endorse his approval on the application and shall, upon
the payment of the prescribed license fee, execute and deliver to the
applicant his license. The Town Manager shall cause to be kept a record
of all licenses issued and of all complaints received, if any, concerning
each license.
C.
§ 79-4 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 79-7
79:74
§ 79-7. License fee.
A fee of $50 shall be paid by each applicant upon the issuance of each
license, except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 79-8. Display of license.
All licenses issued must be worn in such a manner as to be readily visible
when engaged in the activities regulated herein.
§ 79-9. Expiration of license; transferability.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar
year in which they are issued. Licenses shall not be transferable and must
be surrendered after expiration before a renewal license can be issued.
§ 79-10. Revocation of license; notice of hearing.
§ 79-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Town Manager in the denial of
an application for a permit or license as provided in § 79-6 of this chapter
or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a license as provided
in § 79-10 of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Mayor and
Council of Hampstead. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Mayor
and Council within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been
mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Mayor and Council shall set a
Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Town
Manager after reasonable notice and hearing for any of the following
causes:
Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application
for the license.
(1)
Misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on activities regulated herein.
(2)
(3) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
Conducting the business of soliciting and canvassing in an unlawful
manner, in violation of this chapter or in such manner as to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
(4)
A.
Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the licensee or
mailed postage prepaid to the licensee at the address given by the
licensee in making application under § 79-4 herein, at least 10 days
prior to the date set for hearing.
B.
§ 79-7 HAWKING AND PEDDLING § 79-11
79:75
time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in § 79-10 of
this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of
the Mayor and Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 79-12. Exceptions and exemptions.
§ 79-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a municipal infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $100.
§ 79-14. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdictions, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter, it being the intent of the Mayor
and Council of the Town of Hampstead that this chapter shall stand,
notwithstanding the invalidity of any section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase or portion hereof.
Chapter 80
This chapter shall not be construed to include the selling of any article
at wholesale to dealers in such articles or the delivery of milk, eggs,
bread, newspapers or other such necessary and perishable articles of
food or merchandise of a type commonly delivered on a house-to-house
basis at intervals of less than one week.
A.
Any veteran who holds a special license under the laws of the State
of Maryland shall be exempt from securing a license or paying the
fee as provided herein, but shall be required to comply with all other
applicable sections of this chapter and shall be required to register with
the Town Manager and obtain a permit, which will be issued by the
Town Manager upon proper identification and exhibition of such state
license.
B.
Certain organizations. Any nonprofit religious, charitable, educational,
civic or veterans organization, society, association, service club,
volunteer first aid or fire company, etc. desiring to solicit or have
solicited in its name money, donations of money or property or financial
assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any items of
literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from a
person other than members of such organizations at any place or places
within the Town of Hampstead for a charitable, religious, patriotic
or philanthropic purpose shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter. Nor shall this chapter apply to solicitation for political
purposes.
C.
§ 79-11 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 79-14
80:76
RENTAL HOUSING
§ 79-14 RENTAL HOUSING § 79-14
80:77

ARTICLE I
Purpose, Application and Definitions
§ 80-1. Purpose.
The Town considers rental housing a commercial enterprise subject to
licensure and oversight duly authorized in the Town Charter. The purpose
of this chapter is to encourage the responsible ownership and management
of rental housing within the Town, particularly as the public health, safety,
general welfare and economic vitality of the community is directly
impacted. This includes preservation of quality rental housing that blends
with traditional owner-occupied neighborhoods. It is not the intent of the
chapter to mediate internal disputes between landlords and tenants but
rather to address the maintenance of rental housing as it relates to the
greater community.
§ 80-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A second dwelling unit that is part of, or
attached to, an existing one-family detached dwelling and which contains
cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping facilities. Such a unit is subordinate
to the main dwelling unit.
AGENT — A person authorized to do the following on behalf of the landlord/
owner:
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or portion thereof, arranged or designed
for use or occupancy as a residence by not more than one family, as defined
by Ordinance 25. "Dwelling unit" includes accessory apartments. "Dwelling
unit" also includes property that is available for use in connection with the
occupancy of the dwelling unit.
INSPECTION — An examination of rental housing or any part thereof as the
Town Manager deems appropriate to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
LANDLORD or OWNER — The owner of record of rental housing. In the
case of a cooperative or condominium housing structure, any person having
an ownership interest in the legal entity which holds title to the cooperative
Make, contract for, and authorize necessary repairs to the rental
housing.
A.
Comply with the orders, notices and requests of the Town Manager and
the Board of Rental Housing Appeals.
B.
Accept all communications, notices, orders and all types of service of
process, including, but not limited to, municipal infraction citations
relating to the rental housing. The agent may, but need not, be the
operator of the rental housing.
C.
§ 80-1 RENTAL HOUSING § 80-2
80:79
housing structure and is entitled to exclusive use of the dwelling unit that is
rented.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building operated as a single entity
containing three or more dwelling units rented on a minimum of a monthly
basis (an apartment house). "Multiple-family dwelling" does not include
buildings containing condominium or cooperative dwelling units, or other
attached dwelling units, where such units are under different ownership.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of rental housing,
who is responsible for the daily management of the facility and who has
the authority to make minor and emergency repairs and receive complaints.
"Operator" includes but is not limited to any of the following persons
who exercise the foregoing authority and responsibility: a landlord, lessee,
sublessee and any vendee in possession. "Operator" does not include those
persons engaged solely in janitorial functions.
RENTAL HOUSING — Any structure or portion thereof, or combination of
related structures and appurtenances, operated as a single entity, which
the owner or operator thereof provides for a consideration one or more
dwelling units. "Rental housing" includes rooming houses, multiple-family
dwelling units, single-family dwelling units, accessory apartments, inns,
hotels, motels, individual condominium or cooperative dwelling units, etc.
"Rental housing" does not include nursing homes, hospices and other
residential medical or psychiatric care facilities.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A building containing not more than
one dwelling unit. "Single-family dwelling unit" includes attached dwelling
units, where the units are under separate ownership, including cooperative
and condominium units.
TENANT — Any person who occupies a dwelling unit for living or dwelling
purposes with the landlord's consent and upon payment of the required
rent.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Manager or any employee, department,
officer or agency of the Town designated by the Town Manager to carry
out the duties and responsibilities ascribed to the Town Manager under this
chapter.
VIOLATION — Any condition in rental housing which violates this chapter
or any other ordinance of the Town Code of Hampstead or any applicable
federal, state or county law, ordinance, regulation or code applicable to
rental housing, including, but not limited to, livability, housing, sanitation,
litter, public health and safety.
§ 80-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all rental housing within the Town and to all
leases and rental agreements concerning rental housing within the Town,
wherever executed. This chapter shall apply to rental housing owned and/
or operated by any public housing authority, and to rental facilities which
are subject to federal or state law, rule or regulation only to the extent that
§ 80-2 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 80-3
80:80
federal or state law, rule or regulation does not conflict with and is not
inconsistent with the provisions and requirements of this chapter.
§ 80-4. Interpretation.
The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall be in addition
to any provision or requirement of any other applicable law, rule or
regulation and it shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul,
or otherwise affect in any manner any agreements between parties,
unless such agreements conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
A.
To the extent that the provisions of this chapter conflict with state
general public law, state law shall prevail.
B.
§ 80-3 RENTAL HOUSING § 80-4
80:81

ARTICLE II
Licensing Requirements
§ 80-5. Rental housing license; classes of licenses.
§ 80-6. Application.
§ 80-7. Inspections.
Rental housing shall be inspected upon receipt of a complaint and as
deemed necessary by the Town Manager to enforce this chapter. Any person
may make a complaint about the condition of a rental property.
§ 80-8. Licenses for existing rental housing owners and/or agents.
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate within the Town rental
housing without having first obtained a license to operate or conduct
such rental housing. It shall be unlawful to operate rental housing
within the Town under an expired, revoked or suspended license.
A.
There shall be the following classes of rental housing licenses:
(1) Multiple-family dwelling license.
Single-family dwelling rental unit license. Where a single-family
dwelling unit contains, or is attached to, one or more accessory
apartments, the owner or agent shall apply for multiple-family
dwelling license. Rental of rooms that do not meet the standards
of accessory dwellings do not require a multiple-family dwelling
license.
(2)
B.
Application for a license required hereunder shall be made by or on
behalf of the owner of the rental housing on a form provided by the
Town and shall be accompanied by a fee as may be provided by
resolution of the Council.
A.
If the owner of the rental housing is a corporation, the corporation shall
be qualified to do business in the state as provided by state law.
B.
All corporate owners and owners residing outside the state shall have
an agent as defined herein, who shall reside in the state, and shall
certify to the Town Manager the name, address and telephone number
of such agent and shall keep such information current.
C.
Upon enactment of this chapter, existing owners and/or agents of rental
housing within the Town shall apply for a rental housing license. This
application shall be made no more than 90 days after enactment of this
chapter.
A.
Upon approval of an initial application by the Town Manager, a rental
housing license will be issued. Conditions of approval shall include
appropriate zoning or a conditional use granted by the Hampstead
B.
§ 80-5 RENTAL HOUSING § 80-8
80:83
§ 80-9. License renewal.
Absent violations of this chapter or Town Code, renewal applications shall
be approved automatically upon submittal of the application and payment
of the required fee. The rental housing license shall be valid for a period of
two years unless otherwise revoked or rescinded.
§ 80-10. Display of license.
The person to whom any rental housing license is issued shall display it in
the lobby, vestibule, rental office or other prominent public place on the
premises for which the license is issued during the entire period it is in
effect. A telephone number where the operator or representative thereof
may, in fact, be reached at all times shall be included on the license. In the
case of a single-family dwelling rental unit, it is sufficient if a copy of the
license is provided the tenant.
§ 80-11. Fine for operation of rental housing without a license.
Operation of rental housing without a rental housing license shall be a
municipal infraction subject to a fine of up to $100. Each day and each living
unit shall constitute a separate occurrence.
§ 80-12. Transferability.
§ 80-13. Obligation to maintain rental housing and provide
services; violations and penalties.
Board of Zoning Appeals and other conditions as determined by the
Board of Rental Housing Appeals.
In the event the holder of a license transfers ownership or shall change
his address, the holder shall notify the Town Manager within 30 days of
such change.
A.
No license is transferable. Upon sale of rental housing, the new owner
shall file an application for a new rental housing license accompanied
by the appropriate fee.
B.
Whenever the ownership of the rental housing changes hands, it shall
be the duty of the transferor to notify all tenants of the rental housing
of the name, address and office location of the transferee and of the
transferee's agent.
C.
The landlord, at all times, shall reasonably provide for the maintenance
of rental housing, which obligations shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
Complying with all applicable provisions of all Town regulations
and ordinances governing the maintenance, construction, use or
appearance of real property, including compliance with the Carroll
County Minimum Livability Code. This shall include, but is not
(1)
A.
§ 80-8 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 80-13
80:84
§ 80-14. Denial, revocation or suspension.
limited to, securing proper certificates and permits for all
construction or renovation. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No.
439]
Keeping all areas of the building, grounds, facilities and
appurtenances in a clean, sanitary and safe condition unless
provision is made for tenant responsibility thereof by the lease, law,
ordinance or regulation.
(2)
Making all repairs and arrangements necessary to put and keep the
dwelling unit and the appurtenances thereto in as good condition
as required by law.
(3)
Providing and maintaining appropriate receptacles and
conveniences for the removal of ashes, rubbish and garbage, and
arranging for the frequent removal of such waste, except in the
case of single-family dwelling units.
(4)
Maintaining the building, grounds, facilities and appurtenances to
a standard consistent with the surrounding neighborhood.
(5)
Ensuring that the rental housing, including the building, grounds,
facilities and appurtenances, is not used for unlawful purposes, to
include, but not limited to, the harboring of fugitives, the evasion
of persons from the service of warrants, the shelter of juvenile
runaways, the housing of illegal immigrants or for criminal
enterprises or activities, such as the manufacture and distribution
of illegal substances. [Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 439]
(6)
Failure to maintain rental housing, provide services or a violation of any
part of this chapter shall be a violation, and each day shall constitute
a separate occurrence. A violation of any provision of this chapter
shall constitute a municipal infraction subject to a fine of up to $100.
No penalty shall be imposed for that period of time when an alleged
violation is the subject of an investigation or before the Board of Rental
Housing Appeals, or when the violation is the subject of an order which
is complied with or when a good faith effort is made to correct the
violation or comply with an order.
B.
A rental housing license may be revoked or suspended and a renewal
may be denied at any time by the Town Manager if the landlord after 10
working days' written notice fails to eliminate or to initiate good faith
efforts to eliminate violations of this chapter or of other applicable laws,
rules or regulations. Revocation, denial or suspension of a license shall
be in addition to, and not in substitution for, such other penalties as
may be provided for violations by any ordinance.
A.
In the event that a license is revoked or suspended or any application
for license renewal is denied, and the landlord of the premises for which
the license had been issued or applied for chooses to cease renting the
B.
§ 80-13 RENTAL HOUSING § 80-14
80:85
§ 80-15. Ceasing operations in lieu of compliance.
Where a person, rather than comply with an order of the Town Manager or
Board of Rental Housing Appeals, chooses to cease to conduct or operate
rental housing, he shall give any tenant occupying the premises in question
60 days' written notice to vacate the premises, the period to begin on
the first day of the month following service of the notice. A copy of the
notice must be delivered to the Town Manager. No penalty will be imposed
during the sixty-day period that tenants have to vacate the facility, provided
that the holder of the license to conduct or operate the rental housing
relinquishes it and submits it to the Town Manager.
facility regulated hereunder, he shall give any tenants occupying the
premises in question 60 days' written notice to vacate the premises,
such period to begin on the first day of the month following service of
such notice. In addition, a copy of the notice must be delivered to the
Town Manager.
In the event the Town Manager, State Fire Marshal, Carroll County
Livability Inspector or properly authorized official of the Carroll County
Health Department determines that the conditions of a rental housing
unit is unfit for human habitation due to such conditions as fire,
flooding, structural failure, lack of electrical power, lack of water or
lack of heat, the Town Manager may revoke the rental housing license
immediately. In the event of such revocation, any subsequent appeal
shall not stay the enforcement action. The property may not be
occupied until determined fit for human habitation. In the event that
the malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance of the landlord has
caused the conditions making the unit unfit for habitation then the
landlord shall provide alternative housing to any tenants during the
term of such appeal. [Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 439]
C.
§ 80-14 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 80-15
80:86
ARTICLE III
Administrative Appeals
§ 80-16. Overview.
§ 80-17. Creation and membership of Board of Rental Housing
Appeals.
The Board of Rental Housing Appeals of the Town of Hampstead is hereby
created and designated as the "Board of Rental Housing Appeals." The
number of members of such Board shall be three, with one or more
alternates. The Board shall be comprised of one member of the Town
Council, one member of the Planning and Zoning Commission and one
member of the Board of Zoning Appeals as appointed by the Mayor.
§ 80-18. Powers of Board.
Any person aggrieved by an action of the Town Manager under the
provisions of this article may, within 10 working days of receipt of
written notice of such action, appeal such action to the Board of Rental
Housing Appeals by filing a notice of appeal with the Town Clerk.
Except in the case of the revocation of a license, an appeal shall not
operate to stay the action of the Town Manager unless the action is
stayed by order of the Board for good cause shown.
A.
Within 30 working days of the filing of the notice of appeal, the Board
shall conduct a hearing, at which time an opportunity to be heard shall
be given to the person aggrieved. The hearing shall be open to the
public, and records and minutes shall be maintained by the Board.
B.
Unless otherwise provided by Board rules or regulations, the Board or
Board panel shall by order, within 15 working days after such hearing,
either reverse, modify or affirm the action appealed and shall issue its
findings, opinions and orders in writing and provide a copy thereof to
the parties involved. Any appellant dissatisfied with the decision of the
Board may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court of Carroll County;
however, this appeal shall not stay any findings, opinions or orders of
the Board.
C.
The Board shall have the powers to hear and decide appeals where
it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by an administrative official in regard to the
enforcement of this chapter of the Town Code or of any ordinance
adopted pursuant thereto.
A.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board may, in conformity
with the provisions of law and this chapter and amendments thereto,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made.
B.
§ 80-16 RENTAL HOUSING § 80-18
80:87
§ 80-19. Organization; meetings; records.
The Board shall be organized and its rules shall be amended, if necessary, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the Board shall
be held at the call of the Chairman, and at such other times as the Board
may determine. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. For assistance
in reaching decisions relative to appeals, conditional uses or variances,
the Board may request testimony at its hearings for purposes of securing
technical aid or factual evidence from any county agency. All meetings of
the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings and shall keep records of all its official actions, all of which
shall be filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
§ 80-20. Appeals. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 439]
An appeal to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved by the Town
Manager in the enforcement of this chapter of the Town Code. Such appeal
shall be taken within 10 days after the decision by filing with the Town
Manager and with the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds
thereof. The Town Manager shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
§ 80-21. Actions preparatory to hearing.
Upon the filing of an application before the Board, the following action shall
be taken preparatory to holding a hearing thereon:
The Board is also empowered to adopt and promulgate such rules and
regulations as it shall deem necessary in the conduct of its hearings and
the issuance of its decisions or testimony pertaining to its hearings.
C.
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing of the application or
appeal.
A.
Notice of the hearing shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper
having general circulation in the Town of Hampstead, and such
advertisement shall be made at least 20 days prior to such hearings.
B.
Property upon which the application or appeal is concerned shall be
posted conspicuously by a zoning notice no less in size than 22 inches
by 28 inches at least 14 days before the date of the hearing.
C.
Notification by certified mail shall be made to the appellant or
petitioner and to the owners of those properties and the addresses
certified on the notice of appeal by the appellant or petitioner as being
contiguous to the property with which the hearing is concerned.
D.
The Board, upon application in writing by any interested party filed
with the Town Manager no less than 10 days prior to the date of
scheduled hearing, shall visit the specific property involved prior to the
E.
§ 80-18 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 80-21
80:88
§ 80-22. Hearing.
The Board, following such action above, shall hold such hearing. At the
hearing, any party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or
attorney.
§ 80-23. Decisions; appeals.
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the
Board, or by a zoning action by the local legislative body or any taxpayer
or any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town of Hampstead, may
appeal to the Circuit Court for Carroll County as provided for by state law.
The Court may affirm, reverse, vacate or modify the decision complained of
in the appeal to the extent and as provided for by state law.
§ 80-24. Filing fee for appeals.
A filing fee shall accompany each application for an appeal to the Board as
may be determined by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hampstead.
hearing. The Board, in its discretion, may otherwise visit the specific
property prior to or after the hearing.
§ 80-21 RENTAL HOUSING § 80-24
80:89
Chapter 82
(RESERVED)
Chapter 88
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 47.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 73.
Nuisances — See Ch. 95.
§ 88-1. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public way within the Town except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles for collection or in official Town or county dumps.
§ 88-2. Placement in receptacles to prevent scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 88-3. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalks in front of their premises free
of litter.
§ 88-4. Duty of merchants to keep sidewalks litter-free.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Town the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the Town shall keep the sidewalks of their business premises free of
litter.
§ 88-5. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Town or upon private
property.
§ 80-24 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 88-6
82:90
§ 88-6. Truck loads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Town
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the Town, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 88-7. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Town except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
§ 88-8. Litter in bodies of water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Town.
§ 88-9. Throwing and distributing handbills.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Town, nor shall any person hand out, distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful
on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the Town for any person
to hand out or distribute, without charge or to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 88-10. Handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 88-11. Handbills on posted premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises, in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertising" or similar notice
indicating in any manner that the occupants of said property do not desire
§ 88-6 (RESERVED) § 88-11
82:91
to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such
handbills left upon the premises.
§ 88-12. Handbills on inhabited private premises; exceptions for
mail and newspapers.
§ 88-13. Posting notices on public buildings prohibited.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
§ 88-14. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Town, whether owned by such person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 88-15. Owner to maintain premises litter-free.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall, at all times,
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person,
unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may
place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private
premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to be secure or
prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises
or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes
may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or
regulations.
A.
Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or
to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private
property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or upon private property.
B.
§ 88-11 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 88-16
82:92
§ 88-16. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Town, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 88-17. Notice to dispose of litter; failure to comply; payment of
costs. [Amended 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 457]
§ 88-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
231; 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 246; 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 457]
Noncompliance with the terms of this chapter shall constitute a municipal
infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $250. Each day such
noncompliance shall continue unabated shall constitute a separate
infraction.
Chapter 90
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public gatherings — See Ch. 103.
Notice to remove.
The Town Manager and/or the Town Attorney is hereby authorized
and empowered to notify the owner of any property within the
Town or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter
located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public
health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be delivered in
accordance with § 30-4 of the Town Code.
(1)
Once written notice has been provided of a violation of this chapter,
any further violations on the property within one year of the notice
shall be subject to immediate enforcement.
(2)
A.
Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of
any owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter which is
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after
service of notice, the Town Manager and/or the Town Attorney is hereby
authorized and empowered to take such actions as are necessary to
dispose of such litter, whether by municipal employees or by a private
contractor.
B.
Recovery of costs. When in the enforcement of this chapter the Town
incurs any costs, the Town shall be authorized to recover, confirm and
collect such costs in accordance with Article V of Chapter 30 of the
Town Code.
C.
§ 88-16 LOITERING § 90-1
90:93
§ 90-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 90-2. Prohibited acts.
§ 90-3. Warning by law enforcement officers; refusal of juvenile to
heed warning.
As used in these regulations, unless the context requires otherwise, the
following words shall have the meanings set forth below:
GUARDIAN — Any adult person having temporary or permanent care,
custody or control of a juvenile, whether or not such person has been
appointed by a court as the guardian of such juvenile.
JUVENILE — Any child under the age of 18 years.
LOITER — To idle, stand around, tarry or wander on foot, as well as
to park, idle, wander, tarry or play in or on a motor vehicle, unless
engaged in a lawful business, education, recreational or religious
activity or unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a juvenile or parent of a juvenile by
adoption.
PLACE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC — Any place to which the public is
invited in, on or around any privately owned place of business, any
private institution or any place of amusement or entertainment,
whether or not a charge for admission or entry thereto is made.
PUBLIC PLACE — The area between building lines on any street,
avenue or thoroughfare and any alley, park, playground, public
building, public parking lot or vacant lot.
A.
Wherever any masculine term is used in these regulations, the same
includes the feminine.
B.
Any juvenile found loitering in any public place or in any place open to
the public within the Town of Hampstead between the hours of 10:00
p.m. of any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day shall be subject to
the provisions set forth in §§ 90-3, 90-4 and 90-5 of these regulations.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a juvenile knowingly
to permit such juvenile to loiter as set forth in Subsection A above.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm or corporation
owning, operating or having charge of any place open to the public
knowingly to permit any juvenile to loiter in such places between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. of any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to loiter as set forth in § 90-2A.
Any law enforcement officer authorized to make an arrest within the
town finding a juvenile loitering as set forth in § 90-2A above shall warn
him to desist from so loitering and direct him to proceed to his home
or, for a legitimate purpose, to some other destination. A record of
A.
§ 90-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 90-3
90:94
§ 90-4. Notice to parent or guardian.
In addition to complying or causing compliance with the provisions of
Article 26 of the Annotated Code of Maryland7 pertaining to juvenile
offenders, the Chief of Police of the Town of Hampstead or his designated
agent, upon receipt by the Department of Juvenile Services of Carroll
County of a report of contact made by a police officer pursuant to § 90-3A
above, shall request that notice be given personally to the parent or
guardian of said juvenile, specifying the details of such contact and the
manner in which § 90-3A has been violated.
§ 90-5. Subsequent violations by notified guardian.
Every person or guardian to whom the notice provided for in § 90-3A has
been given and who thereafter, within a period of 12 months from the date
of said notice, permits such juvenile in his care, custody or control to loiter,
as set forth in § 90-2A herein, shall be presumed knowingly to have violated
§ 90-2B of these regulations.
§ 90-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
231; 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 247]
Violation of any provision of these regulations shall be a municipal
infraction subject to a fine of not more than $500.
Chapter 95
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 47.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 73.
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Defacing public property — See Ch. 100.
such contact shall be furnished to the Department of Juvenile Services
of Carroll County, where it shall be confidentially maintained until the
child reaches age 18, after which it shall be destroyed.
It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to refuse to heed such warning or
direction by any officer or refuse to give such police officer his correct
name and address, and upon any such refusal, he may be taken into
custody by said officer for action in accordance with applicable laws
and regulations.
B.
7. Editor's Note: See now Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, Title 3, Subtitle 8, Juvenile
Causes, of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 90-3 NUISANCES § 90-6
95:95

ARTICLE I
Public Nuisances
[Adopted 5-18-1970 by Ord. No. 148]
§ 95-1. Nuisances enumerated.8 [Added 11-11-2003 by Ord. No.
379]
Each of the following conditions, actions or activities, unless otherwise
permitted by law, is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and is subject
to criminal enforcement and penalties as provided in this article:
The existence of any offensive or dangerous accumulation of weeds,
trash, dirt, filth, waste shrubs, lawn or yard trimmings, the carcass of
any animal or other offensive matter to include untrimmed weeds or
grass as defined by Chapter 47 of the Town Code.
A.
The existence of any dead, diseased, infested or dying tree or
vegetation including such tree or vegetation that may constitute a
danger to street trees, streets, utilities or portions thereof.
B.
The existence of any tree, shrub or foliage, unless by consent of the
Town, which is apt to destroy, impair, interfere or restrict:
(1) Streets, sidewalks, sewers, utilities or other public improvements.
(2) Visibility on, or free use of, or access to such improvements.
C.
The existence of any tree, shrub or foliage growing on, over, around or
in front of any hydrant, curb box, water system connection or any other
appliance or facility provided for fire protection purposes in such a way
as to obscure the view thereof or impair the access thereto.
D.
The existence of any accumulation of materials or objects in a location
when the same endangers property, safety or constitutes a fire hazard.
E.
The existence of a sidewalk or a portion of a sidewalk adjacent to any
premises which is out of repair, and in a condition to endanger persons
or property, or in a condition to interfere with the public convenience in
the use of such sidewalk.
F.
The dumping or otherwise unlawful depositing of refuse, trash, debris
or any other material without a permit.
G.
The existence of any obstruction to a street, alley, crossing or sidewalk,
and any excavation in or under any street, alley, crossing or sidewalk,
which is by ordinance prohibited, or which is made without lawful
permission, or which, having been made by lawful permission, is kept
and maintained after the purpose thereof has been accomplished.
H.
8. Editor's Note: Former § 95-1, Report of nuisance by Mayor, was repealed 3-15-1993 by
Ord. No. 248.
§ 95-1 NUISANCES § 95-1
95:97
The erecting, maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or
permitting to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure
or premises, or in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway
or other public or private place in the Town, any one or more of
the following disorderly, disturbing, unsanitary, fly-producing. verminharboring,
disease-causing places, conditions or things:
Any putrid, unhealthy or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins,
the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl, or waste
parts of fish, vegetable or animal matter in any quantity, but
nothing in this subsection shall prevent the temporary retention of
waste in approved covered receptacles.
(1)
Any privies, vaults, cesspools, sumps, pits or like places which are
not securely protected from flies and rats, or which are foul or
malodorous.
(2)
Any filthy, littered or trash-covered dwellings, cellars, house yards,
barnyards, stable yards, factory yards, vacant areas in the rear of
stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises.
(3)
Any poison oak or poison ivy, Russian thistle or other noxious
weeds, whether growing or otherwise, but nothing in this
subsection shall prevent the temporary retention of such weeds in
approved covered receptacles.
(4)
Any inherently offensive or dangerous accumulation of bottles,
cans, glass, ashes, paper or paper products, small pieces of scrap
iron, wire, metal articles, household appliances, bric-a-brac or
cement, broken concrete, broken glass, broken plaster and all such
trash or abandoned material unless it is kept in approved covered
bins or appropriate containers.
(5)
Any trash, litter, rags, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes,
crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay,
straw or other packing materials, lumber not neatly piled, scrap
iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled, or anything whatsoever in
which flies or vermin may breed or multiply or which may be a fire
hazard.
(6)
I.
The depositing, or causing to be deposited in any street, alley, sidewalk,
park, parkway or other public place which is open to travel, of any hay,
straw, paper, wood, boards, boxes, leaves, manure or other rubbish or
material.
J.
The storage or keeping on any premises in public view for more than 30
days of any used or unused building materials, provided that nothing in
this subsection shall:
Prohibit such storage without a permit when done in conjunction
with a construction project for which a building permit has been
issued and which is being prosecuted diligently to completion.
(1)
K.
§ 95-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 95-1
95:98
Prohibit such storage without a permit upon the premises of a bona
fide lumberyard, dealer in building materials, or other commercial
enterprise when the same is permitted under the Zoning Ordinance
and other applicable laws.
(2)
Make lawful any such storage or keeping when it is prohibited by
other ordinances or laws.
(3)
The existence of any fence or other structure or thing or private
property abutting or fronting upon any public street, sidewalk or place
which is in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed or otherwise dilapidated
or unsafe condition.
L.
The existence or maintenance on any premises of a storage area,
junkyard or dumping ground for the wrecking or disassembling of
automobiles, trucks, trailers, house trailers, boats, tractors or other
vehicle or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn
out, wrecked, inoperative or abandoned automobiles, trucks, trailers,
house trailers, boats, tractors or other vehicle or machinery of any kind
or of any major parts thereof.
M.
The existence on any premises of any abandoned or unused well,
cistern or storage tank without first demolishing or removing from the
Town such storage tank or securely closing and barring any entrance
or trapdoor thereto or without filling any well or cistern or capping the
same in accordance with law.
N.
The existence on any premises, in a place accessible to children, of
any unattended and/or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other large
appliance.
O.
The existence of any drainage, outfall or sump pump outflow onto or
over or onto any sidewalk or public way except for existing downspouts
on or along Main Street.
P.
Sounds and noises during certain hours.
Production of any of the following sounds or noises between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays,
excluding legal holidays, and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays and legal holidays, except in
the cases of bona fide emergency or under municipal permit in case
of demonstrated necessity:
Sounds caused by the construction or repair of any building or
structure.
(a)
Sounds caused by construction. maintenance, repair, clearing
or landscaping.
(b)
(c) Sounds created by the installation or repair of utility services.
(1)
Q.
§ 95-1 NUISANCES § 95-1
95:99
§ 95-2. Service of notice. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 248]
The Mayor and Council is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the
owner or owners, occupier or occupiers of any premises which they deem
to be in a state of nuisance or in such a condition that the creation of a
public nuisance is imminent or in such condition that the water supply of
the Town of Hampstead may become polluted and the health of the citizens
thereby endangered, directing such persons to have such nuisance or to
cause such nuisance or condition to be abated or removed within 72 hours
from the date that said notice is personally served or mailed by certified
Sounds created by construction equipment including special
construction vehicles.
(d)
It is intended that the sounds described in this subsection refer to
sounds heard beyond the property line of the source.
(2)
Production at any time of any of the following sounds or noises, which
by reason of their intensity, frequency, duration, volume, pitch or any
other reason, disturb the peace, quiet, repose or comfort of any person
or persons:
The sounding of any horn, siren or other signaling device except as
a warning of danger, or as specifically permitted or required by law.
(1)
Sounds in connection with the starting, operation, repair or
rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle or internal combustion
engine within a residential district.
(2)
The use of a sound amplifier or other device capable of producing
or reproducing amplified sound upon public streets for the purpose
of commercial advertising for sales or for attracting the attention
of the public to any vehicle, structure, or property or the contents
therein, except as permitted by law, and except that vendors whose
sole method of selling is from a moving vehicle shall be exempt
from this subsection.
(3)
The use of a musical instrument, whistle, radio, sound amplifier or
other device capable of producing or reproducing sound.
(4)
Sounds produced by any vehicle which is so loaded, or has any
defect or is not equipped with a proper muffler so as to cause loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(5)
Any other unreasonably loud, disturbing, continuous, irritating, or
unnecessary noise, whether emanating from a human, animal or
mechanical source.
(6)
R.
Any other condition, action or activity that presents a risk to public
health, safety or welfare as determined by the Chief of Police, Town
Manager or other authority as recognized by the Town Council.
S.
§ 95-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 95-2
95:100
mail, addressed to said owner, owners, occupier or occupiers or tacked
upon the main building on the premises.
§ 95-3. Abatement by Town; costs. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No.
248]
If such owner or owners, occupier or occupiers fail to abate such nuisance
or condition or remove the cause thereof within the time set out in § 95-2,
the Town Council of Hampstead may then cause such nuisance or condition
to be abated and the cause of such nuisance removed by whatever means
it deems feasible; and the actual cost thereof shall thereafter be billed to
the owner or owners of said premises, who thereupon become obligated to
reimburse said Town of Hampstead, and suit may be brought to recover
such sums.
§ 95-3.1. Additional remedies; lien. [Added 3-15-1993 by Ord. No.
248]
If the owner or owners fail to make payment as provided for in § 95-3 above,
then, in addition to all other remedies, the Town may cause to be recorded
in the Town office a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred
for such work, the date the work was done and the location of the property
on which the work was done. Recording of such sworn statement shall
constitute a lien on the property involved and shall remain in full force
and effect for the amount due, plus interest and cost of court, if any, for
collection, until final payment is made. Said cost and expenses shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and shall
be subject to a delinquent penalty of 2/3 of 1% per month in the event that
the same is not paid in full on or before the date that the tax bill, upon
which such charge appears, becomes delinquent. Sworn statements filed in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall be prima facie evidence
that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work was
done properly and satisfactorily at a reasonable cost and shall be full notice
to every person concerned that the amount constitutes a charge against the
property designated or described in said statement and that the same is due
and collectible as provided by law.
§ 95-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
231; 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 248; 11-11-2003 by Ord. No. 379]
If such owner or owners, occupier or occupiers of said premises shall, after
the abatement and/or removal of the cause of said nuisance within a period
of two years from the date of said notice provided in § 95-2 hereof, create a
similar nuisance on such premises or allow a similar condition endangering
public health to exist, such conduct shall be a municipal infraction subject to
a fine not to exceed $500. Each day such nuisance shall continue unabated
shall constitute a separate infraction.
§ 95-2 NUISANCES § 95-4
95:101

ARTICLE II
Disorderly Houses
[Adopted 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 437]
§ 95-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
DWELLING — Any building arranged, designed or used in whole or part to
provide living facilities for one or more families. "Dwelling" shall include
both the enclosed area within a dwelling as well as the exterior premises
of the dwelling within the boundary lines of any real property on which the
dwelling is located.
OCCUPANT — Any person who lives in or has possession of or holds an
occupancy interest in a dwelling; or any person residing in or frequenting
the premises of the dwelling with the actual or implied permission of the
owner or lessee.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the dwelling; or recorded in official governmental
records as holding title to the dwelling; or otherwise having control of the
dwelling, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the
executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of such property by a court.
TOWN — Town of Hampstead.
TOWN CODE — The Code of the Town of Hampstead.
TOWN'S REPRESENTATIVE — The Town Manager, Assistant Town Manager
or Chief of Police.
§ 95-6. Disorderly house nuisance.
A disorderly house nuisance is a dwelling as defined in this article where
any of the following has occurred within a three-hundred-sixty-five-day
period.
Two or more criminal arrests, criminal citations, criminal indictments,
criminal warrants, criminal summonses, civil citations or civil
summonses arising out of separate and distinct facts and circumstances
(as defined by the statues of the State of Maryland and/or the
ordinances of the Town of Hampstead or of Carroll County Maryland)
which occur at a dwelling or on property in close proximity to a
dwelling; or
A.
Two or more violations of Article 2B of the Annotated Code of Maryland
relating to alcoholic beverages arising out of separate, and distinct
facts and circumstances; or
B.
Two or more violations of Chapter 81 of the Carroll County Maryland
Code of Public Local Laws and Ordinances (Animals) arising out of
separate, and distinct facts and circumstances; or
C.
§ 95-5 NUISANCES § 95-6
95:103
§ 95-7. Actions by owner or occupant that create disorderly house
nuisance.
§ 95-8. Written notice of disorderly house nuisance.
No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this article until the Town
Manager shall serve such person with the notice provided herein, and the
person has either failed, or refused to enter into the nuisance abatement
agreement provided for hereinafter or, after entering into such agreement,
the person fails to comply with its provisions. Such notice may be served
on any person by personal service or, in the case of an occupant, by
certified mail addressed to the address of the dwelling or, in the case of
a nonoccupant owner, by certified mail to his/her last known address or,
if none, the address to which any tax statement is sent to such owner for
the dwelling or by posting of the dwelling, on the structure or at a location
on the exterior premises, or by any other method of service reasonably
Two or more violations of Chapter 141 of the Carroll County Maryland
Code of Public Local Laws and Ordinances (Livability Standards)
arising out of separate, and distinct facts and circumstances; or
D.
Two or more violations of Article I of Chapter 95 of the Town Code
(Nuisances) arising out of separate, and distinct facts and
circumstances; or
E.
A combination of two incidents from any of the above categories,
arising out of separate and distinct facts and circumstances.
F.
No owner or occupant of any dwelling shall allow or permit such
dwelling to be, or become a disorderly house nuisance.
A.
An owner and/or occupant, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have
allowed or permitted a dwelling to be or become a disorderly house
nuisance, if:
The owner or occupant has personally committed the acts set forth
in § 95-6; or
(1)
(2) Such acts were committed by invitees of the occupant or owner; or
Such acts were committed by persons attending events, or
functions, sponsored, permitted or allowed by the occupant or
owner; or
(3)
Such acts were committed by a combination or Subsections B(1),
(2) or (3); or
(4)
The owner or occupant has been provided with the written notice
of a disorderly house nuisance pursuant to § 95-8 below, the facts
alleged therein are true, and the owner or occupant fails or refuses
to enter into a nuisance abatement agreement, or after entering
into such agreement, fails to comply with its terms.
(5)
B.
§ 95-6 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 95-8
95:104
calculated to give actual notice. Such notice shall contain at a minimum the
following:
§ 95-9. Nuisance abatement conference.
At the nuisance abatement conference, the Town's representative and the
owner and/or occupant shall discuss the facts constituting the disorderly
house nuisance and shall attempt to agree on specific actions that the owner
and/or occupant can take to abate said disorderly house nuisance.
§ 95-10. Nuisance abatement agreement.
That a disorderly house nuisance exists as defined by § 95-6 at the
location specified in the notice.
A.
The date of the commission of the acts which constitute the basis for
the disorderly house nuisance, the name(s) of the person(s) committing
such acts if known and all other facts and circumstances that the Town
relies upon to allege that such acts form the basis for the disorderly
house nuisance. Copies of police reports may serve as this
documentation.
B.
The date, time, and place where the person is to appear, and meet
with the Town's representative to participate in the nuisance abatement
conference.
C.
That failure to appear, or failure to make satisfactory arrangements for
an alternative date and time, at the time, place and manner designated
in the notice may result in prosecution of a violation of this article and
the imposition of penalties, as prescribed by this article.
D.
At the conclusion of the nuisance abatement conference, the Town's
representative shall submit to the owner and/or occupant a proposed
written nuisance abatement agreement. If, at the conclusion of the
conference, the Town's representative needs more time to draft said
proposed agreement, then a follow up meeting shall be scheduled with
the owner and/or occupant, within 10 days of the initial conference for
submittal and review of the completed proposed nuisance abatement
agreement.
A.
Any nuisance abatement agreement under this article shall include a
list of specific actions and specific schedule of deadlines for said actions
to abate the disorderly house nuisance. It may also include provisions
for a periodic reassessment of the agreement's effectiveness, and the
procedure for a modification of the agreement. A nuisance abatement
agreement or any written modification to said agreement may impose
conditions or requirements on the owner and/or occupant for a period
of up to 24 months from the date the original agreement is entered
into by the owner and/or occupant and the Town. A nuisance abatement
agreement or any modification may impose one or more of the following
conditions or requirements on the owner and/or occupant:
B.
§ 95-8 NUISANCES § 95-10
95:105
§ 95-11. Commencement of prosecution.
The Town Manager may commence prosecution alleging a violation of this
article under the following circumstances:
§ 95-12. Action to abate.
In addition to prosecution of the offenses defined in this article or to
pursuing any other remedies available under this Code, the Town Manager
may prosecute an action for equitable relief in the name of the Town, to
abate the nuisance and to enjoin any person who shall own, rent or occupy
Institution of eviction proceedings against identified individual(s)
from the dwelling in question.
(1)
Written notification from the owner and/or occupant to an
identified individual or individuals that they are prohibited from
entering onto the premises of the dwelling.
(2)
Utilization of written leases containing a provision or provisions
requiring eviction for criminal activity.
(3)
The completion of improvements upon the premises of the dwelling
which have the impact of mitigating crime, including, but not
limited to, the erection of fences, installation of security devices
upon the entrances or increased lighting.
(4)
Any other reasonable condition or requirement designed to abate
the disorderly house nuisance.
(5)
Once a proposed written nuisance abatement agreement or written
modification to nuisance abatement agreement has been submitted to
the owner and/or occupant, said owner and/or occupant shall have 48
hours to review it and enter into said agreement by signing it and
returning it to the Town Manager.
C.
The owner and/or occupant commits a violation described in § 95-7 of
this article; or
A.
The owner and/or occupant does not attend a nuisance abatement
conference with the Town Manager within the time period described
previously; or
B.
The owner and/or occupant fails or refuses to sign a proposed written
nuisance abatement agreement or proposed written modification to
said agreement within the prescribed time period set forth in § 95-10;
or
C.
The owner and/or occupant subsequently fails or refuses to comply
with any conditions or requirements set forth in a nuisance abatement
agreement, including any prescribed deadlines for taking particular
actions.
D.
§ 95-10 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 95-12
95:106
the dwelling in question from using or permitting its use in violation of the
provisions of this article.
§ 95-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this article, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted
within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense. In addition to other remedies, any violation may be
deemed a municipal infraction and prosecuted as such. The penalty for
violation shall be a fine of $500 for each offense, which may be doubled
in accordance with applicable law, and/or the issuance of an abatement
order.
A.
Upon a finding of guilt under this article, the court may, in addition
to other remedies permitted by law, impose any or all of the following
conditions:
The completion of improvements upon the premises of the dwelling
which have the impact of mitigating crime and criminal activity,
including, but not limited to, the erection of fences, installation of
security devices or increased lighting;
(1)
Requirement of a written lease for occupants which includes
provisions requiring eviction for criminal activity;
(2)
(3) Submitting tenancy lists on a periodic basis to the Town;
Imposition of a period of court supervision with the posting of a
cash bond of no less than the minimum fine and up to the amount
of the maximum fine for the period of court supervision in an
interest-bearing account conditioned on successful completion of
the conditions imposed by the court under the court supervision,
and failure to complete successfully shall result in forfeiture of the
bond to the Town; and
(4)
Any other condition reasonably related to the objective of abating
the disorderly house nuisance.
(5)
B.
§ 95-12 NUISANCES § 95-13
95:107
Chapter 100
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 100-1. Defacing public property.
The defacement of any public property of the Town of Hampstead, including
structures of any and all types, motor vehicles, water tanks and sidewalks,
by painting, marking, spraying, altering or defacing in any other manner is
hereby prohibited and declared to be a misdemeanor.
§ 100-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
231; 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 249]
Anyone so defacing the public property of the Town of Hampstead shall be
guilty of a municipal infraction and, upon conviction, fined not more than
$50.
Chapter 103
PUBLIC GATHERINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 90.
§ 103-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a well-defined process to allow
persons to hold public gatherings or special events in the Town of
Hampstead while ensuring such gatherings or events are planned and
conducted in such a manner that protects public health and safety and
minimizes disruption to the greater community.
§ 103-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC GATHERING — Any parade, event, fair, carnival, circus, block
party, march, fun run, walkathon, athletic event, bicycle race or any other
such gathering of at least 25 people in which the activity takes place on, in
or through any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way or on public property
such as municipal parks.
§ 103-3. Permits not required.
The following public gatherings or special events do not require a permit:
A. Wedding or funeral processions.
§ 95-13 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 103-3
100:108
§ 103-4. Permits required.
The following public gatherings or special events require a permit:
§ 103-5. Indemnification.
The applicants or sponsors of any public gathering shall indemnify the Town
of Hampstead for and hold it harmless from and defend it against any and
all claims, lawsuits or other liability arising from or as a result of the activity,
event or use.
§ 103-6. Reimbursement of costs.
The applicants or sponsors may be required to reimburse the Town for
any cost related to the use of Town employees and for any other expenses
incurred by the Town in preparing for and/or administering the public
gathering. The determination of any requirement to reimburse the Town
shall be made by the Town Council.
§ 103-7. Liability insurance.
The Town reserves the right to require the applicant or sponsor of a
gathering where more than 100 people are expected to attend to secure
liability coverage for his or her organization, naming the Town as an
B. Family or community reunions.
C. Religious services.
D. Political rallies.
E. School events held on school property.
F. Gatherings or events at municipal parks within the capacity of the park.
Sidewalk picketing or marching solely limited to being conducted on
public sidewalks, when the picketing is conducted in such a manner
that allows pedestrian traffic an opportunity to pass by the picketing
unobstructed, and that allows pedestrian and/or motor vehicle traffic
an unobstructed opportunity for ingress and egress to property.
G.
A. Parades on public streets.
B. Circuses or carnivals.
Walks, marches, runs, races, bicycle races or similar events using
public streets or ways.
C.
D. Festivals, street fairs or flea markets.
Other gatherings where the Town Manager or Chief of Police
determines that such event may disrupt the normal movement of traffic
or persons on public streets or ways.
E.
§ 103-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 103-7
100:109
additional insured. To the extent reasonably practicable, liability insurance
coverage shall be in the minimum amounts of $500,000 per claimant and
$1,000,000 per occurrence.
§ 103-8. Application.
§ 103-9. Issuance or refusal of permit.
The application shall contain:
The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the
applicant.
(1)
The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
sponsoring organization.
(2)
The name and cellular telephone number of the designated
person(s) supervising and in attendance at the gathering.
(3)
(4) The nature of the public gathering.
(5) The time, date, place and duration of the gathering.
(6) The anticipated attendance.
If the gathering involves public streets or ways, a plan showing
what streets or ways will be used and a plan to manage traffic and
parking. The applicant or sponsor shall be responsible for renting,
placing and removing any required barricades or traffic control
devices.
(7)
If the gathering will generate litter or trash, a plan to remove any
litter or trash generated by the gathering. The applicant or sponsor
shall be responsible for removing and disposing of all litter and
trash.
(8)
Such other pertinent information as may be required, to include
but not limited to plans related to refuse disposal, utility service,
sanitation facilities, private property protection, noise control,
staging area or other areas for personnel and equipment.
(9)
A certification that the applicant or sponsor will indemnify the
Town for and hold it harmless from and defend it against any and
all claims, lawsuits or other liability arising from or as a result of
the activity, event or use.
(10)
A.
Application shall be made to the Town of Hampstead no later than
30 days prior to the event. The Town Manager may, for good cause
shown, waive the thirty-day requirement for filing the application, but
in no event shall the application be filed less than five days prior to the
scheduled event.
B.
§ 103-7 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 103-9
100:110
§ 103-10. Appeals.
The refusal by the Town Manager to issue a public gathering permit under
this chapter may be appealed, in writing, to the Mayor and Council of
said Town within seven days after notice of such refusal is mailed to the
applicant. Such appeal shall be heard by the Mayor and Council at any
regular public session of the Council.
§ 103-11. Operation without permit prohibited.
Within 10 days after receipt of an application for public gathering, the
Town Manager shall issue a permit for such public gathering if:
The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made
any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in
the application for a permit or in any other document required
pursuant to this chapter;
(1)
The applicant has met the standards in this chapter and agrees to
such conditions as are imposed in the permit;
(2)
The time, duration, size and location of the gathering will not
substantially disrupt the safe movement of traffic or otherwise be
deleterious to public health, safety or welfare;
(3)
Any required or necessary street closure is of a size or nature such
that it will not require the diversion of so great a number of police
officers so as to prevent normal police protection to the Town;
(4)
The concentration of persons will not unduly interfere with proper
fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas
contiguous to that area where the gathering is being held;
(5)
Any required or necessary temporary street closure will not unduly
interfere with the safe movement of traffic;
(6)
Any necessary plans to manage traffic, parking, litter removal,
security, crowd control or other elements of the gathering are
approved by the Town Manager and/or Chief of Police.
(7)
A.
If the application for a public gathering permit is denied by the Town
Manager, the denial shall be provided in writing to the applicant within
seven days of the application, and the reason(s) for refusal shall be
cited.
B.
The holding, maintaining or operating of such public gathering, as
herein described, without a permit shall be unlawful and shall be
immediately closed by the Town of Hampstead and its duly authorized
agent or agents. Such agents shall include the Town Manager, the Chief
of Police and/or any uniformed police officer of the Town of Hampstead.
A.
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked for reasons of
emergency, disaster, calamity, disorder, riot, extreme traffic conditions,
B.
§ 103-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 103-11
100:111
§ 103-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, organization, firm or corporation holding, maintaining
or operating any public gathering or entertainment, as described in this
chapter, without first securing said permit shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
Chapter 113
(RESERVED)
Chapter 114
(RESERVED)
Chapter 116
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 47.
Go-carts — See Ch. 76.
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Loitering — See Ch. 90.
Trees — See Ch. 124.
violation of this chapter or any permit conditions, undue burden on
public services or other circumstances where the health, safety or
public welfare requires revocation. Notice of revocation shall be
delivered in writing or, during the gathering or event, verbally to at
least one person named upon the permit.
§ 103-11 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 103-12
113:112
ARTICLE I
Wastewater and Refuse Matter
[Adopted 3-1-1954 by Ord. No. 116]
§ 116-1. Discharge prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dispose of, drain
or discharge or allow to be disposed of, drained or discharged from any
property or premises owned or occupied by such person, firm of corporation
into, on or upon any of the public streets, highways or alleys within the
corporate limits of said Town of Hampstead any wastewater, drainage,
sewage or other noxious refuse matter of any kind whatsoever, and the
same is hereby prohibited from and after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 116-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
231; 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 251]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a municipal infraction subject to a fine
of not more than $100; provided, however, that each day that any such
violation of § 116-1 hereof is continued or allowed to continue shall be
deemed a separate offense under this article.
§ 116-1 (RESERVED) § 116-2
114:113

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 12-7-1966 by Ord. No. 138]
§ 116-3. Time limit for removal. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No.
251; 3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 412]
The owners of each lot or parcel of land located within the corporate
limits of the Town shall keep the sidewalk crossing over or adjoining their
property free and clear of snow and ice and shall, within 24 hours after the
cessation of any snowfall cause said sidewalks to be cleared.
§ 116-4. Failure to remove; removal by Town; assessment of costs.
In the event that any person responsible for the removal of snow or ice from
the sidewalk shall fail to remove such snow or ice as provided in this article,
the Town shall be authorized to remove snow or ice from the sidewalk over
or adjoining a person's lot or parcel of land, and the cost or expense thereof
shall be billed to the owner of the lot or parcel of land, and upon failure of
the owner to pay such bill, the same shall be included in the next bill for
real property taxes levied by the Town upon the owner of the lot or parcel
of land, and the same shall be collectible as though the bill were a part of
the taxes levied on said property.
§ 116-3 (RESERVED) § 116-4
114:115

ARTICLE III
Construction and Obstructions
[Adopted 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. 206]
§ 116-5. Sidewalk construction; repair and maintenance of roadside
improvements. [Amended 7-13-2004 by Ord. No. 396; 11-10-2009 by
Ord. No. 474]
The owner or owners of every property with frontage on a public street
situated within the corporate boundaries of the Town of Hampstead may
be required to construct or repair, at the expense of said property owner
or owners, a concrete sidewalk, curb and gutter along that part of their
property that abuts the public street or right-of-way. The property owner
or owners also shall maintain abutting roadside improvements along the
portion of the property that abuts the public road or right-of-way, including
any vegetation between the sidewalk and the curb or street, including trees
located therein, regardless of the property lines and/or right-of-boundaries.
Any trees located within the public road right-of-way may be removed by the
abutting property owner in accordance with applicable state law. No street
tree shall be topped or removed except as permitted in §§ 124-9 and 124-10.
§ 116-6. (Reserved)9
§ 116-7. (Reserved)10
§ 116-8. Dangerous condition; notice to property owner.
Whenever it is brought to the attention of the Mayor and Town Council
that a sidewalk, curb or gutter or a portion thereof may be in an
unsatisfactory condition, the Town Manager shall cause an inspection
to be made to determine the nature and validity of such complaint.
A.
Whenever it is found, upon inspection, that any sidewalk, curb or gutter
or any portion thereof because of damage or wear is in an unsafe,
dangerous or hazardous condition so as to cause an immediate danger
to the safety of the Town, the Mayor shall give written notice of such
finding to the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, curb or
gutter or portion thereof whereon such unsafe, dangerous or hazardous
condition exists; and such notice shall: [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 251]
Contain a description of the unsafe, dangerous or hazardous
condition found to exist upon the sidewalk, curb or gutter or
portion thereof which abuts his property.
(1)
B.
9. Editor's Note: Former § 116-6, Route 30 sidewalk specifications, was repealed 3-15-1993
by Ord. No. 251.
10.Editor's Note: Former § 116-7, Other sidewalk specifications, was repealed 3-15-1993 by
Ord. No. 251.
§ 116-5 (RESERVED) § 116-8
114:117
§ 116-9. Failure to correct hazards; repair by Town; costs.
[Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 251]
In the event that an abutting property owner has failed to correct the
hazardous condition within 30 days after service of the notice as provided
for in § 116-8, the Mayor may order the repair or replacement of the
hazardous sidewalk, curb or gutter or portion thereof, and the Mayor and
Town Council shall charge the expense thereof or any part of such expense
against the abutting property, to be collected in the same manner as other
debts are collected, and the expense so incurred by the Town shall
constitute a lien upon such property until paid.
§ 116-10. Obstructions restricted. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No.
359]
Except as otherwise authorized, it shall be unlawful for any person willfully
to prevent, impede or obstruct the free passage of any person along or
upon any sidewalk, way or public place within the corporate limits of the
Town of Hampstead by placing any obstruction which prevents, impedes or
obstructs the free passage of persons.
Advise that the abutting property owner shall be allowed a period
of 30 days to correct such unsafe, dangerous or hazardous
condition.
(2)
Be served upon the abutting property owner or his agent, provided
that the notice shall be deemed properly served upon the abutting
property owner or his agent if a copy thereof is served upon him
personally or if a copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last
known address.
(3)
No person shall place any wares, goods or merchandise for sale or
exhibition upon any sidewalk except under the following conditions:
Wares, goods or merchandise for sale or exhibition may be placed
on a sidewalk during "Hampstead Day" or other community event
as expressly authorized by the Council. During such an event,
any wares, goods or merchandise for sale or exhibition shall not
prevent, impede or obstruct the free passage of persons or threaten
the public safety.
(1)
Wares, goods or merchandise for sale or exhibition may be placed
on a sidewalk, only during normal business hours, immediately
adjacent to and within 30 inches of the front of the building where
they are being sold or exhibited. At no time should the wares, goods
or merchandise be placed within 60 inches of the curbline. Where
utility poles, awning posts or other structures are located on the
sidewalk, there shall be a contiguous clear passageway of at least
60 inches at all times as measured perpendicular to the curbline.
Wares, goods or merchandise for sale or exhibition in front of a
(2)
A.
§ 116-8 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 116-10
114:118
§ 116-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No.
251; 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 359]
Any violation of this article shall be a municipal infraction subject to a fine
not to exceed $500.
building shall not extend more than eight feet above the sidewalk.
[Amended 3-11-2003 by Ord. No. 367]
No person shall place a vending machine or coin-operated device upon
any sidewalk.
B.
A temporary general sign as defined in § 135-216 may be placed on
a sidewalk where such sign is properly permitted and where its
placement does not prevent, impede or obstruct the free passage of
persons or threaten the public safety.
C.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to temporary obstructions
caused by persons engaged in construction work on sidewalks or on
abutting property where such work is properly permitted and where
proper warning devices are maintained.
D.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the delivery of
merchandise or equipment, provided that no person shall permit such
merchandise or equipment to remain on a sidewalk beyond a
reasonable time.
E.
§ 116-10 (RESERVED) § 116-11
114:119

ARTICLE IV
Abandonment of Public Ways and Lands
[Adopted 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 290]
§ 116-12. Compliance required. [Amended 2-11-2003 by Ord. No.
365]
§ 116-13. Temporary closings.
Any public way or public land may be closed temporarily for a period not
to exceed 18 months by ordinance of the Town. Such ordinance may be
renewed at the end of the temporary period of closing or any subsequent
periods of closing by ordinance. The temporary closing shall not constitute
an abandonment of such public way. Any such ordinance shall specify the
purpose of the temporary closing and shall only be enacted upon a finding
that such public way or dedicated land is not necessary for public use
during the period of closing. The Mayor shall have the authority to close
any public way or land during declared emergencies or for such specific
purposes as construction and maintenance or for public functions.
§ 116-14. Application to permanently close and abandon.
No street, road, highway, alley or other public way (hereinafter
collectively referred to as "public way") shall be temporarily or
permanently closed or abandoned, nor shall any other lands which have
been dedicated to public use for any purpose, by recorded plat or in any
other manner, (such land being hereinafter referred to as "public land")
be temporarily or permanently closed or abandoned, except as provided
in this article.
A.
The transfer or conveyance of property to a governmental entity for a
public purpose shall be exempt from the requirements of this article;
however, any such transfer or conveyance shall be done only upon the
majority vote of the Town Council.
B.
An application to permanently close and abandon a public way or public
land in the Town shall be submitted on such forms or in such other
manner as provided by the Town Manager and shall be filed in the office
of the Town Manager. Such application may be filed at any time by any
interested person or governmental agency or by the Town.
A.
If permanent closing and abandonment shall be in conjunction with
the approval of a subdivision plat, in whole or in part, the closing and
abandonment of such public ways and dedicated land shall be made
prior to and as a condition of final approval of such plat by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. In the case of private development projects,
the applicant shall be the developer. The developer shall be responsible
for all aspects of the closure, including, but not limited to:
(1) Notification of adjoining property owners and the public.
B.
§ 116-12 (RESERVED) § 116-14
114:121
Preparation and submission of engineering plans showing the
removal or alteration of any existing roadway and construction of
any proposed new roadway.
(2)
All matters, physical, financial, legal or otherwise, which are
involved in the work.
(3)
Execution of a public works agreement and posting of a bond
in accordance with standard procedures for private development
projects.
(4)
All applications, except those filed by the Mayor and Town Council;
shall be accompanied by a filing fee and/or deposit for publication and
other costs in such amount as may be, from time to time, established by
resolution or, in the event that the amount of such fee and deposit has
not been established by resolution, by such fee and deposit established
by the Town Manager.
C.
The application shall contain at least the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
If the application is for the abandonment of a public way, a general
description of the public way by name and United States post office
numbering and/or intersecting streets.
(2)
If the application is for the abandonment of public land, a general
description of and the location of that public land.
(3)
The names and addresses of all owners, according to the tax
records of the county, of all real property immediately adjacent
to such public way or public land which is the subject of the
application.
(4)
The interest of the applicant, unless the applicant is a government
agency of the Town.
(5)
(6) The applicant's reasons for making such application.
A survey of the area which is proposed to be closed and abandoned,
certified by a licensed surveyor, containing an exact legal
description of the area proposed to be vacated, the scale, the north
point and the date of preparation.
(7)
A narrative legal description, prepared by a licensed surveyor of
such public way or land to be abandoned, bearing certificate of and
date of preparation by the surveyor.
(8)
Current deed references, if appropriate, and, if such public way or
land is on a recorded plat, a land records reference of such plat.
(9)
D.
§ 116-14 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 116-15
114:122
§ 116-15. Proposed ordinance; hearing; publication.
Upon accepting any application for abandonment and closing for filing, the
Town Manager shall cause to be prepared a proposed ordinance for such
abandonment and closing and shall submit, the ordinance for introduction
at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Town Council. Upon
introduction of the ordinance, the Town Council shall schedule the
ordinance for public hearing at a specified date, time and place. Upon the
scheduling of such hearing, the Clerk to the Town Council shall cause to
be published at least once at the expense of the applicant in a newspaper
of general circulation within the Town a notice of the public hearing,
which notice shall state the ordinance number, the date, time and place
of the hearing, the name of the applicant, the interest of the applicant
and a general description of the public way or public land proposed to be
abandoned. Such notice shall be published not less than 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing.
§ 116-16. Notices to public utilities.
§ 116-17. Referrals.
Upon introduction of the ordinance for abandonment and closing, the Town
Council shall refer the application to the Town Manager, the Chief of Police,
the Planning and Zoning Commission, and to any other Town department,
commission, agency or committee which the Town Council shall designate,
such referrals being for the purpose of review and recommendation by such
department, commission, agency or committee. The Town Council shall
refer the application to the County Department of Public Works and the
County Department of Planning for their review and recommendation. The
The Clerk to the Town Council shall also give notice of the public
hearing for abandonment and closing by certified mail to all public
utility companies which have overhead or underground facilities in or
upon or in the immediate vicinity of the area proposed to be closed and
abandoned and to all record owners, according to the tax records of
the county, of real property immediately adjacent to the public way or
land which is proposed to be closed and abandoned. The Town Council
may also direct that notices be sent to any other person, organization,
government agency or commission which it deems appropriate. The site
shall be posted conspicuously by a notice no less in size than 22 inches
by 28 inches at least 21 days before the date of the scheduled hearing
of the Mayor and Town Council to consider the closing or abandonment
of any public way or public land.
A.
The information given in this notice shall be the same as is required
in § 116-15. The provisions of this section are directory and not
mandatory, and the failure of compliance herewith shall not affect
the validity of the application or the decision of the Mayor and Town
Council thereon.
B.
§ 116-15 (RESERVED) § 116-17
114:123
Town Council shall specify in its referral the date when such report or
recommendation is to be returned to the Town Council.
§ 116-18. Hearing; testimony by interested parties; written
transcripts.
§ 116-19. Decision of Mayor and Town Council.
The decision of the Mayor and Town Council on any application for
abandonment and closing shall be rendered at any time after the conclusion
of the hearing thereon, but, in any event, shall be rendered within 60 days
of the conclusion of the hearing, unless such time is extended by the Town
Council. A notice of decision shall be mailed by first class mail by the
Clerk to the Town Council to all persons, governmental agencies, utility
companies or other organizations or entities to whom notice was given
pursuant to § 116-16 and to all persons who have presented oral or written
testimony. If the ordinance is adopted, a copy of the ordinance shall be
forwarded to such persons with the notice of the decision. The decision of
the Mayor and Town Council on any application shall be final.
§ 116-20. Application to reconsider.
The decision of the Mayor and Town Council on any application for
abandonment and closing may be reconsidered if an application for
reconsideration is filed with the Clerk to the Town Council within 20 days of
the date of mailing of the notice of decision. Upon receipt of an application
to reconsider, the Town Council shall schedule a hearing on such
application, such hearing to be held not less than 15 days from the date
of receipt of the application. Notice of such application to reconsider and
notice of the hearing thereon shall be mailed by first-class mail to all
persons entitled to notice of the original notice of decision. Notice of
decision of the Mayor and Town Council on the application to reconsider
At the hearing for abandonment and closing before the Mayor and
Town Council, any interested person, representatives from any public
utility company, representatives from any governmental agency,
representatives from any interested organization or any other
interested person shall have the right to submit oral or written
testimony. The testimony at the hearing shall be recorded in the manner
normally used for hearing of the Mayor and Town Council or in such
other manner as the Town Council may designate.
A.
The hearing may be adjourned from time to time to a date announced
prior to the adjournment.
B.
In the event that it is necessary to prepare a written transcript of the
hearing because of an appeal from any decision of the Mayor and Town
Council, as hereinafter provided, to the Circuit Court of the County,
the cost of preparation of such transcript shall be borne by the person
requesting the transcript.
C.
§ 116-17 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 116-20
114:124
shall be mailed by the Clerk to the Town Council to all persons entitled to
notice of the original decision.
§ 116-21. Appeals.
Any interested person or government agency may appeal from the final
decision on the application for abandonment and closing of the Mayor and
Town Council to the Circuit Court for the county in accordance with the
provisions of state law and the state rules of procedures relating to appeals
from administrative agencies. An order for appeal shall be filed with the
Circuit Court for the County within 30 days of the date of mailing of the
notice of decision of the Mayor and Town Council. A timely filing of a
petition to reconsider shall operate to stay the period of appeal to the
Circuit Court; and in the event that an application for reconsideration is
timely filed, the thirty-day appeal period shall run from the date of mailing
of the notice of decision of the Mayor and Town Council on the application
to reconsider.
§ 116-22. Land must be of no further public necessity. [Amended
10-9-2001 by Ord. No. 348]
No public way or public land shall be permanently closed and abandoned
unless the Mayor and Town Council shall find that the public way or public
land is no longer necessary for present or anticipated future public use, or
that the public use would be better served by conveyance of the property
to a private owner. No public way which is the sole means of ingress and
egress to any property may be abandoned or closed; provided, however, that
this provision may be waived if a perpetual easement agreement or other
means of ingress and egress, satisfactory to the Mayor and Town Council
and to such property owner, is provided.
§ 116-23. Withdrawal of application; refund of fees; refiling.
At any time prior to adoption of the ordinance approving or denying
the application for abandonment and closing or, in the event of an
application for reconsideration, at any time prior to final decision by
the Mayor and Town Council on such application, the applicant may
petition the Mayor and Town Council to withdraw the application,
but such application may only be withdrawn with the consent of the
Mayor and Town Council. The approval of the petition to withdraw the
application shall be without prejudice to the refiling of the petition for
abandonment by the applicant.
A.
There shall be no refund of any filing fees; however, any unused
deposits for publication and preparation of transcripts, if such deposits
have been required, may be refunded to the applicant.
B.
No applicant who has filed a petition for permanent closing or
abandonment of a public way or public land shall file, within one year of
final action by the Mayor and Town Council denying such application,
any new application for permanent closing and abandonment of
C.
§ 116-20 (RESERVED) § 116-23
114:125
substantially the same area for which the original application had been
filed, unless the denial of the application was without prejudice.
Upon the expiration of the time allowed by state law and the state rules
of procedure for filing any appeals, the applicant, at the applicant's
cost, shall cause to be prepared and recorded among the land records
of the county, an appropriate instrument, which shall be approved by
the Town Attorney, reflecting such abandonment in the land records of
the county. The ordinance declaring the abandonment shall become null
and void unless such instrument is filed with the land records of the
county within 90 days of the expiration of all such periods of appeal,
unless the Town Council, by resolution, shall vote to reinstate such
ordinance.
D.
§ 116-23 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 116-23
114:126
ARTICLE V
Construction, Repair and Replacement of Utilities in Public Ways
[Adopted 4-14-2005 by Ord. No. 411]
§ 116-24. Purpose.
The Town of Hampstead monitors utility work through the utility permitting
process. This process allows the Town to coordinate activities between
Town and other utilities, to maintain a record of street cuts and patches and
to identify specific Town requirements.
§ 116-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MAJOR UTILITY WORK — Any work where 100 or more square feet of
pavement, curb, gutter, driveway apron or sidewalk is disturbed or where a
lateral cut is made across the travel lanes of a public street.
MINOR UTILITY WORK — Any work where less than 100 square feet of
pavement, curb, gutter, driveway apron or sidewalk is disturbed.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any public street, road, sidewalk, trail, way, easement or
right-of-way.
§ 116-26. Permit required.
Any work within a right-of-way which disturbs the pavement, curb and/or
gutter, driveway apron, sidewalk, landscaping or grassed area requires a
permit. This work may include, but is not limited to, utility main and/or
lateral replacement and repair; valve replacement or repair; installation
of new underground mains or laterals, structures or accessories; splices,
buried drops (under pavement or sidewalks); pole changes; boxes and vault
installations and jacking or boring under a right-of-way where disturbance
in the right-of-way within may occur. Any utility work that does not disturb
the right-of-way is exempt from the permitting requirements except to
the extent that traffic detours or lane closures must be approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works and/or his/her designee.
§ 116-27. Emergency street cuts.
The Superintendent of Public Works and/or his/her designee may, if the
public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a
necessary street cut or excavation before a permit is issued. If the utility
company and/or contractor fail in a good faith effort to secure this
permission, then the utility company and/or contractor may proceed with an
emergency street cut; however, the utility company and/or contractor shall
notify the Town as soon thereafter as practicable but in no case later than
the first working day after such work occurs.
§ 116-24 (RESERVED) § 116-28
114:127
§ 116-28. Obtaining permits.
Before work within the right-of-way is started, the necessary permit shall be
obtained from the Town Manager. The fee for such permit shall be $100 or
as hereinafter amended by resolution of the Council.
§ 116-29. Responsibility.
The utility company and/or contractor receiving the permit is held
responsible for the work performed and the Town of Hampstead will contact
the specific utility company for required adjustments or corrections
regardless of whether the utility performed the work itself or subcontracted
and assigned the work. The permit is issued to the utility company, and it is
solely responsible for the work performed.
§ 116-30. Inspection.
In all cases, the permit applicant for a street cut shall notify the Town when
the work will commence so, if necessary, arrangements can be made to have
an inspector present while the work is in progress. The applicant may be
billed for the necessary expense of the inspector.
§ 116-31. Street cuts and new pavement.
No permit shall be granted for making an excavation or opening within the
limits of a street which will result in permanent or prolonged interference
with the public use of the street.
Open cuts. No permit to make an opening or excavation in or under
a paved street shall be granted within five years after the completion
of any paving or resurfacing thereof. Paved streets that have been
resurfaced within five years will be subject to bore and jack of the street
unless authorized by Town Manager.
A.
Saw cuts. All pavement cuts shall be saw cut in a straight manner and
shall be made at right angles or parallel with the center line of the
pavement. Saw cuts are not required in the initial pavement excavation
for minor utility work; however, final restoration of the street or public
way shall require saw cuts.
B.
Emergency openings. Pavement less than five years old may be cut
in emergency situations as determined by the Town Manager or the
Superintendent of Public Works.
C.
Temporary patching. Temporary asphalt ("cold") patch is only
authorized for repair related to minor utility work. Where a temporary
asphalt patch is used, permanent restoration of the street or rightof-
way shall be done within 30 days of the completion of work. An
extension may be granted by the Town due to conditions such as
weather.
D.
§ 116-28 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 116-32
114:128
§ 116-32. General responsibilities.
The utility company or its subcontractors shall have a copy of the permit
on the job site at all times. Utility companies shall be responsible for the
condition of any right-of-way repairs. Pavement repairs shall be warranted
for three years. Should the condition of the patch become such that
additional pavement is in jeopardy of failure, the utility company may be
held responsible for an area larger than the original repair. Other repairs
(sidewalks, curb and gutter, trenches, etc.) shall be warranted for three
years.
§ 116-33. Standards.
All work shall be done to standards established by the Town. In the
absence of a municipal standard, all utility work shall be done to the
standards promulgated by the Maryland State Highway Administration
for such work.
A.
Whenever a part of a block, square or section of curb, sidewalk or
driveway is broken or damaged by the person making any excavation or
opening in or under any street, alley or public place, the entire block,
square or section shall be removed to the score, groove or saw cut line
and replaced or reconstructed to the original thickness.
B.
In granting any permit, the Town Manager or Superintendent of Public
Works may attach such other conditions thereto as may be reasonably
necessary to prevent damage to public or private property or to prevent
the operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or
property or in a manner likely to create a nuisance or to ensure the
cost of any necessary repairs during the warranty period are bonded.
Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: a) limitations
on the period of one year in which the work may be performed; b)
restrictions as to the size and type of equipment commensurate with
the work to be done; c) designation of routes upon which materials
may be transported; d) the place and manner of disposal of excavated
materials; e) requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of
streets, the prevention of noise, and other results offensive or injurious
to the neighborhood, the general public, or any portion thereof; f)
regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work; g) a
requirement to post a bond with the Town in an amount no greater than
the estimated cost of the work necessary to restore the public way or
easement.
C.
The permit holder shall notify the Department of Public Works in
writing upon completion of all major utility work accomplished under
the provisions of the permit. The Superintendent of Public Works and/
or his/her designee shall issue a certificate of final inspection to each
permit holder for major utility work three years after the permanent
restoration of the excavation has been made, provided that the work
authorized by the permit has been performed according to the Town
specifications. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the Superintendent
D.
§ 116-32 (RESERVED) § 116-33
114:129
§ 116-34. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be prosecuted as a municipal infraction
subject to a fine of $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense subject to cumulative fines and other penalties.
The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and not exclusive
and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by the law.
of Public Works and/or his/her designee shall make a full inspection of
the restoration to determine whether the Town specifications have been
adhered to. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within three
years from the date of completion of the permanent restoration, any
expense incurred by the Town in correcting such settlement shall be
paid by the permit holder or recovered from the posted bond, unless
the permit holder submits proof satisfactory to the Town Manager or
Superintendent of Public Works that the settlement was not due to
defective backfilling.
In no case shall any opening made by a permit holder be considered
in the charge or care of the Town or any of its officers or employees,
and no officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume
any jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of police
power when it is necessary to protect life and property.
E.
§ 116-33 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 116-34
114:130
ARTICLE VI
Connection to Municipal Streets
[Adopted 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 475]
§ 116-35. Purpose.
The Town of Hampstead maintains a network of public roads and ways.
This permit process allows the Town to manage private roadway, driveway
and/or parking lot access onto municipal streets. This includes ensuring
that new or altered connections are designed and constructed to proper
engineering standards; adequate intersection lines-of-sight are maintained;
interests of public health, safety and welfare are safeguarded.
§ 116-36. Permit required.
The construction, relocation, widening or other alteration of any private
road, use-in-common drive, driveway or parking lot which creates a new
vehicular connection or alters in any way any existing vehicular connection
to a municipal street shall require a permit.
§ 116-37. Obtaining permit; fee.
Before work is started or connection made, the necessary permit shall be
obtained from the Town Manager. The fee for such permit shall be $100 or
as hereinafter amended by resolution of the Council.
§ 116-38. Naming of roads; street signs and traffic control devices.
The Town may require a new private road or use-in-common driveway to
be named. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and approve
private road names. The permit holder shall be responsible for the cost of
any required street signs or traffic control devices. All signs or other traffic
control devices shall conform to the requirements set forth by the Town.
§ 116-39. Responsibility of permit holder.
The person or entity receiving the permit is responsible for all work
performed in the municipal right-of-way, including but not limited to
structural tie-ins to Town streets. The Town will hold the permit holder
responsible for any required adjustments or corrections regardless of
whether the permit holder performed the work or subcontracted and
assigned the work.
§ 116-40. Inspection.
The permit holder shall notify the Town when the work will commence so,
if necessary, arrangements can be made to have an inspector present while
the work is in progress. The permit holder may be billed for the necessary
expense of the inspector.
§ 116-35 (RESERVED) § 116-41
114:131
§ 116-41. Copy of permit to be kept on job site; repairs.
The permit holder or its subcontractors shall have a copy of the permit
on the job site at all times. Permit holders shall be responsible for the
condition of any right-of-way repairs. Pavement repairs shall be warranted
for three years. Should the condition of any roadway tie-in become such that
additional pavement is in jeopardy of failure, the permit holder may be held
responsible for an area larger than the original repair. Other repairs such
as sidewalks, curbs and gutters, valve boxes or stormwater inlets shall be
warranted for three years.
§ 116-42. Standards.
All work shall be done to standards established by the Town. In the
absence of a municipal standard, all work shall be done to the standards
promulgated by the Maryland State Highway Administration for such
work.
A.
Whenever a part of a block, square or section of curb, sidewalk,
driveway or roadway is broken or damaged by the person making any
excavation, the entire block, square or section shall be removed to the
score, groove or saw cut line and replaced or reconstructed to the
original thickness.
B.
In granting any permit, the Town Manager may attach such other
conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage
to public or private property or to prevent the operation from being
conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner
likely to create a nuisance or to ensure the cost of any necessary repairs
during the warranty period are bonded. Such conditions may include,
but shall not be limited to:
Limitations on the period of one year in which the work may be
performed.
(1)
Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment commensurate
with the work to be done.
(2)
(3) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported.
(4) The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials.
Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof.
(5)
(6) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
A requirement to post a bond with the Town in an amount no
greater than the estimated cost of the work necessary to restore
the public way or easement.
(7)
C.
§ 116-41 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 116-42
114:132
§ 116-43. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be prosecuted as a municipal infraction
subject to a fine of $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense subject to cumulative fines and other penalties.
The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and not exclusive
and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by the law.
Where a new or altered access to a municipal street will generate
significant traffic or where there are technical concerns such as
vehicular line-of-sight, pedestrian safety, proximity to other roadways,
on-street parking impacts or other issues, the Town Manager may
require the analysis and report of a traffic engineer, up to and including
a formal traffic study. The permit holder shall be responsible for any
costs related to the review and approval of a permit, including but not
limited to engineering studies.
D.
The permit holder shall notify the Town Manager upon completion of all
work accomplished under the provisions of the permit.
E.
New roadway access to any developed residential lot in the R-7,500,
R-10,000 and R-20,000 Zoning Districts shall be prohibited. Any
alteration of roadway access to any developed residential lot in the
R-7,500, R-10,000 and R-20,000 Zoning Districts shall be made only
with the approval of the Town Council.
F.
§ 116-42 (RESERVED) § 116-43
114:133
Chapter 119
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
25.
Development impact fees — See Ch. 134.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 116-43 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 116-43
114:134
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 119-1. Purpose; definitions.
The purpose of this chapter is to control the division of land within
the Town of Hampstead in order to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare by regulating the division and redivision of land
in order to further the orderly development and appropriate use of
land; to establish accurate records of land subdivisions; to protect land
title; to implement the Hampstead and Environs Comprehensive Plan;
to secure safety from fire and other dangers; to facilitate adequate
and coordinated provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, playgrounds, and other public requirements; to facilitate the
further division of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land; to preserve
natural features such as stands of trees, streams, and other significant
environmental features; and, in general, to facilitate the orderly
coordinated, efficient and economic development of the Town of
Hampstead.
A.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTERIAL — A major street for carrying a large volume of through
traffic in the area, normally controlled by traffic signs and/or signals.
BUILDING SITE — The portion of a lot on which a principal building
could be erected in compliance with the yard requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.11
CARBONATE ROCK AREAS — Areas which are currently known or
suspected to be underlain by carbonate rocks. This includes the
Wakefield Marble and Silver Sun Limestone geologic units, as well as
unnamed calcareous zones within schist and phyllite areas.
COLLECTOR — A street designed to carry moderate volumes of traffic
from local streets to arterial streets or from arterial to arterial.
COMAR — The Code of Maryland Regulations.
COMMISSION — The Town of Hampstead Planning and Zoning
Commission.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the Town of
Hampstead and Environs as adopted by the Mayor and Town Council of
Hampstead and modified from time to time.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local public street with only one outlet that
terminates in a vehicular turnaround and having an appropriate
turnaround for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
DEVELOPER OR SUBDIVIDER — An individual, partnership, firm,
corporation, or agent thereof, that undertakes or participates in the
B.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Zoning.
§ 119-1 (RESERVED) § 119-1
114:135
activities covered by these regulations: the development of a
subdivision.
DRIVEWAY — The space specifically designated and reserved on the
site for the movement of vehicles from a lot to a public street.
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner for use of land by the
public, a corporation, or person(s) land for specified purposes.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE AREAS — Streams, stream buffers,
one-hundred-year floodplains, habitats of threatened and endangered
species, steep slopes, carbonate rock areas, reservoir watersheds, Use
III waters, wellhead buffers and wetlands, all as defined herein.
FINAL APPROVAL — Approval of the final plat by the Commission,
as evidenced by certification on the plat by the Mayor, constitutes
authorization to record a plat.
FLAG OR PANHANDLE LOT — A lot where access to a public road is
created and maintained through a private use-in-common driveway.
FRONTAGE — The side of a lot adjacent or parallel to a public road.
HABITAT OF THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES — An area
which, because of its physical or biological features, provides important
elements for the maintenance, expansion and long-term survival of
threatened and endangered species listed in COMAR 08.03.08, as
amended or modified from time to time. This area may include
breeding, feeding, resting, migratory or overwintering areas. Physical
or biological features include, but are not limited to, structure and
composition of the vegetation, faunal community soils, water chemistry
and quality and geologic, hydrologic and microclimatic factors.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of no more than seven lots
which is not contiguous or in the path of a planned road and does
not involve the construction of a public improvement.[Amended
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 498]
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use
permitted in the Zoning Ordinance.
LOT LINE — The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
at the front setback.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN — The meaning given in the
Carroll County Floodplain Management Ordinance, as amended or
modified from time to time and as applicable pursuant to the provisions
of § 1-18 of this Code.
RESERVOIR WATERSHEDS — Areas which drain into an existing or
proposed water supply reservoir.
SIDEWALK — A public way which provides or is proposed to provide
access for pedestrian traffic to abutting properties.
§ 119-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-1
114:136
STEEP SLOPES — Areas with slopes greater than 25%.
STREAM — Part of a watercourse, either naturally or artificially
created, that contains intermittent or perennial base flow of
groundwater origin. Ditches that convey surface runoff exclusively from
storing events are not included in this definition.
STREAM BUFFERS — Areas which extend a minimum of 100 feet from
the top of each perennial stream bank along both sides of a stream.
STREET OR ROAD — A public way which provides or is proposed to
provide access for vehicular traffic to abutting properties.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots or parcels for immediate or future sale, lease or building
development. If a new street is involved, "subdivision" shall mean any
division of a tract or parcel of land. Subdivision shall not mean:
SUBDIVISION PLAN OR PLAT — A drawing of the subdivision showing
lots, streets and other information which may be required in these
regulations.
Conveyance of property to a state, federal, or local government or
a public utility if for utility right-of-way purposes.
(1)
Conveyance to an adjoining property owner if the transfer is made
with the following statement in the deed: "The land conveyed
herein is being transferred to an adjoining landowner to enlarge
the grantee's existing property and shall be considered merged
under the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Hampstead with
the existing property of the grantee." Such conveyance requires
the approval of the Commission and is permitted only where the
land conveyed is not intended for development. Any subsequent
development of the land shall be subject to all the requirements of
the Town Code.
(2)
SKETCH SUBDIVISION PLAN—A rough drawing of a subdivision
prepared to allow review and comment by the Commission.
(1)
CONCEPT SUBDIVISION PLAN—A master drawing of a
subdivision prepared for the overall planning of a property desired
to be subdivided.
(2)
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN—A master drawing of a
subdivision based on an approved concept plan prepared for the
overall planning of a property desired to be subdivided, and which
is in accordance with these regulations.
(3)
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN—A master drawing of a subdivision
based on an approved preliminary plan prepared for the overall
planning of a property desired to be subdivided, and which is in
accordance with these regulations.
(4)
§ 119-1 (RESERVED) § 119-1
114:137
§ 119-2. Plat required; approval and recording.
From and after the effective date of these regulations, any developer
contemplating the subdivision of land shall, previous thereto, cause a plat
of such subdivision to be made in accordance with provisions set forth in
these regulations, and a copy of such plat shall be recorded in the office
of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Carroll County after approval by the
Commission. No lot in a subdivision or any section thereof created after the
effective date of these regulations shall be transferred nor shall a building
permit be issued by the Town Clerk for a structure thereon until such
approval and recording shall be completed as specified herein.
§ 119-3. Fees.
Fees for review of subdivision plans may be created and amended by
Resolution of the Council.
USE III WATERS — The meaning given by COMAR, Title 26.08.02, as
amended or modified from time to time.
WAY — A passage, sidewalk, street or road.
WELLHEAD BUFFERS — Areas which extend a minimum of 100 feet
around any existing or proposed community water supply well or well
site, unless modified by the Planning Commission, as may be
designated on the adopted Water and Sewer Master Plan or the
Hampstead Comprehensive Plan, or identified during the development
process.
WETLAND — The meaning given for "nontidal wetland" in COMAR,
Title 08.05.04.01 (62), as amended or modified from time to time.
ZONING ORDINANCE — Chapter 135 of the Town Code of Hampstead.
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT—A drawing of any portion of the
subdivision which is desired to be made an official record in the
office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court, and which may be all or a
portion of a preliminary subdivision plan.
(5)
§ 119-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-3
114:138
ARTICLE II
Miscellaneous Requirements
§ 119-4. Compliance with local and state requirements.
§ 119-5. Right-of-way widths.
Proposed streets shall be shown by providing a minimum right-of-way width
of 50 feet. Where it is determined by the Commission that a street should
be designed in a subdivision to carry traffic from other areas or adjacent
subdivisions, whether existing or potential, a minimum of 60 feet shall
be shown. Where a subdivision is created fronting on an existing Townmaintained
road, front lot lines of a subdivision shall be established 25 or
30 feet from the center of the existing Town-maintained road. Culs-de-sac
shall terminate in a circular area with a minimum right-of-way diameter of
100 feet.
§ 119-6. Streets and street names.
§ 119-7. Easements and buffer zones.
All subdivisions shall conform to the Town of Hampstead and Environs
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations, and
to all other applicable ordinances, resolutions and plans, including the
Carroll County Water and Sewer Master Plan. More stringent design
provisions may be required by the Commission if it is demonstrated that
they are necessary to promote the public health, safety or welfare, or to
promote good subdivision design.
A.
In laying out a subdivision, the developer shall comply with all
requirements of the Maryland Department of the Environment and
Carroll County Health Department governing subdivision of land.
B.
The proposed subdivision shall not violate the provisions of any
enforceable deed restrictions or covenants attached to the property.
C.
Streets, roads and public ways shall be located in such a manner as to
provide for the safe and orderly movement of vehicular traffic to, from
and through the subdivision. The course and terminus of any streets,
roads and public ways shall be located in such manner as to allow the
reasonable, planned development of adjacent undeveloped parcels.
A.
Street names shall be approved by the Commission prior to submitting
a final plat to ensure no duplications.
B.
Easements shall be shown on the final plat where a natural watercourse
(stream) exists or where natural or street drainage is located or may be
provided, such easement to be a minimum of 15 feet, except in the case
of a natural watercourse, which shall contain adequate easement area
to provide for a one-hundred-year storm.
A.
§ 119-4 (RESERVED) § 119-7
114:139
§ 119-8. Street and sidewalk construction standards; guaranty.
Whenever a residential subdivision abuts a nonresidential subdivision,
use or undeveloped land not located in a residential district, a
permanently landscaped buffer strip of at least 20 feet in width shall be
provided.
B.
The legal form of all easements shall be provided upon submission of
the preliminary plan.
C.
Streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and driveway aprons shall be
constructed in accordance with those standards and regulations as set
forth in local regulations and design specifications, the Design Manual,
Roads and Storm Drains, Carroll County, Maryland, Department of
Public Works, as adopted on April 14, 1994, by the County
Commissioners of Carroll County, and the Maryland Department of
Transportation State Highway Administration Standard Specification
for Construction and Materials as published in October 1993, and as
may hereinafter be amended. Where standards vary, local regulations
and design specifications shall take precedence. All new road
construction shall use the Superpave materials and paving system as
defined by the Maryland State Highway Administration.
A.
All construction shall be done under the immediate supervision of an
inspector appointed by the Town Manager. No improvement will be
accepted until the Town Manager and appointed inspector are satisfied
that the work has been performed according to the plans, profiles and
specifications furnished and to the lines and grades established.
B.
A suitable guaranty shall be provided to the Town by the developer
prior to final approval of the final subdivision plat by the Commission
in order to ensure construction by the developer of those streets as
shown.
C.
Curbs and gutters are required in all subdivisions containing lots
having an area of 40,000 square feet or less. Subdivisions containing
lots having an area greater than 40,000 square feet may be required to
install curb and gutter as directed by the Town.
D.
Driveway access to the street shall not be located within 10 feet of a
storm drain. All driveway access to the street shall be by a concrete
driveway apron in conformance with Town standards.
E.
Unless an exception is granted by the Commission, culs-de-sac shall be
not more than 500 feet in length measured along the center line from
the center line of the street of origin to the center of the turnaround,
and each shall have a terminus generally circular in shape, with a rightof-
way diameter of 100 feet and a center on, or within 30 feet of, the
cul-de-sac center line.
F.
Signs, sign posts, and pavement markings, as required, shall meet the
minimum requirements for similar signs and posts as shown and set
G.
§ 119-7 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-8
114:140
§ 119-9. Utilities and stormwater management facilities.
§ 119-10. Lot size, width, frontage and lines.
forth in the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways.
In all subdivisions where lots are less than 40,000 square feet,
sidewalks shall be provided along one side of all public streets except
expressways. In all subdivisions where lots are less than 20,000 square
feet, sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all public streets
except expressways. The Town also may require that sidewalks be
provided elsewhere than as required above, where considered
necessary.
H.
All electric and telephone distribution lines shall be installed
underground, except those overhead distribution feeder lines necessary
to serve that subdivision and in locations as approved by the
Commission. Cable-switching enclosures, pad-mounted transformers,
and service pedestals may also be installed above the ground and may
be installed as a part of the streetlighting standards where approved by
the Commission.
A.
Water mains shall be not less than six inches in diameter and shall be
arranged so as to avoid dead ends. Shut-off valves shall be provided
at each branch main connection and elsewhere as required to permit
adequate sectionalizing for maintenance purposes. Fire hydrants shall
be installed throughout the entire system at intervals not exceeding 400
feet. A house service connection shall be provided at the center line of
each lot or as specified by the Hampstead Public Works Department,
extending to within one foot of the property line, before roadway
pavement is constructed. Materials, system arrangement, and details of
design shall be subject to the approval of the Town.
B.
Stormwater management facilities shall be designed in accordance
with Chapter 113 of the Town Code. All such facilities shall be located
in such a manner as to facilitate municipal ownership and maintenance
of such facilities.
C.
A. Every lot shall contain a suitable building site.
Lot size. Lot dimensions and area shall be not less than the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or as determined by the
Maryland Department of the Environment, whichever is greater.
B.
Lot width. The minimum width of lots shall be as follows:
All lots containing an area of 7,500 square feet, but less than
10,000 square feet, shall have a minimum width of 70 feet at the
required minimum building line.
(1)
C.
§ 119-8 (RESERVED) § 119-10
114:141
§ 119-11. Access to lots.
§ 119-12. Nonresidential subdivisions.
All lots containing an area of 10,000 square feet, but less than
20,000 square feet, shall have a minimum width of 80 feet at the
required minimum building line.
(2)
All lots containing an area of 20,000 square feet, but less than
40,000 square feet, shall have a minimum width of 100 feet at the
required minimum building line.
(3)
All lots containing an area of 40,000 square feet, but less than
three acres, shall have a minimum width of 150 feet at the required
minimum building line.
(4)
All lots containing three acres or more shall have a minimum width
of 250 feet at the required minimum building line.
(5)
The minimum width at the right-of-way line for lots fronting on a
cul-de-sac turnaround shall be not less than 36 feet.
(6)
Lot frontage. Except as allowed by § 119-11, each proposed lot
containing an area of less than three acres shall front upon a street
accepted by the Town of Hampstead as a public street. The front of any
lot shall not face the rear yard of any other lot.
D.
Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street
line, or substantially so.
E.
Every lot shall have access to it that is sufficient to afford a reasonable
means of ingress and egress for vehicles and emergency vehicles as
well as for all those likely to need or desire access to the property in its
intended use.
A.
The creation of "flag" or "panhandle" lots may be permissible by the
Commission only under the following circumstances:
(1) To avoid providing direct access onto an arterial.
When a property owner demonstrates that, because of the irregular
shape of a tract or its difficult topography or for some other
substantial reason, the creation of a flag lot is reasonably necessary
to avoid extreme hardship to the property owner and can be
accomplished without creating substantially adverse effects on
neighboring properties or the public health or safety.
(2)
B.
In nonresidential subdivisions, including industrial and commercial
tracts, the subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Commission that the street, parcel and block pattern is specifically
adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the
vicinity.
A.
§ 119-10 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-12
114:142
§ 119-13. Higher standards to prevail.
Where there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions
noted herein and other official regulations, the highest standards shall
apply.
§ 119-14. Design guidelines.
Subdivisions shall be designed to protect environmental resource areas in
accordance with the Environmental Resource Areas Guidelines as published
in Appendix A to the Environmental Resources Element of the Hampstead
Comprehensive Plan and as modified from time to time.
§ 119-15. Wellhead buffer.
The developer shall provide a wellhead buffer easement for any portion
of the subdivision within the wellhead buffer. This area shall be preserved
with an ownership arrangement acceptable to the Town. The total wellhead
buffer for a community wellhead shall be a circular area having a minimum
one-hundred-foot radius which extends around any existing or proposed
community water supply well or well site, as may be designated on the
adopted Water and Sewer Master Plan or the Comprehensive Plan, or
identified during the development process, unless this configuration and/
or size is specifically modified by the Commission in its approval of the
preliminary subdivision plan. The wellhead buffer shall be shown on the
preliminary plan and included on the final plat.
Whenever a nonresidential subdivision abuts a residential subdivision,
use or undeveloped land located in a residential district, a permanently
landscaped buffer strip of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided.
B.
§ 119-12 (RESERVED) § 119-15
114:143

ARTICLE III
Single Parcel Division
[Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 49812]
§ 119-16. Single parcel division.
The Commission may consider the division of a single parcel into no
more than two lots where such division does not occur in the path of
a planned road or involve construction of a public improvement like
a public road or water main. The Commission may waive procedural
requirements of this chapter except as follows:
No single parcel division shall be exempt from the adequate
facilities provisions contained herein;
(1)
All single parcel divisions shall be subject to the provisions of
§§ 119-28 through 119-33;
(2)
The Commission shall allow for public notification and comment
before approval.
(3)
A.
Any lot created by the single parcel division process shall not be further
subdivided, except in full compliance with this chapter.
B.
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be applicable to any preliminary
subject plan, or amendment thereto, submitted to the Town after 10-1-2012.
§ 119-16 (RESERVED) § 119-16
114:145

ARTICLE IV
Sketch Subdivision Plan
§ 119-17. Sketch subdivision plan; components; process.
A developer may, prior to preparing and submitting a concept
subdivision plan, present a sketch of the proposed subdivision for any
assistance the staff of the Commission might give. The developer, in
order to ensure review of the Commission at its regular meetings,
should file with the staff of the Commission six black-line prints of
the sketch plan at least two weeks prior to such regularly scheduled
Commission meeting.
A.
The sketch plan shall include:
(1) The location of the tract in relation to the surrounding area;
The approximate location of all existing structures within the tract
proposed to be retained and wooded areas within the tract and
within 100 feet thereof;
(2)
(3) The names of the owners of all property adjoining the tract;
All existing streets, roads, and approximate location of wet and
dry weather watercourses, floodplain areas, sinkholes, and other
significant physical features within the tract and within 150 feet
thereof;
(4)
(5) Approximate location of proposed streets and property lines;
(6) A rough sketch of the proposed subdivision plan;
(7) A north arrow and scale;
Direction of and approximate distance to nearest existing major
street intersection.
(8)
B.
The Commission shall review and evaluate the sketch plan as soon as
practicable and shall report to the developer its opinion as to the merits
and feasibility of the improvements contemplated by the sketch plan.
C.
§ 119-17 (RESERVED) § 119-17
114:147

ARTICLE V
Concept Subdivision Plan
§ 119-18. Submission.
The developer, in order to ensure review of the Commission at its regular
meetings, shall file with the staff of the Commission six black-line prints
of the concept plan at least two weeks prior to such regularly scheduled
Commission meeting. If a sketch plan has been submitted and evaluated by
the Commission, the developer is encouraged to incorporate the results of
the evaluation into the concept plan.
§ 119-19. Approval.
A concept plan for a subdivision of land in any zoning district may be
approved by the Commission subject to the following conditions:
The property which is proposed to be subdivided shall be posted by
the Town within seven days of submittal of the concept plan and shall
remain posted for a period of 30 days so that the public is made aware
of the possible use of the property. The sign shall be no less in size than
22 by 28 inches.
A.
The developer will submit the plan for the proposed subdivision at a
Commission meeting and will simultaneously submit the plan to the
county, when applicable, for its review. The Zoning Administrator will
complete a study for the Commission to be submitted at or before the
next (2nd) Commission meeting. The study will be an overview of how
the proposed plan relates to the surrounding area and if it is zoned
properly and may include any information the Zoning Administrator is
able to provide so that the Commission may reach an informed decision.
The Commission shall review the study and may vote on the approval
of the proposed subdivision as early as the next (3rd) Commission
meeting.
B.
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed subdivision is
in conformance with the Town of Hampstead and Environs
Comprehensive Plan.
C.
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed subdivision is in
conformance with the Carroll County Water and Sewer Master Plan.
D.
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed subdivision will
violate the provisions of any enforceable deed restrictions or covenants
attached to the property.
E.
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed subdivision will
add to or create an inadequacy to any street, street section, or
intersection.
F.
§ 119-18 (RESERVED) § 119-19
114:149
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed subdivision will
add to or create an inadequacy of any public school expected to service
the proposed subdivision.
G.
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed subdivision will
add to or create an inadequacy in fire protection, police protection,
emergency services, recreation facilities, water facilities and/or
sewerage facilities.
H.
The Commission shall require that public comments be heard prior to a
Commission vote on a proposed subdivision and that all persons present
at the meeting be allowed to address the Commission.
I.
§ 119-19 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-19
114:150
ARTICLE VI
Preliminary Subdivision Plan
§ 119-20. Submission.
The proposed preliminary subdivision plan shall be based on the approved
concept subdivision plan. The proposed preliminary subdivision plan shall
be submitted to the county for review within 18 months of concept plan
approval, or the approval will automatically expire and the proposed
subdivision must then be resubmitted for concept plan approval. The
Commission, at its discretion, may grant a request for an extension of time
to submit the preliminary subdivision plan if the developer proves there are
extenuating circumstances preventing a presentation within that eighteenmonth
period.
§ 119-21. Required information.
Information to be shown on the preliminary subdivision plan shall
include:
(1) The subdivision name;
(2) The owner's and developer's names and addresses;
(3) The surveyor's and engineer's names and addresses;
Certificate of registered professional engineer or registered land
surveyor as to the source and accuracy of boundary lines,
topographic data and other engineering or surveying data;
(4)
A legend defining all marks, notations and symbols used in the
plan;
(5)
(6) The election district, county and state;
(7) The names and addresses of adjacent property owners;
(8) References to adjoining subdivisions by liber and folio number;
(9) A vicinity sketch at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet;
Metes and bounds description and survey of the boundary of the
land proposed for subdivision;
(10)
(11)Scale;
(12)North point and date;
(13)Contours with intervals no greater than five feet;
(14)Zoning district;
(15)School districts for elementary, middle and high school;
(16)Fire and emergency services district;
A.
§ 119-20 (RESERVED) § 119-21
114:151
(17)Building lines;
Locations, names, dedicated widths and construction details for
all existing or planned roads, sidewalks or other public ways and
all dedicated rights-of-way or easements, their location, width and
purpose;
(18)
Other existing and proposed rights-of-way or easements, their
location, width and purpose;
(19)
(20)Location of existing and proposed utilities;
(21)Street names;
Lots identified by unduplicated lot numbers and to include lot lines
and width;
(22)
(23)All minimum building setback lines;
(24)Area, zoning and density calculations;
Proposed method or treatment of sewage disposal including septic
field replacement areas where required;
(25)
(26)Bearings and dimensions;
(27)Any one-hundred-year floodplain;
(28)Existing structures and features;
(29)Location of all specimen trees;
(30)Location of all forest conservation easements;
(31)Historic or scenic areas;
(32)Streams, intermittent or continuous;
(33)Wetlands;
(34)Outstanding topographic features;
Covenants, restrictions and or statements proposed to be shown on
the final subdivision plat;
(35)
Areas, if any, to be reserved for parks, playgrounds or other public
uses;
(36)
(37)Areas reserved for stormwater management;
Proposed method of conserving any area not included in lots to be
developed or dedicated for public use; and
(38)
(39)Other information as determined appropriate by the Commission.
§ 119-21 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-22
114:152
§ 119-22. Adequacy of facilities. [Amended 12-8-2015 by Ord. No.
514]
With the exception of those facilities for which the developer's rights and
obligations are to be established in a development rights and
responsibilities agreement with the Town pursuant to Article IX of this
chapter, before a preliminary subdivision plan approval may be given, the
Commission shall receive written certification, as specified in the following
provisions, to verify that the proposed subdivision meets all applicable
state, county and Town codes. Certifications shall automatically expire 120
days from the date of completion whenever a time limit is not specified. The
Commission shall deny or defer approval of the plan if any one or more of
these conditions cannot be provided or received by the Town.
The proposed subdivision shall be posted conspicuously by a notice
no less in size than 22 by 28 inches at least 14 days before the date
of the first Commission meeting at which preliminary approval of the
proposed subdivision is to be considered.
A.
The proposed subdivision shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Code of the Town of Hampstead and all other applicable state
and county codes and provisions. More stringent design provisions may
be required by the Commission if it is demonstrated that they are
necessary to promote the public health, safety or welfare or to promote
good subdivision design.
B.
The proposed subdivision shall be in conformance with the Town of
Hampstead and Environs Comprehensive Plan.
C.
The proposed subdivision shall be in conformance with the Carroll
County Water and Sewer Master Plan.
D.
The proposed subdivision shall not violate the provisions of any
enforceable deed restrictions or covenants attached to the property.
E.
The proposed plan shall be consistent with the concept plan except
where the Commission approves changes to the concept plan.
F.
The Commission shall certify the adequacy of all public schools which
are to service the proposed subdivision, using the enrollment figures
and projections supplied by the Board of Education. An elementary
school which has an enrollment of 100% to 105% of capacity shall be
deemed as "approaching inadequate." An elementary school which has
an enrollment of greater than 105% of capacity shall be deemed as
"inadequate." A secondary school which has an enrollment of 100%
to 110% of capacity shall be deemed as "approaching inadequate."
A secondary school which has an enrollment of greater than 110%
of capacity shall be deemed as "inadequate." The Commission shall
deny or defer preliminary approval of the proposed subdivision if a
school which will service the proposed subdivision is inadequate under
this requirement unless there is a school project that will eliminate
the inadequacy projected to be funded for construction, in the most
G.
§ 119-22 (RESERVED) § 119-22
114:153
recently adopted Capital Improvements Program (CIP) of Carroll
County, to begin within three years of preliminary approval.
The Commission shall require that all wells which the developer is
required to supply to the Town, that are to provide the Town with
the additional water necessary for the proposed subdivision, are tested
by a licensed state-certified firm hired by the Town, to certify the
adequacy of both the quantity and quality of the water as set forth in
§ 132-12 of the Code of the Town of Hampstead. A non-interest-bearing
escrow account will be maintained by the Town and funded by the
developer prior to the hiring of the firm, for the cost of the certification.
The developer will have operational control of the development of the
well(s). If the findings of this certification show that the developer is
unable to supply water for the proposed subdivision which meets the
requirements of § 132-12A, the Commission may grant preliminary plan
approval only if the Hampstead Town Manager, through an engineering
study, certifies that the existing water system of the Town has the
excess capacity to service the proposed subdivision. Under such a
circumstance, the developer shall be required to pay the water
replacement fee set forth in § 132-12B.
H.
The Commission shall require that all streets, street sections and
intersections which are to service the proposed subdivision be certified
as to their adequacy by a licensed firm hired by the Town. A noninterest-
bearing escrow account will be maintained by the Town and
funded by the developer prior to the hiring of the firm, for the cost of
the certification. The Commission shall designate the area that must
be certified within 60 days following the concept plan approval. The
Commission shall also require county certification whenever a county
road is within the designated area. If any street, street section or
intersection is certified as inadequate by either agent, the Commission
must be reasonably assured that a solution will be provided or received
within four years of the date of preliminary approval. The firm
preparing the certification shall use the methodology in the Highway
Capacity Manual (current edition) for the rating of all streets and street
sections. The firm shall use the methodology of Critical Lane Analysis
in the rating of all intersections. Ratings of A, B, C or D will be deemed
adequate, while an E or F rating will be deemed inadequate.
I.
The proposed subdivision shall be certified by the County Fire
Protection Engineer as to the local Fire Department's ability to
adequately access and provide the proposed subdivision with fire
protection and emergency services. Such certification shall include any
comments by the local Fire Chief.
J.
The proposed subdivision shall be certified by the Chief of the Town
Police Department as to the Police Department's ability to provide
adequate police protection. This certification shall address the ratio of
officers per citizen. A ratio of one officer to every 1,000 citizens will be
deemed adequate.
K.
§ 119-22 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-22
114:154
§ 119-23. Approval.
Whenever any one or a combination of the requirements of § 119-22 are
not met or any such facility or facilities are deemed inadequate by the
state, county, Town or their hired agent, the Commission shall deny or
defer the approval of the preliminary subdivision plan until such a time as
those inadequacies are provided for or assured. The Commission may, in its
discretion, recommend to the Hampstead Town Council that an exception
for approval be made. If a recommendation for an exception is made by
the Commission, the approval or disapproval of the proposed plan will be
deferred until the Council makes a determination. The Council shall hold
a hearing promptly after the recommendation and render a decision at the
first Council meeting following the hearing. The Council may either grant
the exception recommended by the Commission; grant the recommended
exception subject to certain conditions, which it may impose; or deny the
exception. If the Council denies the exception, the Commission shall
disapprove the plan. If the Council grants the exception subject to
conditions, the Commission has the discretion to approve the plan with the
conditions as set by the Council or disapprove the plan. If the Council grants
the exception with no conditions, the Commission shall approve the plan.
The proposed subdivision shall be certified by Hampstead's Town
Manager as to the Town's ability to provide the proposed subdivision
with solid waste removal under the current contract.
L.
The developer shall provide a written approval from the State Secretary
of Transportation and CSX Transportation (CSXT) or its successors for
any railroad crossings that are to be built. As long as the scope of
the proposed plan does not change and neither the State Secretary of
Transportation or CSXT revokes their approval, the railroad crossing
approvals will not expire and may be used at future approvals.
M.
The proposed subdivision shall be certified by the county as to the
county's ability to provide the sewerage capacity necessary for the
proposed subdivision. The certification must indicate whether the
county has the proper permit(s) and capacity to accommodate the
additional sewerage of the proposed subdivision.
N.
The proposed subdivision shall be reviewed by the county as to its
conformance with all applicable state, county and Town codes, with
written reviews from all applicable county departments. The proposed
subdivision shall be certified by the county as to the proposed
subdivision's conformance with all county adequate facilities
ordinances.
O.
The Commission shall require that public comments be heard prior to a
Commission vote on a proposed subdivision and that all persons present
at the meeting be allowed to address the Commission.
P.
§ 119-22 (RESERVED) § 119-23
114:155

ARTICLE VII
Final Subdivision Plan and Record Plats
§ 119-24. Submission. [Amended 12-8-2015 by Ord. No. 514]
The proposed final subdivision plan shall be based on the approved
preliminary subdivision plan. Unless otherwise provided by a development
rights and responsibilities agreement regarding the subdivision project
with the Town pursuant to Article IX of this chapter, the proposed final
subdivision plan shall be submitted to the county for review within 18
months of preliminary plan approval, or the approval will automatically
expire and the proposed subdivision must then be resubmitted for
preliminary plan approval. The Commission, at its discretion, may grant
a request for an extension of time to submit the final subdivision plan if
the developer proves there are extenuating circumstances preventing a
presentation within that eighteen-month period.
§ 119-25. Required information.
The final subdivision plan shall include all the information required in
§ 119-21 and a written description of all changes from the preliminary plan.
§ 119-26. Approval. [Amended 12-8-2015 by Ord. No. 514]
Unless otherwise provided by a development rights and responsibilities
agreement with the Town pursuant to Article IX of this chapter, before
a final plan approval may be given, the Commission shall receive written
certification, as specified in the following provisions, to verify that the
proposed subdivision meets all applicable state, county and Town codes.
Certifications shall automatically expire 120 days from the date of
completion whenever a time limit is not specified. The Commission shall
deny or defer approval of the plan if any one or more of these conditions
cannot be provided or received by the Town.
The proposed subdivision shall be posted conspicuously by a notice no
smaller in size than 22 by 28 inches at least 14 days before the date of
the first Commission meeting at which final approval of the proposed
subdivision is to be considered.
A.
The proposed subdivision shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the Code of the Town of Hampstead zoning regulations and all other
applicable state and county codes and provisions.
B.
The proposed subdivision shall be in conformance with the Town of
Hampstead and Environs Comprehensive Plan.
C.
The proposed subdivision shall be in conformance with the Carroll
County Water and Sewer Master Plan.
D.
The proposed subdivision shall not violate the provisions of any
enforceable deed restrictions or covenants attached to the property.
E.
§ 119-24 (RESERVED) § 119-26
114:157
The proposed plan shall be consistent with the preliminary plan, except
where the Commission approves changes to the preliminary plan.
F.
The Commission shall certify the adequacy of all public schools which
are to service the proposed subdivision, using the enrollment figures
and projections supplied by the Board of Education.
An elementary school which has an enrollment of 100% to 105%
of capacity shall be deemed as "approaching inadequate." An
elementary school which has an enrollment of greater than 105%
of capacity shall be deemed as "inadequate."
(1)
A secondary school which has an enrollment of 100% to 110%
of capacity shall be deemed as "approaching inadequate." A
secondary school which has an enrollment of greater than 110% of
capacity shall be deemed as "inadequate."
(2)
When a school is deemed as "approaching inadequate," the
Commission may decrease the number of lots and/or dwelling units
to be recorded per year. This provision may be applied when
enrollment projections indicate the school will become
"inadequate" (as defined above) during the development of the
subdivision and there is no school project forecasted in the most
recently adopted Capital Improvements Program of Carroll County
that will eliminate the projected inadequacy.
(3)
The Commission shall deny or defer final approval of the proposed
subdivision if any school that will service the proposed subdivision
is inadequate under this requirement, unless there is a school
project in the most recently adopted Capital Improvements
Program (CIP) of Carroll County that will eliminate the inadequacy,
funded for construction to begin within two years of final approval.
(4)
G.
The Commission shall require that all wells which the developer is
required to supply to the Town, that are to provide the Town with the
additional water necessary for the proposed subdivision, are tested by
a licensed state-certified firm hired by the Town to certify the adequacy
of both the quantity and quality of the water as set forth in § 132-12
of the Code of the Town of Hampstead. A non-interest-bearing escrow
account will be maintained by the Town and funded by the developer
prior to the hiring of the firm, for the cost of the certification. If the
findings of this certification show that the developer is unable to supply
water for the proposed subdivision, which meets the requirements of
§ 132-12A, the Commission may grant approval of the final plan only if
the Hampstead Town Manager, through an engineering study, certifies
that the existing water system of the Town has the excess capacity
to service the proposed subdivision. Under such a circumstance, the
developer shall be required to pay the water replacement fee set forth
in § 132-12B.
H.
The Commission shall require that all streets, street sections and
intersections which are to service the proposed subdivision be certified
I.
§ 119-26 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-26
114:158
as to their adequacy by a licensed firm hired by the Town. A noninterest-
bearing escrow account will be maintained by the Town and
funded by the developer prior to the hiring of the firm, for the cost of
the certification. The Commission shall require that the area designated
in the previous approval process be recertified for adequacy. The
Commission shall also require county certification whenever a county
road is within the designated area. If any street, street section or
intersection is certified as inadequate by either agent, the Commission
must be reasonably assured that a solution will be provided or received
within three years of the date of final approval. The firm preparing the
certification shall use the methodology in the Highway Capacity Manual
(current edition) for the rating of all streets and street sections. The
firm shall use the methodology of Critical Lane Analysis in the rating of
all intersections. Ratings of A, B, C or D will be deemed adequate, while
an E or F rating will be deemed inadequate.
The proposed subdivision shall be certified by the County Fire
Protection Engineer as to the local Fire Department's ability to
adequately access and provide the proposed subdivision with fire
protection and emergency services.
J.
The proposed subdivision shall be certified by the Chief of the Town
Police Department as to the Police Department's ability to provide
adequate police protection. This certification shall address the ratio of
officers per citizen. A ratio of one officer to every 1,000 citizens will be
deemed adequate.
K.
The proposed subdivision shall be certified by Hampstead's Town
Manager as to the Town's ability to provide the proposed subdivision
with solid waste removal under the current contract.
L.
The Commission shall have a written agreement, approved by the
Council, signed by CSXT and the developer for any railroad crossing
which is to be built, before final approval may be given.
M.
The proposed subdivision shall be certified by the county as to the
county's ability to provide the sewerage capacity necessary for the
proposed subdivision. The certification must indicate whether the
county has the proper permit(s) and capacity to accommodate the
additional sewerage of the proposed subdivision.
N.
The proposed subdivision shall be reviewed by the county as to its
conformance with all applicable state, county and Town codes, with
written reviews from all applicable county departments. The proposed
subdivision shall be certified by the county as to the proposed
subdivision's conformance with all county adequate facilities
ordinances.
O.
The approved subdivision shall have an executed public works
agreement (PWA) and have grading permits issued within one year of
the date of final approval, or the approval will automatically expire
and the subdivision must then be resubmitted for final approval. The
P.
§ 119-26 (RESERVED) § 119-26
114:159
§ 119-27. Denial or deferral of approval.
Whenever any one or a combination of the requirements of § 119-26 are
not met or any such facility or facilities are deemed inadequate by the
state, county, Town or their hired agent, the Commission shall deny or
defer the approval of the final subdivision plan until such a time as those
inadequacies are provided for or assured. The Commission may, in its
discretion, recommend to the Hampstead Town Council that an exception
for approval be made. If a recommendation for an exception is made by
the Commission, the approval or disapproval of the proposed plan will be
deferred until the Council makes a determination. The Council shall hold
a hearing promptly after the recommendation and render a decision at the
first Council meeting following the hearing. The Council may either grant
the exception recommended by the Commission; grant the recommended
exception subject to certain conditions, which it may impose; or deny the
exception. If the Council denies the exception, the Commission shall
disapprove the plan. If the Council grants the exception subject to
conditions, the Commission has the discretion to approve the plan with the
conditions as set by the Council or disapprove the plan. If the Council grants
the exception with no conditions, the Commission shall approve the plan.
§ 119-28. Drawing intended for record.
§ 119-29. Title and graphic information.
The title and graphic information to be shown on the final subdivision plat
shall be as required on the final subdivision plan, except contour lines.
§ 119-30. Required signatures and dates.
Space shall be provided on the final plat for the following signatures and
dates:
subdivision will be subject to the regulations in force at the time of
resubmission.
The Commission shall require that public comments be heard prior to a
Commission vote on a proposed subdivision and that all persons present
at the meeting be allowed to address the Commission.
Q.
The final subdivision plan shall include a subdivision plat or plats
intended for recordation incorporating those changes or additions
lawfully ordered by the Commission in its approval of the final
subdivision plan. The final subdivision plat or plats may include all or
any portion of the area covered by the final subdivision plan.
A.
When the final record plat or plats are submitted for approval, the
subdivider shall file with the Commission a title report, certificate of
title or comparable evidence showing the names and addresses of the
holders of all legal and equitable interests in and to said land.
B.
§ 119-26 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-30
114:160
§ 119-31. Size and scale; number of copies.
The final subdivision plat shall be legibly and accurately prepared or printed
on sheets 18 by 24 inches (to include a two-inch left margin on the long
side) and to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or one inch equals 100 feet,
dependent upon the size of the subdivision. The developer shall file with
the Commission seven black- or blue-line prints of the final plat, two of
which shall be on Mylar. One copy shall be returned, properly signed, to the
developer.
§ 119-32. Owner's statement.
The following owner's statement shall be provided: "The streets, roads,
open spaces, and public sites shown hereon, and the mention thereof in
deeds, are for the purpose of description only and the same are not intended
to be dedicated to public use; the fee simple title to the land so shown
is expressly reserved in the present owners shown on this plat, their
successors, heirs and assigns. No more than one principal building shall be
permitted on any residential lot, and no such lot may ever be resubdivided
so as to produce a building site of less area or width than the minimum
required by applicable health, zoning or other regulation."
§ 119-33. Expiration and recordation of lots.
§ 119-34. Use and occupancy permits. [Amended 12-8-2015 by Ord.
No. 514]
In any approved and properly recorded subdivision, there shall be no
limitation on the issuance of use and occupancy permits unless specifically
recommended by the Commission and approved by the Town Council or
A. Certificate of land surveyor.
Approval of the County Health Officer or representative of the
Maryland Department of the Environment.
B.
C. Approval of the Town of Hampstead Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. Approval of the Mayor of Hampstead.
E. Approval of the Town Manager/Zoning Administrator.
Upon approval, the Commission shall establish an expiration date of
the final subdivision plan. The final subdivision plan shall expire on the
specified date unless all lots are recorded or unless an extension of the
expiration date is recommended by the Commission and approved the
Council.
A.
An approved final subdivision plan does not confer, guarantee or assure
a right to record a plat or plats. The Commission shall have the power
to limit recordation of lots in such a manner as to ensure the orderly
construction of any subdivision and its improvements.
B.
§ 119-30 (RESERVED) § 119-34
114:161
otherwise provided for in a development rights and responsibilities
agreement.
§ 119-34 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-34
114:162
ARTICLE VIII
Violations, Exceptions, Appeals, Remedies and Penalties
§ 119-35. Violations.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, persons, firm,
corporation or other legal entity to:
§ 119-36. Exceptions.
Except as specified elsewhere in this chapter, no exceptions shall be made
to any part or provision of this chapter unless recommended by the
Commission and approved by the Town Council. Exceptions shall be limited
to such circumstances where full conformance with this chapter would
cause extraordinary hardship and where such hardship has not been
created by the applicant. Any such exceptions shall be consistent with
the Town of Hampstead and Environs Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning
Ordinance and not adverse to the public interest, as determined by the
Town Council.
§ 119-37. Appeals.
Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the Commission under this
chapter may file an appeal of such decision to the Hampstead Town Council
within 30 days of issuance of such final decisions. Any party aggrieved by a
decision of the Town Council may seek judicial relief in the Circuit Court for
Carroll County.
§ 119-38. Remedies and penalties.
Violate any provision of this chapter, or permit such violation, or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
A.
B. Submit false information on any plan or document.
Submit for approval a proposed final subdivision plat after having the
property shown thereon retitled in such a manner as to make it appear
that it was not part of a larger tract or parcel.
C.
Sell, transfer or convey any land of a subdivision before the final
subdivision plan has been approved and the final plats recorded.
D.
Construct any improvements, erect any building or use any land in
violation of the approved subdivision plan and record plats.
E.
The Commission, Council, or any owner or occupant of neighboring
property may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent or terminate any violation of this
chapter, and the Circuit Court of Carroll County is hereby granted
jurisdiction to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A.
§ 119-35 (RESERVED) § 119-38
114:163
Any violation of this chapter may be also be prosecuted as a municipal
infraction subject to a fine of $1,000. Each lot that constitutes a
violation and each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense subject to cumulative fines and other penalties.
B.
The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and not
exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by the
law.
C.
§ 119-38 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-38
114:164
ARTICLE IX
Development Rights and Responsibilities Agreements
[Added 12-8-2015 by Ord. No. 514]
§ 119-39. Definitions.
The words or phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning
prescribed in the current Code except as otherwise indicated herein:
AGREEMENT — A development rights and responsibilities agreement.
APPLICANT — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
society, syndication, trust, or other legal entity that files a petition to enter
into an agreement.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The current Town of Hampstead
Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Town of
Hampstead under the provisions of Maryland Annotated Code, Land Use
Article.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, dumping,
extraction, dredging, grading, paving, storage of materials or equipment,
land excavation, land clearing, land improvement, landfill operation, or any
combination thereof; and any change in the use of a building for which a
building permit/zoning certificate is required by law.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL — The Mayor and Council of the Town of
Hampstead.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION — The Town of Hampstead
Planning and Zoning Commission.
PROPERTY — The parcel or parcels of real property to be developed which
is/are the subject of an agreement.
PUBLIC PRINCIPAL — The governmental entity of the Town of Hampstead
that has been granted the authority to enter into agreements under this
chapter.
§ 119-40. Authority; public principal.
The Mayor and Council may exercise the authority granted by Maryland
Annotated Code, Land Use Article, § 7-301 et seq., to enter into
development rights and responsibilities agreements and shall act as the
public principal.
Any applicant having a legal or equitable interest in real property in the
Town of Hampstead may petition the Mayor and Council to enter into
an agreement.
A.
B. The petition shall be filed with the Town Manager.
C. The petition shall include a copy of the proposed agreement.
§ 119-39 (RESERVED) § 119-40
114:165
§ 119-41. Contents of agreement.
All persons with a lien interest in the property must authorize the
petition.
D.
The Mayor and Council shall first review the petition and determine
whether to accept the petition and initiate this process.
E.
If the Mayor and Council accepts the petition, a filing fee for each
petition shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the Mayor and Council.
F.
At a minimum, a development rights and responsibilities agreement
shall contain the following:
An attorney's certification that the applicant has either a legal or
equitable interest in the property;
(1)
The names of all persons having a legal or equitable interest in the
property, including lienholders;
(2)
(3) A legal description of the property subject to the agreement;
(4) The duration of the agreement;
(5) The permissible uses of the property;
(6) The density or intensity of use of the property;
The maximum height and size of structures to be located on the
property;
(7)
A description of permits required or already approved for the
development of the property;
(8)
A statement that the proposed development plan is consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan and all applicable Town and county
regulations;
(9)
A description of the conditions, terms, restrictions or other
requirements determined by the Mayor and Council to be
necessary to ensure the public health, safety or welfare; and
(10)
To the extent applicable, provisions for the:
(a) Dedication of a portion of the property for public use;
(b) Protection of sensitive areas;
(c) Preservation and restoration of historic structures;
(d) Construction or financing of public facilities; and
Responsibility for attorney's fees, costs, and expenses incurred
by the Mayor and Council.
(e)
(11)
A.
§ 119-40 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-41
114:166
§ 119-42. Referral to Planning Commission.
If the Mayor and Council accepts the petition as provided in § 119-40E,
the Town Manager shall refer the petition to the Planning Commission for
determination of whether the proposed agreement is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan. The Mayor and Council may not enter an agreement
unless the Planning Commission determines whether the proposed
agreement is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 119-43. Public hearing.
Before entering an agreement, the Mayor and Council shall conduct a public
hearing on the agreement. Notice of the hearing shall be published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City once each week for two
consecutive weeks, with the first such publication of notice appearing at
least 14 days prior to the hearing. Notice shall also be provided by any other
means generally used by the Town.
§ 119-44. Amendment of agreement.
§ 119-45. Termination of agreement; suspension.
An agreement may contain other terms, provisions, requirements and
agreements concerning the property that may be agreed upon by the
Mayor and Council and the applicant.
B.
An agreement may fix the time frame and terms for development and
construction on the property.
C.
An agreement may provide for other matters consistent with this
chapter, the Code of the Town of Hampstead and the Land Use Article
of the Maryland Annotated Code.
D.
All persons with a lien interest in the property must execute the
agreement.
E.
Any superior interest with a power of sale must be subordinated to the
position of the Mayor and Council or acceptable financial guarantees
must be provided.
F.
Subject to Subsection B of this section and after a public hearing, the
parties to an agreement may amend the agreement by mutual consent.
A.
Unless the Planning Commission determines that the proposed
amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, the parties may
not amend the agreement.
B.
The parties to an agreement may terminate the agreement by mutual
consent; or
A.
§ 119-41 (RESERVED) § 119-45
114:167
§ 119-46. Applicable laws, regulations and policies.
§ 119-47. Recording.
§ 119-48. Enforcement by interested parties.
Unless the agreement is terminated under § 119-45 of this chapter, the
Mayor and Council and the applicant, or their successors in interest, may
enforce the agreement.
§ 119-49. Time limits.
An agreement shall be void five years after the day on which the parties
execute the agreement unless the agreement specifies a shorter or longer
duration or unless extended by an amendment under § 119-44 above.
If the Mayor and Council determine that suspension or termination is
essential to ensure the public health, safety, or welfare, the Mayor and
Council may suspend or terminate an agreement after a public hearing.
B.
Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, the laws, rules,
regulations, and policies governing the use, density, or intensity of the
property subject to the agreement shall be the laws, rules, regulations
and policies in force at the time the Mayor and Council and the
applicant execute the agreement.
A.
If the Town determines that compliance with local laws, rules,
regulations and policies enacted or adopted after the effective date of
an agreement is essential to ensure the public health, safety or welfare,
an agreement may not prevent the Town from requiring a developer to
comply with those local laws, rules, regulations, and policies.
B.
An agreement not recorded in the Land Records of Carroll County
within 20 days after the day on which the Mayor and Council and the
applicant execute the agreement is void. Either the applicant or the
Mayor and Council may record the agreement.
A.
The Mayor and Council and the applicant, and their successors in
interest, are bound to the agreement after the agreement is recorded.
B.
§ 119-45 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 119-49
114:168
Chapter 120
SITE PLANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
25.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 119.
Open space — See Ch. 121.
Development impact fees — See Ch. 134.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 120-1. Purpose.
The provisions set forth in this chapter are intended to protect the public
health and safety, promote the general welfare of the community, and
conserve the environment by assuring that construction is designed and
developed in a manner which assures that adequate provisions are made for
traffic safety and access; emergency access; water supply; sewage disposal;
management of stormwater, erosion, and sedimentation; protection of the
groundwater; protection of the environment, wildlife habitat, fisheries, and
unique natural areas; protection of historic and archaeological resources;
minimizing the adverse impacts on adjacent properties; and fitting the
project harmoniously into the fabric of the community.
§ 120-2. Approval required.
Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, a person who has right,
title, or interest in a parcel of land must obtain site plan approval prior
to commencing any of the following activities on the parcel, obtaining
a building permit for the activities, or undertaking any alteration or
improvement of the site:
The construction or placement of any new building or structure for a
nonresidential use.
A.
The expansion of an existing nonresidential building or structure.
NOTE: Eligible for approval as a simplified site plan.
B.
The conversion of an existing building, in whole or in part, from a
residential use to a nonresidential use. NOTE: Eligible for approval as
a simplified site plan.
C.
The establishment of a new nonresidential use even if no buildings or
structures are proposed, including uses such as gravel pits, cemeteries,
golf courses, and other nonstructural nonresidential uses. NOTE:
Eligible for approval as a simplified site plan.
D.
The conversion of an existing nonresidential use, in whole or in part,
to another nonresidential use if the new use changes the basic nature
of the existing use such that it increases the intensity of on- or off-
E.
§ 119-49 SITE PLANS § 120-2
120:169
§ 120-3. Waiver of approval requirement.
The Zoning Administrator, with the concurrence of the Planning and Zoning
Commission (the Commission) Chairperson, may waive the requirement
for site plan approval where no extensive construction or improvements
are sought. Before acting upon any application for a waiver, the Zoning
Administrator, with the concurrence of the Commission Chairperson, shall
consider whether the use will affect existing drainage, traffic, relationships
of buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other
elements normally considered in the site plan approval process, and that the
existing facilities do not require upgraded or additional site improvements.
§ 120-4. Simplified site plans.
As permitted by § 120-2, the Commission may allow the submission of
a simplified site plan under the rules and regulations for simplified site
plans as administered by the Carroll County Department of Development
Review. The Commission may require a full site plan submission for any
construction, expansion or change of use as deemed necessary by the
Commission.
§ 120-5. Full site plans.
A full site plan shall be submitted and reviewed under the following
conditions:
site impacts of the use subject to the standards and criteria of site
plan review described in this chapter. NOTE: Eligible for approval as a
simplified site plan.
The construction of a residential building containing three or more
dwelling units.
F.
The construction of more than three residential buildings pursuant to
an approved subdivision.
G.
The modification or expansion of an existing residential structure that
increases the number of dwelling units in the structure to contain three
or more dwelling units. NOTE: Eligible for approval as a simplified site
plan.
H.
The conversion of an existing nonresidential building or structure, in
whole or in part, into three or more dwelling units. NOTE: Eligible for
approval as a simplified site plan.
I.
The construction or expansion of paved areas or other impervious
surfaces, including walkways, access drives where such expansion is
subject to the Carroll County Stormwater Management Ordinance.
NOTE: Eligible for approval as a simplified site plan.
J.
Site plans for construction or any portion thereof involving engineering,
architecture or land surveying shall be prepared and certified
A.
§ 120-2 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 120-5
120:170
respectively by an engineer, architect or land surveyor duly registered
by the state to practice as such.
A site plan may be prepared on one or more sheets to show clearly the
information required by this chapter to facilitate review and approval of
the plan. If prepared on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly
indicate where the sheets join.
B.
The sheet or sheets to be used for a site plan for construction shall not
be less than 18 inches by 24 inches.
C.
An appropriate number of clearly legible blue- or black-line copies of
a preliminary site plan for construction, as determined by the number
of reviewing agencies, prepared in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter are required to be submitted for review as hereinafter
provided.
D.
An appropriate number of additional copies, as determined by the
number of reviewing agencies are required to be submitted as as-built
plans as hereinafter provided.
E.
Information to be shown on the full site plan shall include:
(1) Project name.
(2) Owner's and developer's names and addresses.
(3) Surveyor's and engineer's names and addresses.
Certificate of registered professional engineer or registered land
surveyor as to the source and accuracy of boundary lines,
topographic data and other engineering or surveying data.
(4)
(5) Legend defining all marks, notations and symbols used on the plan.
(6) Election district, county and state.
(7) Names and addresses of adjacent property owners.
(8) References to adjoining subdivisions by liber and folio number.
(9) Vicinity sketch at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet.
Metes and bounds description and survey of the boundary of the
land proposed for the project.
(10)
(11)Scale.
(12)North point and date.
Contours with intervals no greater than two feet within 100 feet of
all buildings and a minimum of five-foot contour intervals on the
remainder of the site or spot elevations if the site grading is minor
and no part of the developed area of the site involves a flood-prone
area.
(13)
F.
§ 120-5 SITE PLANS § 120-5
120:171
(14)Zoning district.
(15)School districts for elementary, middle and high school.
(16)Fire and emergency services district.
(17)Building lines.
Locations, proposed names, dedicated widths and construction
details for all existing or planned roads, sidewalks or other public
ways and all dedicated rights-of-way or easements, their location,
width and purpose.
(18)
Other existing and proposed rights-of-way or easements, their
location, width and purpose.
(19)
(20)Location of existing and proposed utilities.
Location of existing and proposed stormwater management
facilities to include plans for collecting, detaining, retaining or
depositing stormwater in accordance with Carroll County Code,
Chapter 191, Stormwater Management. Plans shall include both
pre- and post-development calculations along with calculations for
sizing piping, storage areas or impoundments, flumes, spillways
and other devices. The plan shall include pre- and postdevelopment
calculations of the area of impervious surface. The
total square footage of pre- and post-development impervious
surface shall be shown on the title sheet.
(21)
(22)Proposed street names.
Lots identified by unduplicated lot numbers and to include lot lines
and lot widths.
(23)
(24)All minimum building setback lines.
(25)Area, zoning and density calculations.
Proposed method or treatment of sewage disposal, including septic
field replacement areas where required.
(26)
(27)Bearings and dimensions.
(28)Any one-hundred-year floodplain.
(29)Existing structures and features.
(30)Location of all specimen trees.
(31)Location of all forest conservation easements.
(32)Historic or scenic areas.
(33)Streams, intermittent or perennial.
(34)Wetlands.
§ 120-5 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 120-5
120:172
(35)Outstanding topographic features.
Covenants, restrictions and/or statements proposed to be shown on
the final subdivision plat.
(36)
Areas, if any, to be reserved for parks, playgrounds or other public
uses.
(37)
Proposed method of conserving any area not included in lots to be
developed or dedicated for public use.
(38)
Cross sections, details and specifications as required by the
reviewing agencies.
(39)
Buildings and structures, to include:
(a) Dimensions, size and height.
(b) Distances between buildings.
(c) Number of stories.
(d) Area in square feet of each floor.
(e) Number of dwelling units.
(f) Elevations.
(40)
(41)Construction details and specifications of all utilities.
Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas and loading spaces, to
include:
(a) Number of parking spaces.
(b) Number of loading spaces.
(42)
(43)Slopes, terraces, retaining walls, fencing and screening.
(44)Landscaping, including details and number of planting units.
Location, height, design and square footage of any proposed
signage.
(45)
Location, height, design, direction and lumens of any proposed
exterior lighting.
(46)
(47)Engineering estimates of water and sewerage demand.
Location and design of storage facilities for any treated, untreated,
or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such
nature, quantity, toxicity, or temperature that may run off, seep,
percolate, or wash into surface or ground water so as to
contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters.
(48)
§ 120-5 SITE PLANS § 120-5
120:173
§ 120-6. Submission to be concurrent with subdivision plans.
Where the subdivision of land is proposed, the submission of site plans shall
occur concurrently with the submission of the concept, preliminary and final
subdivision plans as required by Chapter 119 of the Town Code.
§ 120-7. Concept site plans.
Location and design of storage facilities for fuel, chemicals,
chemical or industrial wastes, and biodegradable raw materials.
(49)
(50)Location, design and screening of storage facilities for solid waste.
Draft language for any easement or right-of-way to be conveyed to
the Town.
(51)
Other information as determined necessary by the Commission or
the reviewing agencies, including such requirements for site plans
as promulgated by Carroll County.
(52)
The Commission may require the submission of a concept site plan
subject to the following conditions:
The developer will submit the concept site plan at a Commission
meeting and will simultaneously submit the plan to the county,
when applicable, for its review. The Zoning Administrator will
complete a study for the Commission to be submitted at or before
the next (second) Commission meeting. The study will be an
overview of how the proposed plan relates to the surrounding area
and if it is zoned properly and may include any information the
Zoning Administrator is able to provide so that the Commission
may reach an informed decision. The Commission shall review the
study and may vote on the approval of the proposed concept plan
as early as the next (third) Commission meeting.
(1)
The concept site plan shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the Code of the Town of Hampstead and all other applicable state
and county codes and provisions. More stringent design provisions
may be required by the Commission if it is demonstrated that they
are necessary to promote the public health, safety or welfare or to
promote good subdivision design.
(2)
A.
Commission considerations.
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed use will add
to or create an inadequacy to any street, street section, or
intersection.
(1)
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed use will add
to or create an inadequacy of any public school expected to service
the proposed development.
(2)
B.
§ 120-5 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 120-7
120:174
§ 120-8. Preparation, submittal and review of final site plans.
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed use will add
to or create an inadequacy in fire protection, police protection,
emergency services, recreation facilities, water facilities and/or
sewerage facilities.
(3)
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed use conforms
with the Town of Hampstead and Environs Comprehensive Plan
and the Carroll County Water and Sewer Master Plan.
(4)
The Commission shall consider whether the proposed use violates
the provisions of any enforceable deed restrictions or covenants
attached to the property.
(5)
The Commission shall hold a properly advertised public hearing in
accordance with § 120-9 and require that public comments be heard
prior to a Commission vote on a proposed concept site plan and that all
persons present at the meeting be allowed to address the Commission.
C.
A final site plan shall be based upon an approved concept site plan, if
a concept plan has been approved by the Commission. The proposed
final site plan shall be submitted to the Town for review within 18
months of concept site plan approval or the concept site plan approval
will automatically expire. The Commission, at its discretion, may grant
a request for an extension of time to submit the final site plan if the
developer proves there are extenuating circumstances preventing a
presentation within that eighteen-month period.
A.
The developer will submit the final site plan for the proposed
development at a Commission meeting and will simultaneously submit
the plan to the county, when applicable, for its review. The Zoning
Administrator will complete a study for the Commission to be submitted
at or before the next (second) Commission meeting. The study will be
an overview of how the proposed plan relates to the surrounding area
and if it is zoned properly and may include any information the Zoning
Administrator is able to provide so that the Commission may reach an
informed decision. The Commission shall review the study and may vote
on the approval of the proposed site plan as early as the next (third)
Commission meeting.
B.
The Commission or the agencies so empowered by the Commission
for review are responsible for checking the concept site plans for
general completeness and compliance. The Town Manager shall see
that all examination and review of the site plans are completed by all
reviewing and approving authorities. All site plans which are properly
submitted shall be reviewed. Upon completion of review, the site plans
shall be submitted to the Commission with any recommendations and
comments from each reviewing agency. The Commission shall consider
such recommendations and comments in its consideration of the site
plans.
C.
§ 120-7 SITE PLANS § 120-9
120:175
§ 120-9. Action on plans by Commission.
Consideration and approval or rejection of final site plans shall be
conducted under the following conditions:
The site shall be posted conspicuously by a notice no less in size than
22 inches by 28 inches at least 14 days before the date of the first
Commission meeting at which final approval of the proposed site plan
is to be considered.
A.
The Commission shall require that public comments be heard prior to a
Commission vote on a proposed site plan and that all persons present
at the meeting be allowed to address the Commission.
B.
In approving concept and final site plans, the Commission shall have
the authority to:
(1) Approve the location and design of all site improvements.
Limit the number and approve the location and design of entrances
and exits.
(2)
Require a plan which shows how signs are to be located and
designed and may approve, reject or modify the plan to promote an
attractive and pleasing appearance.
(3)
Require a plan which shows the location, design and effect of any
outside lights to be used on the property and the effect of any inside
lights to be used if their use would affect adjacent, neighboring or
contiguous properties and may approve, reject or modify the plan
where appropriate to prevent visual interference to the traveling
public on adjacent roadways, or glare or reflections on adjacent
buildings or neighboring properties.
(4)
Require that a binding agreement backed by bond or other surety
be provided to the Town when an occupancy permit is required
prior to the completion of the site plan, or the fulfillment of any
conditions attached thereto.
(5)
Require architectural elevations and details as the Commission
may desire. Such elements shall include, but not be limited to,
exact color schemes of siding and roofing. The Commission may
approve, reject or require modifications to any architectural
element.
(6)
Require that all parcels greater than one acre in size or expansion
of an existing use which disturbs more than 5,000 square feet
be designed in accord with Environmental Resource Area Design
Guidelines as published in Appendix A to the Environmental
Resources Element of the Hampstead Comprehensive Plan,
adopted May 14, 1997, and as may from time to time be amended.
(7)
C.
§ 120-9 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 120-9
120:176
Before a final plan site approval may be given, the Commission shall
receive written certification as specified in the following provisions, to
verify that the proposed development meets all applicable state, county
and town codes. Certifications shall automatically expire 120 days from
the date of completion whenever a time limit is not specified. The
Commission shall deny or defer approval of the plan if any one or more
of the following conditions cannot be provided or received by the Town:
The site plan shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
Code of the Town of Hampstead and all other applicable state and
county codes and provisions. More stringent design provisions may
be required by the Commission if it is demonstrated that they are
necessary to promote the public health, safety or welfare or to
promote good site design.
(1)
The site plan shall be in conformance with the Town of Hampstead
and Environs Comprehensive Plan.
(2)
The site plan shall be in conformance with the Carroll County Water
and Sewer Master Plan.
(3)
The site plan shall not violate the provisions of any enforceable
deed restrictions or covenants attached to the property.
(4)
The Commission shall certify the adequacy of all public schools
which are to service the proposed development using the
enrollment figures and projections supplied by the Board of
Education. An elementary school which has an enrollment of 100%
to 105% of capacity shall be deemed as approaching inadequate.
An elementary school which has an enrollment of greater than
105% of capacity shall be deemed as inadequate. A secondary
school which has an enrollment of 100% to 110% of capacity shall
be deemed as approaching inadequate. A secondary school which
has an enrollment of greater than 110% of capacity shall be
deemed as inadequate. When a school is deemed as approaching
inadequate, the Commission may decrease the number of lots and/
or dwelling units to be recorded or built per year. This provision
may be applied when enrollment projections indicate the school
will become inadequate (as defined below) during the construction
of the development and there is no school project forecasted in the
most recently adopted Capital Improvements Program of Carroll
County that will eliminate the projected inadequacy. The
Commission shall deny or defer approval of the proposed site plan
if a school which will service the site is inadequate under this
requirement unless there is a school project in the most recently
adopted Capital Improvements Program (CIP) of Carroll County
that will eliminate the inadequacy funded for construction to begin
within two years of final approval. Commercial and industrial site
plans may be exempt from this provision by the Commission.
(5)
D.
§ 120-9 SITE PLANS § 120-9
120:177
The Commission shall require that all wells which the developer is
required to supply to the Town, that are to provide the Town with
the additional water necessary for the proposed development, are
tested by a licensed state certified firm hired by the Town, to certify
the adequacy of both the quantity and quality of the water as set
forth in § 132-12 of the Code of the Town of Hampstead. A noninterest-
bearing escrow account will be maintained by the Town
and funded by the developer prior to the hiring of the firm, for the
cost of the certification. If the findings of this certification show
that the developer is unable to supply water for the development
which meets the requirements of § 132-12A, the Commission may
grant approval only if the Hampstead Town Manager, through an
engineering study, certifies that the existing water system of the
Town has the excess capacity to service the proposed development.
Under such a circumstance, the developer shall be required to pay
the water replacement fee set forth in § 132-12B. Site plans which
are a part of a previously approved residential development may be
exempt from this provision by the Commission.
(6)
The Commission shall require that all streets, street sections and
intersections which are to service the proposed development be
certified as to their adequacy by a licensed firm hired by the
Town. A non-interest-bearing escrow account will be maintained
by the Town and funded by the developer, for the cost of the
certification. The Commission shall designate the area that must
be certified immediately following the submission of the site plan
to the Commission. The Commission shall also require county
certification whenever a county road is within the designated area.
If any street, street section or intersection is certified as
inadequate by either agent, the Commission must be reasonably
assured that a solution will be provided or received within three
years of the date of approval. The firm preparing the certification
shall use the methodology in the Highway Capacity Manual
(current edition) for the rating of all streets and street sections.
The firm shall use the methodology of Critical Lane Analysis in the
rating of all intersections. Ratings of A, B, C or D will be deemed
adequate, while an E or F rating will be deemed inadequate. Sites
which are a part of a previously approved residential development
may be exempt from this provision by the Commission.
(7)
The site plan shall be certified by the County Fire Protection
Engineer as to the local Fire Department's ability to adequately
access and provide the site with fire protection and emergency
services. Such certification shall include any comments by the local
Fire Chief.
(8)
The site plan shall be certified by the Chief of the Town Police
Department as to the Police Department's ability to provide
adequate police protection. This certification shall address the
ratio of officers per citizen. Commercial and industrial site plans
(9)
§ 120-9 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 120-9
120:178
§ 120-10. Expiration of approval.
may be exempt from this provision by the Commission. A ratio of
one officer to every 1,000 citizens will be deemed adequate.
The site plan shall be certified by Hampstead's Town Manager as
to the Town's ability to provide the site with solid waste removal
under the current contract. Commercial and industrial site plans
shall be exempt from this provision.
(10)
The Commission shall have a written agreement, approved by the
Council, signed by CSXT and the developer for any railroad
crossing which is to be built, before final approval may be given.
Sites which are a part of a previously approved development may
be exempt from this provision. The developer shall provide a
written approval from the State Secretary of Transportation for any
railroad crossings that are to be built.
(11)
The site plan shall be certified by the county as to the county's
ability to provide the sewerage capacity necessary for the site.
The certification must indicate whether the county has the proper
permit(s) and capacity to accommodate the additional sewerage of
the proposed use of the site.
(12)
The site plan shall be reviewed by the county as to its conformance
with all applicable state, county and Town codes, with written
reviews from all applicable county departments. The site plan shall
be certified by the county as to the site plan's conformance with all
county adequate facilities ordinances.
(13)
Upon approval of the final site plan, the applicant shall be required
to execute a public works agreement to construct such required
improvements as are located within public rights-of-way or easements
or as are connected to any public facility and shall guarantee such
construction in the amount of the estimated cost of the required
improvements as determined by the Town.
E.
The approved final site plan shall have an executed public works
agreement (PWA) and have grading permits issued within one year of
the date of final approval and shall have construction started within
two years for a residential site plan, three years for a commercial site
plan and three years for an industrial site plan or the approval will
automatically expire and the site plan must then be resubmitted for site
plan approval. The site plan will be subject to the regulations in force
at the time of resubmission.
A.
The Commission may establish a specific expiration date for an
approved site plan which is later than when the approved site plan
would otherwise expire, but only if the Commission approves the later
expiration date at the same time it approves the site plan; the approved
site plan is part of a larger development with an approved phasing plan
B.
§ 120-9 SITE PLANS § 120-10
120:179
§ 120-11. Conformance to site plan required.
§ 120-12. Inspections; supervision; construction standards.
or extended build-out period; and the later expiration date is consistent
with the approved phasing plan or extended build-out period of the
larger development. The Commission, at its discretion, may grant a
request for an extension of time to the site plan expiration date if the
developer proves there are extenuating circumstances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect or alter any
building or structure, or develop, change or improve land for which
a site plan is required, except in accordance with the approved or
amended site plan.
A.
No building permit shall be issued to construct, erect or alter any
building or structure, or develop or improve any land that is subject to
the provisions of this chapter, until a site plan has been submitted and
received approval as determined by the Commission unless such site
plan shall have been waived pursuant to the provisions of § 120-3.
B.
No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued until the site plan
shall have received approval and all provisions of the site plan and
all other regulations governing the building or development have been
complied with.
C.
Nonconformance with an approved site plan shall be grounds for an
order stopping all work, cessation of building permit issuance,
cessation of use and occupancy permit issuance and any other such
measures as authorized by this chapter or the Town Code.
D.
Inspection during the installation of the off-site improvements and
required on-site improvements shall be made by the agency responsible
for such improvements, as required to certify compliance with the
approved site plan and applicable standards.
A.
The owner or developer shall notify the agency responsible for
inspections three days prior to the beginning of all street or storm
sewer work shown to be constructed on the site plan.
B.
The owner or developer shall provide adequate supervision on the
site during the installation of all required improvements and have
a responsible superintendent or foreman together with one set of
approved plans, profiles and specifications available at the site at all
times when work is being performed.
C.
Final inspection. Upon satisfactory completion of the installation of the
improvements, the owner or developer shall receive a final inspection
from the agency responsible upon a request for such inspection. A
final inspection which evidences no defects or noncompliance with
the requirements set forth above shall authorize the release of any
bond which may have been furnished to guarantee the satisfactory
D.
§ 120-10 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 120-12
120:180
§ 120-13. Changes to approved site plans.
After a site plan has received final approval, minor (red line) adjustments of
the site plan, which comply with the spirit and intent of this chapter and that
of the Zoning Ordinance, with the intent of the approving agencies in their
review of site plans and with the general purpose of the comprehensive
plan for development of the area, may be approved by the Town Manager
with the concurrence of the Commission Chair. Substantial deviation from
an approved site plan shall require the submittal, review and approval of
a revised site plan pursuant to the process outlined in § 120-9 prior to any
request for final inspection or occupancy or use of the premises.
§ 120-14. Exceptions.
installation of such improvements or parts thereof. This inspection
shall release only the bond required pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and shall not effect the terms or validity of any bond(s) required
by the development ordinance or any other ordinance or regulation.
Construction standards.
The construction standards for all off-site improvements and on-site
improvements required by this chapter shall conform to the design
and construction standards of the Town of Hampstead, Carroll
County, Maryland or the State of Maryland. Where such standards
conflict, the higher standard shall prevail.
(1)
More stringent construction standards may required by the Town
if it is demonstrated that they are necessary to promote the public
health, safety, or welfare or to promote good development design.
(2)
The Town Manager or the Town's appointed agent or the Carroll
County Department of Permits and Inspections shall approve the
plans and specifications for all required improvements, and shall
inspect the installation of such improvements to assure conformity
thereto.
(3)
E.
Adequate facilities. All subdivisions of land and all site plans may
be approved by the Commission subject to the following conditions.
The following conditions, therefore, are set forth in planning for the
continued orderly development of Hampstead and in the pursuit of
these objectives: The Commission, pursuant to authority granted by
Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Zoning Ordinance
and the Subdivision Regulations of Hampstead, in addition to any other
applicable ordinances or regulations, shall require that the adequate
conditions and other criteria set forth in § 120-9 shall be incorporated
in and made a part of any conditions of approval for a subdivision or
site plan. The Commission shall use these conditions to ensure that the
Town has the ability to provide for itself or receive from the appropriate
authority or governing body improvements, facilities and/or services
which are essential to the health, safety, convenience, general welfare,
A.
§ 120-12 SITE PLANS § 120-14
120:181
§ 120-15. Appeals.
Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the Commission under this
chapter may file an appeal of such decision to the Hampstead Board of
Zoning Appeals within 30 days of issuance of such final decisions. Any
party aggrieved by a decision of the Board may seek judicial relief in the
Circuit Court for Carroll County. The Board may overturn a decision of the
Commission; however, the power to approve a site plan is reserved in whole
to the Commission.
§ 120-16. Violations.
environment and quality of life of the Town. Whenever any one or a
combination of these conditions are not met or are deemed inadequate
by the state, county, Town or their hired agent, the Commission shall
deny or defer the approval of the plan until such a time as those
inadequacies are provided for or assured. The Commission may, in
its discretion, recommend to the Hampstead Town Council that an
exception for approval be made. If a recommendation for an exception
is made by the Commission, the approval or disapproval of the proposed
plan will be deferred until the Council makes a determination. The
Council shall hold a hearing promptly after the recommendation and
render a decision at the first Council meeting following the hearing.
The Council may either grant the exception recommended by the
Commission, grant the recommended exception subject to certain
conditions, which it may impose, or deny the exception. If the Council
denies the exception, the Commission shall disapprove the plan. If the
Council grants the exception subject to conditions, the Commission has
the discretion to approve the plan with the conditions as set by the
Council or disapprove the plan. If the Council grants the exception with
no conditions, the Commission shall approve the plan.
Other exceptions. Except as authorized by § 120-14A, no exceptions
shall be made to any part or provision of this chapter unless
recommended by the Commission and approved by the Town Council.
Such shall be limited to such circumstances where full conformance
with this chapter would cause extraordinary hardship and where such
hardship has not been created by the applicant. Any such exceptions
shall be consistent with the Town of Hampstead and Environs
Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance and not adverse to the
public interest as determined by the Town Council.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or develop
any site regulated by this chapter or cause same to be done, contrary to
or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
A.
The Town Manager shall serve a notice of violation or order on the
person responsible for the use or development of any site in violation
of the provisions of this chapter or in violation of a detailed statement
or a plan approved thereunder; and such order shall direct the
B.
§ 120-14 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 120-16
120:182
§ 120-17. Remedies and penalties.
Chapter 121
OPEN SPACE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
25.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 119.
Site plans — See Ch. 120.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 121-1. Purpose.
The Town of Hampstead recognizes that common open space (open space)
created by the planned unit development process is a resource that is
intended to benefit both the residents of a subdivision and, because of its
status, the greater community. Open space generally serves a number of
functions, including conservation of natural resources and environmentally
sensitive land; screening and buffering of residents from other land uses
and developments; preservation of scenic vistas and rural characteristics;
and recreational areas. Open space may include places for active and
passive recreation, such as tot lots, athletic fields or walking trails. The
purpose of this chapter is to preserve and maintain open space in
accordance with approved site plan or subdivision plans for the perpetual
use and enjoyment of the community and the benefit of the natural
environment.
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of
the violation.
The Commission, Town Council, or any owner or occupant of
neighboring property may institute injunction, mandamus or other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or terminate any violation
of this chapter, and the Circuit Court of Carroll County is hereby
granted jurisdiction to issue restraining orders, temporary or
permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
A.
Any violation of this chapter may be also be prosecuted as a municipal
infraction. Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 where
each violation constitutes a separate offense. Each day of work without
an approved site plan shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
§ 120-16 OPEN SPACE § 121-2
121:183
§ 121-2. Maintenance requirements.
Passive open space shall be generally preserved in a natural state and
the use of such land shall be limited to appropriate conservation and
passive recreational purposes. Active open space, such as tot lots, ball
fields, basketball or volleyball courts, or other improved areas shall be
properly maintained by the property owner or other responsible party to
allow safe and reasonable use by residents.
§ 121-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Undeveloped land within a subdivision that
has been designated, dedicated, reserved, or restricted in perpetuity from
further development and set aside for the use and enjoyment by residents
of the development and/or the community. Open space shall not be part of
individual residential lots. It shall be substantially free of structures, but
may contain historic structures and archaeological sites, including burial
sites and/or such recreational facilities for residents as indicated on the
approved development plan.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A subdivision and/or site plan approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission..
NATURAL STATE — Land that is generally undisturbed by human
intrusions, including but not limited to, construction; filling or excavation;
removal or destruction of trees, shrubs or vegetation (live or dead); and
activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation, erosion
control, soil conservation or the preservation of wildlife. "Natural state"
may also be land that has been altered to create stormwater management,
drainage or other facilities but allowed to return to a natural condition.
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Activities that require physical exertion by people
and/or cause physical alterations to the land.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Minimally intrusive activities that allow the land
to remain essentially in its natural state.
UNBUILDABLE LAND — The area of a site that includes wetlands and
submerged areas, slopes of 25% or more and the one-hundred-year
floodplain.
§ 121-4. Boundaries; use; compliance with other provisions.
The boundaries of open space shall be clearly delineated on plans,
including record plats. The boundaries may be marked in the field with
signage approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission to delineate
these areas.
A.
The entity that owns or manages the open space shall assure that
the open space will be protected in perpetuity from all forms of
development, except as shown on an approved development plan. Any
B.
§ 121-2 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 121-4
121:184
change related to the use of open space shall be done through the
site plan amendment process which shall require a public hearing and
notification of property owners contiguous to the open space. Any such
change shall be in compliance with this chapter and must be approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The entity that owns or manages the open space shall assure that
the open space is maintained in accordance with the approved site
development plan, this chapter and the Hampstead Town Code,
including the zoning regulations.13
C.
Prohibited uses.
Except where authorized by the development plan, the following
uses shall be prohibited on open space:
Removal or intentional destruction of existing vegetation
except as required for the maintenance of stormwater
management facilities or recreational facilities, such as ball
fields, walking trails or other similar facilities.
(a)
Motorized vehicle use or parking beyond the limits of
established public access roads and designated parking areas.
(b)
(c) Unrestricted activities of pets.
(d) Storage of debris, materials, vehicles or equipment.
Disposal or dumping of debris (including grass, leaves, brush,
construction debris, refuse, etc.)
(e)
(f) Excavation or filling.
(g) Construction or placement of any building or structure.
Any uses prohibited by municipal, state or federal regulations
or laws, including the municipal zoning regulations of the
underlying zoning district.
(h)
(1)
The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to properly
authorized uses by local, state or federal government or private
utilities, however, the placement of such governmental and utility
buildings and structures shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(2)
D.
The following activities or land uses may not be counted as a part of
designated open space:
(1) Land considered unbuildable under § 121-3.
(2) Streets, off-street parking and utility easements.
E.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Zoning.
§ 121-4 OPEN SPACE § 121-4
121:185
§ 121-5. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction subject to a fine
not to exceed $500. Each day a violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate infraction.
Chapter 122
TAXATION
(3) Setbacks and lawns.
Open space shall be subject to routine municipal inspection for
compliance with subdivision and site plan approvals and the provision
of this chapter.
F.
The deed restrictions and covenants on land designated as open space
shall not be removed except upon the recommendation of the Planning
and Zoning Commission and approval of the Town Council and where
a clear and compelling municipal purpose necessitates the removal of
such restrictions as determined in the sole and exclusive discretion of
the Town Council.
G.
Whenever land designated as open space is conveyed, the plat, parcel
and deed shall contain any restrictions or covenants or other
requirements thereupon. In the event open space is conveyed, such
open space land may not be further used to meet any open space
requirements or density calculations.
H.
§ 121-4 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 121-5
121:186
ARTICLE I
Tax Rate
[Amended in its entirety 6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 372]
§ 122-1. Tax rate.
The tax rates on assessed value of all real, personal and mixed property
within the corporate limits of the Town of Hampstead shall be fixed annually
by ordinance adopted by the Mayor and Council, a copy of which is on file
in the office of the Town Clerk and available for review and inspection.
§ 122-1 OPEN SPACE § 122-1
121:187

ARTICLE II
Admissions and Amusements Tax
[Amended in its entirety 6-9-2015 by Ord. No. 510]
§ 122-2. Imposition of tax; rate.
An admissions and amusements tax shall be imposed at a rate of 7% on the
gross receipts derived from the admission and amusement charges from all
sources and activities within the corporate limits of the Town of Hampstead,
Carroll County, Maryland, to be levied for the use of the Town of Hampstead
for the period July 1, 2015, to June 30, 2016, for general purposes.
§ 122-3. Exemptions.
In addition to the exemptions provided in § 4-103 of the Tax-General Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended from time to time, the
following shall be exempt from the admissions and amusement tax:
§ 122-4. Notification and collection.
The Town Manager is hereby authorized and directed to notify the
Comptroller of the Treasury of the State of Maryland of the passage of
this article and of all ordinances modifying the admissions and amusement
tax, and be it further enacted and ordained that the Comptroller of the
Treasury of the State of Maryland be and is hereby authorized, directed,
and required to collect the admissions and amusement taxes levied by this
article and the interest and penalties accruing thereon, in accordance with
the aforementioned authorities.
The gross receipts derived by:
(1) The Town of Hampstead;
(2) The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, Maryland;
Any sporting, athletic, recreational or cultural event sponsored and
operated by the Carroll County Public School System;
(3)
Any charge for admission or for merchandise, refreshments or
a service where the gross receipts are used exclusively for
community or civic improvement by a not-for-profit association that
is organized and operated to promote the general welfare of the
community;
(4)
Any source upon which a Maryland state sales or use tax is
applicable.
(5)
A.
§ 122-2 OPEN SPACE § 122-4
121:189
Chapter 124
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 13.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 35.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 47.
Sediment control and grading — See Ch. 114.
§ 122-4 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 122-4
121:190
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 124-1. Terms defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are
defined as follows:
DEPARTMENT — The State Department of Natural Resources.
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names or to which the public has free access
as a park, plus all facilities, parking lots, open spaces and all other areas
owned by the Town.
ROADSIDE TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation
on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the Town.
§ 124-1 OPEN SPACE § 124-1
121:191

ARTICLE II
Town Tree Commission
§ 124-2. Creation; membership. [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No.
491]
There is hereby created and established a Town Tree Commission for the
Town of Hampstead, Maryland. The members shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the approval of the Council.
§ 124-3. Term of office; vacancies; removal. [Amended 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 491]
§ 124-4. Compensation.
Members of the Town Tree Commission shall serve without compensation
for their services.
§ 124-5. Officers; proceedings; quorum.
§ 124-6. Duties and responsibilities.
The terms of persons appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
Council shall be for three years.
A.
In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member,
a successor shall be appointed and approved. Members may be
removed by the Mayor and Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office.
B.
C. The Commission shall maintain a minimum of five members.
The officers of the Commission shall consist of a Chairman, Secretary
and Treasurer. They shall be elected by the members of the Commission
and will hold such office at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
A.
The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a
journal of the proceedings.
B.
A quorum at any meeting shall be the majority of the total number of
members.
C.
It shall be the responsibility of the Town Tree Commission to study,
investigate, counsel, develop and/or update annually, and recommend
to the Mayor and Council, a written plan for the care, preservation,
pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and
shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will
be presented annually to the Mayor and Council. Upon its review, the
Mayor and Council may modify and amend such proposed plan and
adopt it by resolution as the official Comprehensive Town Tree Plan.
A.
§ 124-2 OPEN SPACE § 124-6
121:193
Upon the request of the Mayor and Council, the Commission shall
consider, investigate and make findings, reports and recommendations
upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its
responsibilities.
B.
The Commission shall also perform the various duties and
responsibilities assigned to it in this chapter.
C.
§ 124-6 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 124-6
121:194
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 124-7. Tree species.
This subsection constitutes the official list of permissible roadside tree
species for the Town of Hampstead as follows:
Official Roadside Tree List for
the Town of Hampstead, Maryland
Common Name Horticultural Name
Small Trees
Hornbeam maple Acer carpinifolium
Tatarian maple Acer tataricum
Purpleblow maple Acer trunacatum
European hornbeam cvs.
Fastigata
Carpinus betulus
American dogwood Cornus florida
Kousa dogwood Cornus kousa
Cornelian cherry Cornus mas
Golden raintree Koelreuteria paniculata
Purpleleaf plum Prunus cerasifera
Oriental cherry Prunus serrulata
Ironwood Ostrya virginiana
Japanese snowball Styrax japonica
Amur maackia Maackia amurensis
Official Roadside Tree List for
the Town of Hampstead, Maryland
Common Name Horticultural Name
Medium Trees
Hedge maple Acer campestre
Red maple cvs. Autumn Flame,
Autumn Glory, Bowhall, Gerling,
October Glory, Red Sunset, Tilford
Acer rubrum
American yellowwood Cladrastis lutea
Thornless honey locust cvs.
Imperial, Moraine, Shademaster,
Skyline
Gleditsia triancanthos
Carolina silverbell Halesia carolina
A.
§ 124-7 OPEN SPACE § 124-7
121:195
§ 124-8. Distance from street corners, fire hydrants and utilities.
§ 124-9. Maintenance; removal.
Official Roadside Tree List for
the Town of Hampstead, Maryland
Common Name Horticultural Name
Medium Trees
Callery pear cvs. Aristocrat,
Fauriel, Chanticleer, Redspire
Pyrus calleryana
Sargent cherry Prunus sargenti
Little leaf linden cvs. Greenspire Tilia cordata
Chinese elm Ulmus parvifolia
Zelkova Zelkova serrata
Large tree species which have a mature height of 50 feet or more are
not considered suitable as roadside trees under most circumstances.
However, the Commission may approve their use upon an express
written determination that such trees will not adversely impair the
integrity of the Comprehensive Town Tree Plan and that said trees will
not create an unreasonable risk of danger to person or property.
B.
The following species are not considered suitable under any
circumstances and may not be approved by the Commission:
Common Name Horticultural Name
Mimosa Albizzia julibrissin
Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima
Silver maple Acer saccharinum
Catalpa Catalpa speciosa
Black walnut Juglans nigra
Paulownia Paulownia tomentosa
Hybrid poplar Populus nigra
Lombardy poplar Populus nigra
Siberian elm Ulmus pumila
C.
No roadside tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curblines. No roadside tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any
fire hydrant.
A.
The Tree Commission will give special consideration to trees planted
within the area of overhead and underground utilities.
B.
§ 124-7 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 124-9
121:196
§ 124-10. Tree topping.
§ 124-11. Removal on private property.
The Town shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the Town when such trees constitute a
public hazard to life and property or harbor insects or disease which
constitute a potential threat to other trees within the Town. The Town will
notify the owners in writing of such trees. Removal shall be done by said
The Town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds. The Town may remove or cause or order to be
removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or
which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric powerlines,
gas lines, waterlines or other public improvements or is affected with
any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
A.
All persons, including businesses, utilities and government agencies,
are subject to the provisions of the Natural Resources Article, Title
5, Subtitle 4, of the Annotated Code of Maryland and must obtain a
permit from the Department to remove, prune, root prune or treat in
any way trees and shrubs existing in the right-of-way of any street,
alley or avenue within the Town. The Department shall notify the Tree
Commission of any request for removal of a roadside tree received by
the Department. The Town may remove a tree without a permit from the
Department if the tree is uprooted or determined to be an immediate
danger to persons or property. The Town shall notify the Department of
the action within 24 hours of the removal.
B.
This section does not prohibit the planting of roadside trees by adjacent
property owners, provided that the selection and location of said trees
is in accordance with §§ 124-7 and 124-8 of this chapter.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any tree care firm/business entity to top any
roadside tree, park tree or other tree, except trimming as necessary to
clear electric utility lines, located within the Town limits without prior
written approval of the Commission. As used in this section, "topping"
means the cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in
diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
A.
The Commission may grant written approval to allow topping in cases
where a tree has been severely damaged by storms or other causes or
when a tree creates a dangerous condition relating to utility wires or
other obstructions. Prior to granting any such approval, the Town shall
obtain a recommendation from the Tree Commission. In emergency
situations, immediate authorization to top may be given by the Town
Manager.
B.
§ 124-9 OPEN SPACE § 124-11
121:197
owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of
notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the
Town shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of
removal to the property owner.
§ 124-12. Stump removal.
§ 124-13. Tree experts.
All stumps of roadside and park trees shall be removed below the
surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project
above the surface of the ground unless the Commission authorizes an
alternative method of removal or a variance.
A.
All roadside trees within the right-of-way of Maryland Route 30, within
the Town limits, which are removed shall have the stumps ground
out. The Town shall contract for stump removal, if required. The
apportionment of expenses and tree replacement shall be determined
by the Tree Commission.
B.
No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation of pruning
or treating trees within the Town without having a tree expert license
issued by the Department.
A.
A public service company which desires to prune, root prune, remove
or treat a roadside tree in any way must obtain a permit from the
State Department of Natural Resources for the desired treatment. Any
treatment of a roadside tree, except removal, must be performed by a
tree expert licensed by the Department.
B.
The Town must obtain a permit from the Department to remove, prune,
root prune or treat a roadside tree. Such treatment, except removals,
must be performed by a licensed tree expert unless the work done
by Town crews is supervised by the Department's Forestry Division
in accordance with its schedule of charges. The Town may obtain
conditional permits to perform limited work on roadside trees by its
employees if said employees are trained to perform the work and
supervised by a Town employee who has passed the tree expert exam
administered by the Department and agrees to be responsible for the
quality of work performed. The designated Town supervisor is not
required to have the necessary three years' experience to obtain a tree
expert's license but must exhibit the ability to cause the trimming to
be done to accepted standards. Supervision of tree trimming will be
limited to roadside trees within the Town and trees on Town-owned
property.
C.
§ 124-11 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 124-13
121:198
ARTICLE IV
Violations; Appeals
§ 124-14. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of §§ 124-8, 124-10, 124-11, 124-12 and 124-13 is declared to
be a municipal infraction. The penalty for violations shall be a fine of $25
for each offense and $50 for each repeat offense.
§ 124-15. Appeals.
Any applicant seeking Commission approval under §§ 124-7B, 124-10 and
124-12 may appeal, in writing, an unfavorable decision of the Commission to
the Commission within 10 days after receipt of the Commission's decision.
Said appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Commission. After its review, the Commission may affirm, reverse or modify
the decision within 10 days from the date of the appeal hearing. Further
appeal of the Commission's decision may be made to the Mayor and Town
Council once the appeal process with the Commission is exhausted. The
decision of the Mayor and Council shall be final.
§ 124-14 OPEN SPACE § 124-15
121:199
Chapter 127
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Go-carts — See Ch. 76.
§ 124-15 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 124-15
127:200
ARTICLE I
Traffic and Parking Control
§ 127-1. Supplementary nature of provision. [Amended 3-15-1993
by Ord. No. 252]
The provisions of this chapter are intended to be in addition to and
supplementary to the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Laws of the State
of Maryland and in accordance with authority specifically granted by said
laws.
§ 127-2. Applicability of statute.
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, the Motor Vehicle Laws of the
State of Maryland, which are hereby declared and made a part of this article
by reference, shall control and govern, and any person violating any of
the provisions thereof shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties
provided therein.
§ 127-3. Erection of signs. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 350]
§ 127-4. Designation of boulevards; erection of stop signs.
The Council shall from time to time designate as "boulevards" such streets
as shall contribute to the safe movement of traffic within the Town and may
post intersecting streets with appropriate "Stop Signs," so placed as to be
readily visible to the motoring public, and all traffic entering boulevards so
designated shall come to a complete stop before so doing.
§ 127-5. Stopping, standing and parking.
Whenever, in the judgment of the Council of the Town of Hampstead, it
is necessary for the safety or control of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
or for the regulation of the use of parking areas, the Town Council
may erect or cause to be erected STOP, NO PARKING, SPEED LIMIT,
ONE WAY or other traffic control and parking restriction signs designed
to control, warn, regulate or guide traffic or limit parking on public
streets, highways or other areas in the Town, and it shall be the duty of
all persons to observe such signs, and any person failing to observe any
such sign shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to constitute a repeal of the
authority heretofore granted by the Town of Hampstead for the erection
of traffic control and parking restriction signs, and a failure by anyone
to observe any such signs heretofore erected shall make them subject
to the same penalties as set forth hereafter.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person except the Town of Hampstead,
Carroll County or the State of Maryland to erect any street, parking or
traffic control sign or device on or near any public street or municipal
parking lot unless authorized in writing. Illegal placement of traffic
signs or devices shall be punishable by a fine of up to $100.
B.
§ 127-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-5
127:201
All vehicles shall be driven and parked on the right-hand side of the
street, unless a street or avenue is designated by a sign to be for
one-way traffic. At any time as shall become necessary, the Police
Department may mark and designate areas which may become
congested, banning parking altogether if necessary. No automobile
or other vehicle shall stop in any street, avenue or highway in such
manner as to hinder or delay traffic or passage, create a hazardous
or unsafe condition or interfere with municipal utility work or snow
removal. The Police Department is empowered to enforce this provision
by removing and impounding said vehicle immediately. [Amended
4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 422]
A.
Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; exception. [Amended
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 350]
No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, tractor
over 20 horsepower, recreational vehicle, camper, boat, trailer or
equipment, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or
traffic control device, in any of the following places:
On sidewalks, curbs or any unpaved soil or vegetative surface
forward of the rear building line, except temporarily as
necessary for loading and/or unloading.
(a)
In front of a public driveway or alley or in front of a private
driveway, except with the consent of the owner or occupant of
the premises.
(b)
(c) Within an intersection.
(d) On a crosswalk.
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction,
when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct
traffic.
(e)
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street, except for the purpose of receiving or
discharging passengers or merchandise.
(f)
At any place where an official sign or painted curb of Carroll
County, the State of Maryland or the Town of Hampstead
prohibits stopping, standing or parking, and it is hereby
specifically provided that wherever a curb is painted yellow
that there shall be no parking, standing or stopping parallel to
said painted curb.
(g)
On or along any public street in such manner as to interfere
with the safe and unrestricted movement of traffic and removal
of snow.
(h)
(1)
B.
§ 127-5 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 127-5
127:202
§ 127-6. Parking violations; issuance of citations; penalty.
[Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 212]
It shall be unlawful to park on any street or parts of streets
designated, after it has been properly posted, for a period longer
than indicated on such posted sign.
(2)
Government vehicles engaged in the necessary performance of
official duties shall be exempt from parking regulations.
(3)
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, designed or used for
carrying freight or merchandise, in front of, alongside of or in the rear
of any private dwelling, except when actually unloading merchandise
or when the operator or owner of such vehicle is actually engaged in
rendering a service at or to such premises.
C.
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle more than 12 inches from the
curb, curbline or side of street or alley where the curbline should
normally be, said parked vehicle facing to the right of all traffic and
not less than four feet behind or ahead of any vehicle already parked.
All parking shall be parallel with the curb. Exception will be made to
this subsection in cases of loading or unloading a vehicle or vehicles,
and said exception shall be given for a reasonable time as necessary for
loading and/or unloading a vehicle or vehicles. [Amended 11-13-2001
by Ord. No. 350]
D.
No person shall use any portion of any street or municipal parking lot
for long-term storage of any motor vehicle, tractor, recreational vehicle,
camper, boat, trailer or equipment. The term "long-term storage" shall
mean the use of any portion of a street or municipal parking lot for the
parking or placing of any vehicle for the purpose of exhibition, sale,
repair or storage for a period of longer than seven days. Recurrent onstreet
parking of an operational, noncommercial motor vehicle by an
adjacent property owner does not constitute long-term storage. [Added
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 350]
E.
No vehicle shall be repaired in any street except in case of emergency
and then only so as not to block or obstruct any street or sidewalk,
nor shall the motor of any such vehicle be tested while it is parking or
standing on any street except when unavoidable. [Added 11-13-2001
by Ord. No. 350]
F.
No commercial vehicle, bus, house trailer, mobile home, recreational
vehicle, boat or utility trailer, camper or truck over one ton shall be
permitted to park or stand on a public street or municipal parking
lot except while actively engaged in loading or unloading. [Added
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 350]
G.
In all cases of parking violations, the officer who discovers the vehicle
illegally parked shall deliver a citation to the operator or, if the vehicle
is unattended, attach a citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
A.
§ 127-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-6
127:203
§ 127-7. (Reserved)14
In the absence of the operator, the registered owner of the vehicle shall
be presumed to be the person receiving the citation. A copy of the
citation shall be retained by the officer and shall bear his certification,
under penalty of perjury, attesting to the truth of matters therein set
forth. The recipient of a citation may make payment of the violation
directly to the Town of Hampstead; or if he desires to stand trial for said
charges, he may elect to do so by notifying the Town of Hampstead of
his intention to stand trial at least five days prior to the payment date
set forth in the citation. At the time the notice of intention to stand trial
is given, the person receiving the citation must also notify the Town of
Hampstead that he desires the presence, at said trial, of the officer who
issued the citation. If the person receiving the citation does not notify
the Town of Hampstead that he desires the presence of the officer at the
trial, it shall not be necessary that the officer appear, and the copy of
the citation bearing the certification of the officer shall be prima facie
evidence of the matter therein set forth.
The penalty for illegal parking at any time in any space which shall
be designated as a no-parking space by any traffic control sign, traffic
control marking or as so designated in this chapter shall be $50.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 350]
B.
The penalty for parking overtime in any space designated as "timed
parking" by any traffic control sign or traffic control marking shall be
$25. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 350]
C.
The penalty for illegal parking at any time in a space designated as
handicapped parking by any sign or marking shall be $100. [Added
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 350]
D.
If a Town of Hampstead parking citation is not paid within the time
allotted, the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) will be notified by
the Hampstead Police Department to place a flag against the vehicle
record. A flag will prevent the vehicle’s registration from being
renewed or the transferring of plates. An administrative flag fee must
be paid to the MVA and is in addition to the fine payable to the Town of
Hampstead. [Added 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 398]
E.
When any unattended motor vehicle is found parked at any time upon
any street of the Town against which there are three or more
unsatisfied citations for parking violations and when a period of 15
days or more has elapsed since the third unsatisfied citation, the Police
Department is authorized to cause such vehicle to be immobilized or
removed and impounded in any place designated by the Chief of Police.
[Added 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 422]
F.
14.Editor's Note: Former § 127-7, Leaving vehicle unattended; penalty, as amended, was
repealed 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 350.
§ 127-6 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 127-8
127:204
§ 127-8. Abandoned and unregistered vehicles; penalty. [Amended
4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 212; 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 295]
Any motor vehicle that is inoperable and is left unattended on public
property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained
on public property for a period of more than 48 hours, or a motor
vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of
the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours,
or a motor vehicle that has remained on public property for more than
48 hours and is not displaying currently valid registration plates or is
displaying registration plates of another vehicle, shall be deemed to be
an abandoned vehicle and may be impounded and disposed of by the
Police Department as provided herein.
A.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person(s) in possession of any
property within the Town to have or permit anyone to have on such
property in excess of 30 days any registered motor vehicle with expired
registration plates unless enclosed in a garage or other building;
provided, however, that not more than one such vehicle may be on
such property for not more than six months so long as it is currently
and actively being restored or repaired to such operating condition as
would permit it to be lawfully operated upon the public roads. This
section shall not apply to any vehicle being offered for sale by a licensed
automobile dealer or used car lot on property that is properly zoned and
is authorized as an automobile, trailer or implement sales and service
establishment.
B.
Prior to the issuance of any citation, the following procedure shall be
observed:
The Police Chief or Town Manager shall issue a warning letter
to the owner(s) of the property involved and/or any person(s) in
possession thereof Said letter shall give the recipient(s) 30 days
to either remove or enclose the vehicles(s), or provide written
evidence satisfactory to the Police Chief or Town Manager that the
vehicle(s) is (are) properly registered and displaying valid plates,
or provide written evidence satisfactory to the Police Chief or Town
Manager that the vehicle is currently and actively being restored
or repaired in order to put it in operating condition as described in
§ 127-8B.
(1)
If the recipient of the warning letter does not take the actions
described in Subsection C(1) within the thirty-day time period or if
the Police Chief or Town Manager who sent the warning letter is
not satisfied as to the validity of any response, then a citation for
a municipal infraction and fine shall be issued. After the thirty-day
time period given in the warning letter, each additional day that a
vehicle is in violation of § 127-8B of the Code will be considered a
separate municipal infraction.
(2)
C.
§ 127-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-8
127:205
§ 127-9. Disposition of impounded vehicles.
§ 127-10. Disposition of proceeds from sale of impounded vehicles.
After payment of the expenses of any sale held pursuant to § 127-9 of this
article and the amount of storage and other charges incurred on account of
the vehicle or part thereof sold at such sale and after payment of all liens
against the vehicle or part thereof, the balance, if any, received by the Town
at any such sale shall be held by the Town Clerk-Treasurer for a period of
one year from the date of such sale. The Town-Clerk Treasurer shall pay
such balance to any person who shall file his verified claim prior to the
All warning letters and all responses by recipients thereof shall be
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(3)
The violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable
by a fine of $50.
D.
Whenever any vehicle or part thereof is in the custody of the Mayor and
whenever the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof cannot
be located and fails to claim such vehicle or part thereof for a period
of 60 days after such vehicle or part thereof came into the custody of
the Mayor, the same may be disposed of by the Mayor at public sale at
some place which shall be convenient and accessible to the public, at
any time, provided that an advertisement of the time, place and terms
of the sale, together with a full, detailed description of such vehicle
or part thereof shall be inserted in at least one newspaper of general
circulation in the Town, at least once each week for two successive
weeks prior to the sale, provided, further, that a notice by certified mail
shall be sent at least 10 days prior to the sale to the owner or lienholder,
if any, shown on the records of the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles or
the person entitled to the possession of such vehicle or part thereof,
if his address is known or if it can be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence. If such address cannot be ascertained, then such
notice shall not be required.
A.
If the impounded vehicle shall be deemed by the Mayor or his designee
to be of no value or of insufficient value to warrant sale and if the
person entitled to the possession thereof shall not appear to redeem
such valueless property or cannot be located within 30 days after such
vehicle came into Town custody, such vehicle shall be conclusively
deemed of no value and to be abandoned and may be destroyed or
otherwise disposed of, and there shall be no claim against the Town by
reason of any such destruction or disposition, provided that a notice by
certified mail shall be sent at least 10 days prior to such disposition
to the owner and lienholder, if any, shown on the records of the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles or the person entitled to the
possession of such vehicle or part thereof, if his address is known or
if it can be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence. If such
address cannot be ascertained, then such notice shall not be required.
B.
§ 127-8 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 127-10
127:206
expiration of such year establishing that he is the owner or person entitled
to the possession of such vehicle. If no such claim is filed within such period,
the balance shall be transferred to the general funds of the Town.
§ 127-11. Reckless driving; speed restrictions; injury to streets;
penalty.
§ 127-12. Obstructions to vision.15
No individual shall operate a motor vehicle over any street or public
highway within the Town limits recklessly, or at a rate of speed greater
than is reasonable and proper, having regard to the width of the public
highway, the use thereof and the traffic thereon, or so as to endanger
any property or individual or so as to unnecessarily or unreasonably
damage the public highway.
A.
No motor vehicle, truck or tractor shall be operated upon any highway
or street in the Town at a greater speed than 25 miles per hour, except
on such streets and highways as may be covered by regulations and the
placing of signs.
B.
No person shall operate over the streets of the Town any vehicle, motordriven
or otherwise, equipped with spikes, cleats or other traction
device calculated to inflict any undue damage or injury upon the
surface of the streets of the Town.
C.
Any person or persons charged with the violation of any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be charged
with a misdemeanor and punished as provided in § C13-4A of the
Charter. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 231]
D.
No person shall fail to observe the traffic direction of a school crossing
guard. Failure to stop when directed by a school crossing guard shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250. [Added 11-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 350]
E.
Whenever the Police Department finds that there exists on any private
property within the Town any trees, bushes, vines, weeds, undergrowth,
loose earth or other obstructions, except buildings and similar
structures affixed to the ground, and if they further find that the same
do obstruct the vision of operators of vehicles traveling upon any
public street, road or highway so as to constitute a traffic hazard, they
shall immediately, upon finding such condition, serve upon the owner,
agent, lessee or any other person having supervision over such property
a written notice describing the premises whereon such obstruction
exists, a statement of the particulars in which the vision of operators
of vehicles is obstructed, including the steps necessary to correct such
conditions, and an order directing that such corrective steps be taken
within a stated period of time.
A.
15.Editor's Note: See also § 135-22, Traffic visibility across corner lots.
§ 127-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-12
127:207
§ 127-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
231]
Unless otherwise provided specifically in this article, any person violating
any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in § C13-4A of the
Charter.
Any person who considers himself aggrieved by an order issued
pursuant to the authority of this section may, within 10 days of the
receipt of such order, petition the Town in writing for a hearing thereon;
within 30 days from the receipt of such petition, the Council shall hold
such a hearing, after which it may either affirm, modify or rescind the
order. No official of the Town government shall remove any obstruction
or enforce any order issued hereunder until after such hearing by the
Council has been held or until after the time to petition for such hearing
has expired without such a petition having been filed.
B.
Upon the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of any
order issued hereunder within the time specified therein, the Police
Department shall direct work forces to enter upon the property
whereon the obstruction is located and remove all or such part of the
obstruction as may be necessary to eliminate the traffic hazard.
C.
All orders and notices issued by the Police Department or any Town
official pursuant to the authority of this section shall be served on the
person to whom they are directed, by registered mail or by personal
delivery to such person. If such person is not known to reside and
cannot be found in the Town, such service shall be made by publication
of such order or notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Town and by posting the same on the premises in a conspicuous
manner. Service by publication and posting shall be deemed to be made
on the day of publication and posting.
D.
Whenever it is necessary for the Police Department to provide for the
removal or elimination of any type of obstruction referred to herein
pursuant to the procedures prescribed above, they shall file with the
Clerk-Treasurer a certified statement of the cost to the Town of such
removal or elimination, together with proof of service of the notice
above described. The cost of removal, together with the cost of
publication shall therefrom and thereafter constitute a charge against
the owner of said property and may be recovered by the Council by
appropriate legal action.
E.
§ 127-12 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 127-13
127:208
ARTICLE II
Snow Emergency Procedures
§ 127-14. Declaration of snow emergency. [Amended 1-13-2004 by
Ord. No. 383]
When, due to an accumulation of snow and/or ice on the streets and roads
of the Town and environs, a snow emergency is declared by the State
Highway Administration, the State Police and/or the Mayor of Hampstead,
the provisions of this article will become effective and remain in effect until
such snow emergency is removed by said authority.
§ 127-15. Parking and interference with snow removal operations
prohibited. [Amended 1-13-2004 by Ord. No. 383]
During a snow emergency, parking of vehicles on or along public streets and
roads designated by the Mayor and Council as emergency streets and roads
is prohibited on one side of the street until such accumulation has been
cleared. No person shall wilfully interfere with or hinder in any manner the
removal of snow from public streets, to include throwing or depositing snow
into a plowed roadway. Parking on a public street during a snow emergency
or interfering with snow removal operations shall be a municipal infraction
subject to a fine of up to $100 per occurrence.
§ 127-16. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
The Police Department is authorized and empowered to take possession
of and to remove any parked vehicle or abandoned vehicle that obstructs
traffic or interferes with the clearance of snow and/or ice on any designated
street or road within the corporate limits of the Town of Hampstead.
§ 127-17. Costs of removal.
To defray the costs of removing or towing any such vehicle, the Police
Department is hereby authorized to charge and collect a sum equal to an
amount charged the Town by a garage for towing, removal and storage of
the vehicle.
§ 127-18. Emergency hours.
If the accumulation of snow and/or ice takes place after 10:00 p.m., no
vehicle will be towed away until after 8:00 a.m. of the following day.
§ 127-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-18
127:209

ARTICLE III
Towing from Private Property (Trespass Towing)
[Added 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 422]
§ 127-19. Purpose.
§ 127-20. Scope.
This article shall apply to commercial and industrial properties and
residential properties with more than three dwelling units.
§ 127-21. Site plan.
Any posted restrictions in any vehicle parking area on or for a residential
multifamily, commercial or industrial property shall be part of an approved
site plan pursuant to Chapter 135 of the Hampstead Town Code. Where a
property has been developed under the site plan process, the posting of
parking restrictions shall require approval of a site plan amendment. Where
a property has been developed without a site plan, the property owner
must make application for parking restrictions to the Hampstead Planning
and Zoning Commission in such a form and manner as determined by the
Commission.
§ 127-22. Parking areas.
Any parking area where restrictions are posted must meet all requirements
of the Hampstead Town Code pertaining to off-street parking.
§ 127-23. Handicapped vehicle owners.
A vehicle with a valid handicapped registration plate or valid disabled
person's parking permit conspicuously displayed shall not be towed from
private property without the consent of the vehicle owner unless the tow is
expressly authorized by a police officer or member of the department of fire
and rescue services.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare
of municipal residents by regulating the towing of vehicles from private
property. To the extent that legal authority to tow or hold a vehicle
without the consent of its owner exists, that authority shall be derived
from other statutes or the common law. This article restricts the
exercise of any such legal authority but does not authorize the towing
of any vehicle.
A.
This article applies to the towing of a vehicle from private property
without the consent of the owner of the vehicle. It does not apply
to towing initiated by the vehicle owner or by towing approved or
requested by a police officer, fire fighter or other person in an official
capacity in the course of removing impediments to traffic, in the course
of criminal investigation or removal of abandoned vehicles.
B.
§ 127-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-24
127:211
§ 127-24. Regulation by Town Council.
The Town Council may establish by resolution a requirement that all
trespass towing firms operating within the Town limits be registered with
the Town. The Town Council may also by resolution establish fair rates
for trespass towing, incomplete tows, vehicle storage and other activities
related to the removal of vehicles from private property as deemed
necessary to safeguard public health, safety and welfare.
§ 127-25. Remedies; violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be a municipal infraction subject to a
fine of $1,000. Each violation and each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense subject to cumulative fines and
other penalties.
A.
The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and not
exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by the
law.
B.
§ 127-24 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 127-25
127:212
ARTICLE IV
Metered Parking
[Added 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 422]
§ 127-26. Installation authorized.
The Town Council may from time to time authorize, by resolution, the
installation of parking meters in those places in the Town as the Council
may deem necessary. Contracts for these meters shall be so constructed as
to allow for the payment of meters from meter revenue and not from other
Town sources.
§ 127-27. Meter hours.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor or other vehicle
to park that vehicle in violation of meter regulations between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and Town-observed holidays, on
the streets designated as parking meter zones.
§ 127-28. Meter operation.
On streets or in municipal parking lots designated as meter zones, the
proper officers shall designate parking spaces on the curb or pavements
or by other appropriate means and in each space so marked shall erect or
cause to be erected a parking meter which, upon the deposit of a coin or
combination of coins of the United States indicated on the parking meter,
will entitle the party to park his or her car for a limited time as is indicated
on the parking meter, but in any event no longer than the period of time
provided in this article.
§ 127-29. Meter rates.
A person parking a vehicle in a metered parking space during the time
of limited parking shall deposit a coin or coins sufficient to pay for the
amount of time he or she intends to use the parking space. Parking rates
and maximum parking time limits shall be set from time to time by the
Council. If the vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space for any
length of time so that the meter shall indicate by a proper signal that the
lawful parking period has expired, the vehicle and its operator shall be
considered as parking overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall
be a violation of this article.
§ 127-30. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be a municipal infraction subject to
enforcement as described in § 127-6.
§ 127-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 127-30
127:213
Chapter 132
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development impact fees — See Ch. 134.
§ 127-30 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 127-30
127:214
ARTICLE I
Rates and Billing
§ 132-1. Rates for metered service. [Amended 6-17-1991 by Ord.
No. 224; 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 364; 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 436;
8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 468; 6-12-2012 by Res. No. 2012-02;
5-15-2013 by Res. No. 2013-02; 5-13-2014 by Res. No. 2014-02;
6-9-2015 by Res. No. 2015-02; 6-14-2016 by Res. No. 2016-02;
6-13-2017 by Res. No. 2017-01; 6-5-2018 by Res. No. 2018-02]
The rates and charges for metered water service shall increase by 8%
effective July 1, 2018, as shown in the chart below:
§ 132-2. Fire protection system (sprinkler) service rates and
charges. [Amended 4-11-2000 by Ord. No. 331; 1-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 364; 5-14-2009 by Ord. No. 458]
§ 132-3. Rates for unlisted or special customers; exemption.
Quarterly water rates within the Town:
Number of Gallons Rate
0 to 5,000 gallons $45.80 flat fee
5,001 to 20,000 gallons $5.53 per thousand
20,001 to 40,000 gallons $7.88 per thousand
40,001 to 100,000 gallons $8.40 per thousand
100,001 to 250,000 gallons $9.01 per thousand
250,001 to 500,000 gallons $9.46 per thousand
500,001 to 1 million gallons $9.90 per thousand
1 million gallons or more $10.61 per thousand
A.
B. Outside of the Town, the rate shall be two times the Town rate.
Properties served by a fire-suppression sprinkler system with a
connection greater than one inch in size shall pay a quarterly fee. For
the first four inches of the internal diameter of such connection, the
charge shall be $110 per inch. For every inch of internal diameter
greater than four inches, the charge shall be $60 per inch. This fee shall
be included on the quarterly water bill to the property.
A.
The quarterly rate for fire hydrants shall be, for each hydrant: $60. This
fee shall be included on the quarterly water bill to the property.
B.
Connection charge. The following connection charge shall be made
for multifamily residential, commercial or industrial fire suppression
sprinkler systems: $110 per inch of inside diameter of service lateral. In
addition, each customer shall pay all costs of installation from the main
to the protected premises.
C.
§ 132-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-3
127:215
§ 132-4. Rendering of bills; discontinuance of service; penalty
charge.
All unlisted or special water customers not included in the foregoing
section shall pay for water used or consumed according to the rates
established for metered service. Any water sold and dispensed by truck
or tank from a location designated by the Town shall be at the rate of
$3 per thousand gallons.
A.
The Hampstead Volunteer Fire Company shall be exempt from this
charge for all water used for fire prevention purposes.
B.
A. All bills shall be rendered quarterly to the property owners.
Bills are due and payable upon receipt thereof, and, if not paid within
30 days of the billing date, service may be discontinued 10 days after
written notice to the property owner of the Town's intent to discontinue
service. [Amended 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 330]
B.
A penalty shall be imposed if a bill is not paid within 30 days of the
billing date. The penalty shall be $25 or 10% of the bill, whichever
amount is greater. [Amended 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 330; 7-10-2018
by Ord. No. 529]
C.
§ 132-3 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 132-4
127:216
ARTICLE II
Connections
§ 132-5. Application for service.
§ 132-6. Charges and general regulations.
All applications for service must be made in writing on a form provided
by the Town. Applications for service must be made by the property
owner or his agent or representative and will only be accepted for
property located within the corporate limits of the Town of Hampstead,
except for circumstances as defined in § 132-7C. All applicable fees
must accompany the application. [Amended 10-24-1995 by Ord. No.
280]
A.
No contract for service will be entered into by the Town with any
applicant until all arrears and charges due by the applicant at any
premises now or heretofore owned or occupied by him shall have been
paid or satisfactory arrangements made in regard thereto.
B.
An accepted application by the Town shall constitute a contract
between the Town and the applicant, obligating the applicant to pay
the Town its rates as established or as may be established from time
to time. The applicant also shall comply with the Town's rules and
regulations.
C.
Applications for service installations will be accepted, subject to there
being an existing and adequate main in a street or right-of-way abutting
the premises to be served. The contract shall in no way obligate the
Town to extend its mains to service the premises under construction.
D.
When a prospective customer has made application for a new service or
has applied for reinstatement of an existing service, it is assumed that
the piping and fixtures which the service will supply are in good order,
and the Town will not be liable in any case for any accident, breaks or
leakage arising in any way in connection with the supply of water or
failure to supply the same or the freezing of water pipes or fixtures of
the customer, nor for any damage to property which may result from
the usage or nonusage of water supplied to the premises.
E.
The following connection charges shall be made for each connection to
the Town's water system:
Size of Service Line
(inches) Charge
3/4 $350.00
1 $400.00 plus cost of meter
1 1/2 and larger Actual invoice plus 20%
A.
§ 132-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-6
127:217
In any instance in which any owner or developer of land shall extend
any of the Town's water mains for the purpose of serving five or more
dwellings or living units, a charge shall be made for all water service
connections to such extended mains in the amount of $250 for each
dwelling or living unit when such connection is made simultaneously
with the installation of the main. However, if the owner or developer
makes the connections at his expense, the connection charge may be
waived, except that charge for the meter shall be made based on the
actual cost of the meter, plus a handling fee of 20%, or as may be
amended by motion of the Council.
B.
C. Connection will be made upon proper application.
Between November 15 and March 15, the Town may, in its discretion,
defer connections until weather and ground conditions will reasonably
permit such connections.
D.
The Town shall not be required to make any connection which it may
deem not to be economically feasible or which may constitute an undue
burden upon the Town's physical water plant or system.
E.
The service connection from the main to the property line will be
installed by the Town or under its supervision. Title to all services from
the main to the property, meters and meter installations is vested in,
and the same shall at all times remain the property of, the Town, and
such property shall not be trespassed upon or interfered with in any
respect. This property shall be maintained by the Town and may be
removed or changed by it at any time.
F.
The Town will furnish and install the following equipment: a corporation
stop, service pipe to the property line, curb stop, curb box, remote
reading meter and meter pit with lid, if required. The meter shall be
installed at the expense of the customer.
G.
The service pipe shall be a minimum of three-fourths-inch inside
diameter and shall be Type-K copper.
H.
Curb stops are not to be used by the customer or his agent for turning
on or shutting off the water supply. The control of the water supply by
the customer shall be by means of a separate stop located just inside
the building wall. Curb stops are for the exclusive use of the Town.
I.
The service pipe, from the property line to the premises, shall be
installed at the expense of the owner. For this installation the owner
or applicant shall employ a competent registered plumber, satisfactory
to the Town, to do the work and comply with national or prevailing
plumbing codes in the area. The minimum size and cover shall be
the same as that used from the main to the property line. Materials
and methods of construction shall be approved by the Town, and,
if the service has not been installed in accordance with the Town's,
requirements, water service will not be turned on until such defects
have been remedied. The service pipe between the curb stop and the
J.
§ 132-6 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 132-6
127:218
§ 132-7. Time limit for making connections; notification;
unimproved property; water service outside Town limits. [Amended
10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 280]
premises and all piping and fixtures on or in the premises of the
owner or applicant shall be maintained by him, and the work shall be
performed by a competent registered plumber in a manner satisfactory
to the Town.
In all future installations or reinstallations of service lines, only one
premises will be supplied through one service pipe, which shall be
under the control of one curb stop. Any violation of this chapter by
any customer shall be deemed a violation by all customers involved,
and the Town may take such action as could be taken against a single
owner, except that such action shall not be taken until an innocent
owner who is not in violation of the Town rules has been given a
reasonable opportunity to attach his pipe to a separately controlled
service connection.
K.
In the event that any service line between the curb box and the meter
is improperly maintained or is damaged, the Town shall have the right
to discontinue service to such premises, upon written notice to the
customer. Service shall not be restored until satisfactory repairs have
been made.
L.
All properties abutting a municipal water line shall connect into such
line within 180 days following notification that said municipal water
line is available for connection. Notification of such availability shall be
made by the Town of Hampstead and shall be sent to the address of
the owner of each property as shown on the tax rolls of the Town of
Hampstead.
A.
No unimproved property abutting any public utility of the Town of
Hampstead shall be improved unless connection into all public utilities
shall be provided for and effected prior to such improvement to the
point where it may be utilized for the purpose intended.
B.
Water service outside corporate limits. [Amended 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. 326]
It is the policy of the Town of Hampstead not to provide water
service outside the corporate limits of the Town of Hampstead.
(1)
Owners of property located outside the corporate limits of the Town
of Hampstead may petition the Hampstead Town Council for an
exception to the Town's policy not to provide water service outside
the Town's corporate limits in order to enter into a limited and
special contract for the provision of water service. In determining
whether to grant an exception to the Town's policy, the Town
Council shall consider the following factors:
(2)
C.
§ 132-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-7
127:219
Whether granting the petition will serve the Town's interests.
Determination of the best interests of the Town of Hampstead
shall be the sole responsibility of the Town Council.
(a)
Whether granting the petition will provide a vital improvement
or enhancement of the water production or distribution system
or will enhance the operation or efficiency of the water
production or distribution system.
(b)
Whether the Town has sufficient water capacity to service the
property which is the subject of the petition.
(c)
(d) Environmental concerns.
(e) Aesthetic issues.
Whether provision of water service to the property, without
annexation into the Town, would be an impediment to the
natural growth of the Town by annexation.
(f)
(g) Any other matter deemed relevant by the Council.
A majority vote of the Hampstead Town Council is necessary to
approve a petition to extend water service outside the corporate
limits of the Town of Hampstead.
(3)
In the event that a petition for provision of service outside the
corporate limits of the Town of Hampstead is granted, service shall
be provided only under the following conditions:
The owner of the property to be served shall guarantee
payment in cash or in kind in an amount not less than the
total water impact fees as calculated by the Town. The amount
of any such payment in cash or in kind shall be determined
by the Town and shall not be subject to any limits otherwise
enumerated in this chapter. [Amended 11-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 363]
(a)
The owner of the property to be served shall bear all costs of
improvements necessary to make the connection to the Town
of Hampstead water system.
(b)
The owner of the property to be served shall grant all property,
easements or rights-of-way deemed necessary or convenient by
the Town to connect to the Town of Hampstead water system.
(c)
Approval of the petition does not relieve the property owner
from the other terms and conditions of this chapter.
(d)
(4)
§ 132-7 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 132-7
127:220
ARTICLE III
Special Benefit Charges
§ 132-8. Levy of assessment; amounts. [Amended 6-7-1991 by Ord.
No. 224; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 307]
From and after the effective date of this chapter, in any instance in which
the Town shall supply water to any building, dwelling, apartment, living
unit or other structure for which an impact fee pursuant to Chapter 134
of this Code is not assessed, a special benefit assessment is hereby levied
and imposed, payable prior to issuance of a building permit, upon the owner
or owners of such property or properties to be served, in the amount or
amounts as follows:
Dwellings or dwelling units, including mobile homes:
Each single-family dwelling unit or each unit in a multifamily
dwelling unit: $1,000.
(1)
A.
Planned unit developments (single developments):
(1) Each dwelling unit constructed by a developer: $1,000.
B.
Industrial manufacturing:
Minimum, includes a building containing up to 5,000 square feet
total floor space: $1,000.
(1)
(2) Next 10,000 square feet: $0.15 per square foot.
(3) Next 15,000 square feet: $0.13 per square foot.
(4) All over 30,000 square feet: $0.12 per square foot.
C.
Industrial warehousing:
Minimum, includes a building containing up to 2,000 square feet
total floor space: $350.
(1)
(2) Next 3,000 square feet: $0.13 per square foot.
(3) Next 5,000 square feet: $0.10 per square foot.
(4) Next 19,000 square feet: $0.09 per square foot.
(5) All over 30,000 square feet: $0.08 per square foot.
D.
Schools and colleges, including dormitories (students and staff):
Number of Persons Amount
1 to 100 $1,600
100 to 250 $4,100
250 to 400 $6,600
E.
§ 132-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-8
127:221
§ 132-9. Alteration or expansion of dwelling or business units.
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 307]
In any instance in which an existing structure is altered to add additional
dwelling units or business units or business offices and an impact fee
pursuant to Chapter 134 of this Code is not assessed, there shall be imposed
a special benefit assessment in accordance with the schedule hereinbefore
set forth. Expansion of existing structures shall be allowed credit for
previously paid special benefit assessments in all types of uses.
§ 132-10. Alteration or expansion of school or college buildings.
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 307]
In an instance in which a school or college expands existing structures or
constructs new buildings for nonresident use and an impact fee pursuant to
Chapter 134 of this Code is not assessed, there shall be imposed a special
Number of Persons Amount
400 to 1,000 $13,300
Each additional 400 or fraction
thereof over 999
$5,800
F. Day-care homes, caring for more than six children: $250.
Hospitals, care and nursing homes:
Number of Beds Amount
1 to 19 $1,300
19 to 60 $3,300
Each additional over 59 $55
G.
Hotels and motels:
Number of Rooms Amount
1 to 10 $1,000
10 to 25 $1,600
25 to 50 $3,000
Each additional over 49 $65
H.
Commercial (retail, wholesale, business offices):
Minimum, includes a building containing up to 5,000 square feet
total floor space: $1,000.
(1)
(2) Next 5,000 square feet: $0.15 per square foot.
(3) Next 10,000 square feet: $0.13 per square foot.
(4) All over 19,000 square feet: $0.12 per square foot.
I.
§ 132-8 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 132-10
127:222
benefit assessment in accordance with § 132-8D, Industrial warehousing.
In the instance where a school adds or expands its residential buildings, a
special benefit assessment shall be imposed in accordance with § 132-8A,
Dwellings and dwelling units, or, in the event of the construction of
dormitories, § 132-8E, Schools and colleges, including dormitories, shall be
applicable.
§ 132-11. Charges for uses not listed.
In situations where no specified category is provided for in this chapter, the
Town Council shall determine the applicable special benefit assessment to
be charged, but in no case shall such charges exceed those existing in this
section.
§ 132-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-11
127:223

ARTICLE IV
Main Extensions
§ 132-12. Water supply in developments. [Amended 5-19-1986 by
Ord. No. 205; 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 224; 6-27-1995 by Ord. No.
271; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 466]
Prior to approving a development where the estimated consumption
upon completion is equal to or greater than 5,000 gallons per day
and/or the size of the site developed is equal to or greater than 10
acres, the Town shall require the developer to furnish a water supply to
deliver a water production well or wells that can produce 375 gallons
of permitted water capacity per day for each equivalent dwelling unit
(EDU). For the purpose of this chapter, an equivalent dwelling unit
(EDU) shall represent an annual average demand of 250 gallons of
water per day. Conveyance of any well shall include a wellhead buffer
area as determined by the Town and any such easements or rights-ofway
as may be required for connection of the well to the municipal
water system and vehicular ingress and egress to the well. The
developer shall drill and test the well(s) under the supervision of the
Town or its agent. This testing is to develop data as to the dependable
yield and quality of the source. Such testing will be done in compliance
with all local, state and federal laws and regulations, including all
rules promulgated by the Maryland Department of the Environment
for the testing of municipal water production wells. The Town will
not accept a well for this requirement that produces less than 40
gallons per minute as certified in a groundwater appropriation permit
granted to the Town by the Maryland Department of the Environment.
Where possible, any new well or wells shall be located no closer than
1,000 feet from any existing or planned municipal production well. The
developer shall provide three-phase electric service to the site with
sufficient amperage to supply the well and pumphouse. The Town will
not accept a well for this requirement unless the well's quality has been
tested by a certified laboratory and no contaminant exceeds current
Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant levels for inorganic
chemicals, volatile organic compounds and turbidity. The well shall
be tested within 180 days prior to preliminary development approval
and 180 days prior to final development approval by the Town of
Hampstead.
A.
When a well meeting the above requirements cannot be located, the
developer may apply to the Town Council for a waiver. If a waiver is
approved, the developer shall be assessed a water replacement fee
in the amount of $2,250 for each equivalent dwelling unit (EDU);
provided, however, that the Town has the needed capacity in the
existing water system, as determined by the Town. This fee shall be
payable prior to issuance of a building permit.
B.
Before any waiver may be granted, a developer must make a good faith
effort to provide a water production well or wells. For the purpose of
C.
§ 132-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-12
127:225
§ 132-13. Responsibility for costs; title vested in Town.
The owner or owners applying for a water main extension shall be
responsible for the cost of making such an extension. Title to the main shall
remain the sole property of the Town, and shall not be trespassed upon
or interfered with in any respect. This property shall be maintained by the
Town and may be used as the Town deems fit.
§ 132-14. Plans for construction of water facilities.
When water facilities are to be constructed, the owner will furnish plans
for review by the Town and all other agencies having jurisdiction. These
plans will denote location, profile and any other pertinent details required
by agencies having jurisdiction.
§ 132-15. Public works agreement.
Before an extension of a main is made, the owner or applicant shall
complete a public works agreement. Any surplus security will be returned
to the owner. Any deficit will be billed to the owner upon final accounting.
§ 132-16. Reimbursement and buy-back agreements.
The Town will not be required to make any reimbursement to the owner
for additional connections to such mains or enter into any type of buy-back
agreement.
this section, good faith effort shall include but is not limited to the
drilling and testing of exploratory wells in locations determined by the
Town.
In residential developments, each single-family dwelling unit shall
equal one equivalent dwelling unit (EDU). In multifamily developments,
each dwelling unit shall equal .75 of an equivalent dwelling unit (EDU).
D.
In any commercial, industrial or institutional development, the
potential consumption shall be determined by a certified engineer
selected by the Town. The developer shall be required to pay all costs
associated with such determination. The total potential demand shall
be estimated and converted into equivalent dwellings units (EDUs)
by dividing 250 gallons per day into the total estimated daily usage.
Where the Town determines demand cannot be accurately estimated,
the water replacement fee shall be based on a formula of three EDUs
per gross developed acre for commercial developments and 3.5 EDUs
per gross developed acre for industrial developments.
E.
In developments where the projected use is less than 5,000 gallons
per day and/or the size of the site developed is less than 10 acres,
the developer is not required to furnish a water source; however,
the developer shall pay a water replacement fee of $2,250 for each
equivalent dwelling unit.
F.
§ 132-12 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 132-16
127:226
ARTICLE V
Meters
§ 132-17. Town to furnish meters; size.
All meters will be furnished by and remain the property of the Town, which
reserves the right to stipulate the size, type and make of the meter to be
used as well as the location of the setting. Minimum meter size shall be 5/8
inch by 3/4 inch meter.
§ 132-18. Location.
Whenever possible, the meter shall be set in the basement in a convenient
place, the location to be provided and maintained by the owner. In the event
the customer desires any change in the location or position of the meter,
meter box or vault, such change in location shall be made by the Town at
the cost and expense of the owner.
§ 132-19. Maintenance; responsibility for damage.
All meters shall be maintained by and at the expense of the Town insofar
as ordinary wear and tear are concerned, but the owners will be held
responsible for damages as a result of freezing, hot water or other external
causes, when such damage results directly or indirectly from the negligence
of the customer. When such damage occurs, the Town will furnish and set
another meter to replace the one frozen or otherwise damaged, and the cost
of such repairs, including replaced parts, labor and transportation charges,
shall be paid for by the owner.
§ 132-20. Check or relief valve.
Any owner may be required to install a suitable check valve and relief valve
in the service line on the outlet side of the meter, in such a manner as to
prevent the return of hot water to the meter, and any such owner shall pay
the cost of all repairs necessitated by failure to do so.
§ 132-21. Determination of quantity of water used.
The quantity recorded by the meter shall be taken to be the amount of water
passing through the meter, which amount shall be accepted as conclusive
by both the owner and the Town, except when the meter has been found
to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In such cases, the
quantity may be determined by the average registration of the meter in a
corresponding past period when in order or by the average registration of
the new meter, whichever method is representative, in the opinion of the
Town, of the conditions existing during the period in question.
§ 132-17 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-22
127:227
§ 132-22. Removal and testing. [Amended 11-12-2002 by Ord. No.
363]
The Town reserves the right to remove and to test any meter at any time and
to substitute another meter in its place. In the case of a disputed account
involving the question of accuracy of the meter, such meter will be tested
upon the written request of the applicant. A meter-testing firm selected by
the Town shall conduct the test.
§ 132-23. Costs of replacement.
If a meter is found to be inaccurate, it shall be replaced at Town expense.
However, if a meter is found to be accurate, the owner will bear all costs of
replacement and related expense.
§ 132-24. Removal, inspection and tampering.
The owner shall permit no one, except an agent of the Town or person
otherwise lawfully authorized to do so, to remove, inspect or tamper with
the meter or other property of the Town located on his premises. The
customer shall notify the Town, as soon as it comes to his knowledge, of any
injury to or cessation in the registration of the meter.
§ 132-22 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 132-24
127:228
ARTICLE VI
Discontinuance and Abandonment of Service
[Amended 2-8-2000 by Ord. No. 330; 11-12-2002 by Ord. No. 363]
§ 132-25. Notification of Town by owner.
Whenever the owner desires to have his service contract terminated or his
water service discontinued, he shall so notify the Town in writing. Until
such notice is received by the Town, the owner shall be responsible for the
payment of all service rendered by the Town, including charges for meter
repairs caused by damage by hot water or freezing. A reasonable time after
the receipt of such notice shall be allowed the Town to take a final reading
of the meter or meters and to discontinue service.
§ 132-26. Reasons for discontinuance.
Service may be discontinued for any one of the following reasons:
§ 132-26.1. Abandonment of service.
Any municipal water service or connection may be declared abandoned for
any one of the following reasons:
§ 132-27. Restoration of service.
Use of water for purposes other than for consumption on the premises
serviced.
A.
B. Misrepresentation in application.
C. Willful waste of water.
D. Molesting or tampering with Town property or seals on appliances.
E. Vacancy.
F. Nonpayment of bills when due.
Cross-connection of the Town's water service pipe with any other water
supply source.
G.
H. Refusal of reasonable access to property.
The water use or service has been discontinued for a period of one year
or more.
A.
The primary structure has remained continuously vacant for a period of
one year or more.
B.
When water service has been discontinued to any premises for any of
the reasons enumerated in § 132-26 or for any other violation of the
Town's rules not previously listed, except for vacancy, a charge will be
A.
§ 132-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-27
127:229
made for restoring service in the amount of $75. [Amended 7-10-2018
by Ord. No. 529]
When a water service has been declared abandoned by the Town in
accordance with § 132-26.1, restoration of service shall be subject to all
of the requirements of this chapter except the payment of impact fees.
Restoration of an abandoned water service to a property outside the
municipal limits shall require annexation of the property where such
property adjoins the Town.
B.
§ 132-27 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 132-27
127:230
ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 132-28. Right of access by Town agents.
The authorized agents of the Town, presenting proper credentials, shall
have the right of access at all reasonable hours to the premises supplied
with water, for the purpose of reading meters, examining fixtures and pipes,
observing the manner of using water and for any other purpose which is
proper and necessary in the conduct of the water system.
§ 132-29. Temporary cutoff or pressure reduction; boilers; water
reserve; pressure-reducing valves.
§ 132-30. Mingling of water with water from other sources
prohibited; exception.
No water will be furnished to any premises where any possibility exists of
the mingling of the water furnished by the Town with water from any other
source. Nor will the Town permit its mains to be connected in any way to
any piping, tank, vat or any other apparatus containing liquids, chemicals
or any other matter which may flow back or have cross-connection into the
Town's service mains or any other water facilities or unit and which may
consequently endanger or adversely affect the water supply. An exception
may be made to this rule, at the option of the Town, provided that the proper
As necessity may arise, in case of main breaks, emergency or other
unavoidable cause, the Town shall have the right to temporarily cut off
the water supply in order to make the necessary repairs, connections,
improvements, etc., but the Town will use all reasonable and
practicable measures to notify the customer in advance of such
discontinuance of service. In any case, the Town shall not be liable
for any damage or inconvenience suffered by the customer nor for any
claim against it at any time for interruption in service, lessening of
supply, inadequate pressure, quality of water or any cause beyond its
control.
A.
All customers having boilers upon their premises, depending upon the
pressure of the water in the Town's pipes to keep them supplied, are
cautioned against danger of collapse, and any such damage shall be
borne exclusively by the owner.
B.
The Town shall have the right to reserve a sufficient supply of water at
all times in its reservoirs to provide for fire or any other emergencies
and may restrict or regulate the quantity of water used by its customers
in case of scarcity or whenever the public welfare may require it.
C.
Any owner requiring reduced water pressure shall do so through
pressure-reducing valves, to be furnished and installed at the owner's
expense on the outlet side of the meter, ahead of stop and drain valve.
D.
§ 132-28 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-30
127:231
safeguards are installed which shall be inspected by and have approval of
the Town.
§ 132-31. Fire hydrants.
§ 132-32. Tampering with system prohibited; penalty. [Amended
7-13-2004 by Ord. No. 397]
§ 132-33. Presentation of bill not deemed waiver of rules.
The presentation or nonpresentation of a bill shall not be held to be a waiver
of any of the above rules.
Use of hydrants; testing. Water from hydrants or other fire protection
systems shall be used only in case of fires, except that water from public
fire hydrants may be used in a reasonable amount and at such times
and places as the Town may permit. The testing of hydrants and firefighting
apparatus by any fire company may be permitted upon request
by an authorized agent or employee. No pumps will be permitted to be
connected with water pipes so as to draw water directly from a main or
service pipe, except for fire purposes, without specific permission from
the Town.
A.
Opening of hydrants without permission. The opening or closing of
any fire hydrant or plug, except in case of fire, without the written
permission of the Town shall be deemed tampering with the appliances
of the Town.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to wrongfully and
maliciously connect, disconnect, tap, damage, alter, interfere or tamper
with any part of the municipal water system, including but not limited
to production wells, monitoring wells, pump houses, storage towers,
mains, valves or fire hydrants, or to in any way tamper with any meters
used to register the water consumed. It shall also be unlawful for
any person or persons to enter any municipal pump house, storage
tower, testing or treatment area or any Public Works facility without the
authorization of the Town Manager or Superintendent of Public Works.
A.
No person shall be allowed to alter, repair, construct or remove any
part the municipal water system unless such person or persons are duly
authorized as evidenced by a utility permit issued by the Town or are
employees of the Town acting under the direct supervision of the Town
Manager or Superintendent of Public Works.
B.
Any person or persons found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions
of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be subject to penalties as provided in the Charter, § C13-4A and the
maximum penalties allowed under state and federal laws. Unauthorized
taking of water from a municipal fire hydrant shall be subject to a fine
of up to $500 and the cost of any water taken as estimated by the Town.
C.
§ 132-30 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 132-34
127:232
§ 132-34. Delinquent bills to become liens.
All delinquent water-related bills shall be and become liens upon the
premises served, which liens may be collected in the same manner as the
collection of delinquent taxes.
§ 132-35. Notification of shutdown of water main.
Whenever a water main is proposed to be shut down by:
§ 132-36. Turning off water at request of owner; charges.
Water will be turned off by the Town at the request of the property owner so
that a repair can be made between the curb valve and the property. If this
is done during regular working hours, no charge will be made; however, at
all other times, a charge will be imposed, consisting of the actual expenses
incurred for this service.
The Town, the Town shall send notices to all affected properties and
advertise in at least one newspaper with general circulation in the Town
one week prior to the commencement of work.
A.
A private contractor, the contractor shall notify the Town at least 10
business days prior to any work being done. The Town shall advertise
as in Subsection A above.
B.
§ 132-34 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-36
127:233

ARTICLE VIII
Water Conservation and Restrictions
[Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 44516]
§ 132-37. Irrigation.
Outdoor watering and irrigation is strictly prohibited between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Handheld watering by hose and watering canister
during this time is allowed but not encouraged.
§ 132-38. Water waste.
The following activities shall be considered wasteful use of water and are
strictly prohibited:
§ 132-39. Restrictions on water use; violations and penalties.
[Added 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 358]
Any watering, irrigation or other use of water which results in runoff
from the property onto adjacent properties or onto public or private
roadways including into the municipal storm sewer system.
A.
Failing to repair a leak, including a broken sprinkler head, a leaking
valve, or a leaking faucet.
B.
Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with a broken head
or emitter, or with a head that is spraying water onto a street, parking
lot, or sidewalk.
C.
Washing of cars, boats, campers, windows, and the like, except when
the hose is equipped with a flow-restricting device such as a trigger
nozzle.
D.
During a period of drought or other circumstances that limit the Town's
water supply, the Town Council shall have the power to impose
restrictions on water usage, including watering lawns, gardens and
other vegetation, filling pools, washing cars or limitation, restriction or
prohibition of other water uses as determined necessary by the Council.
Any such restrictions shall be enacted by resolution of the Council.
After enactment, the restrictions may be lifted by a majority vote of the
Council.
A.
Violation of the restrictions shall be a municipal infraction. The first
violation shall result in a fine of $25. The second violation shall result
in a fine of $100. The third and subsequent violations shall result in
a fine of $250, with each occurrence constituting a separate violation.
Repeated violation shall serve as cause for discontinuance of water
service in accordance with § 132-26.
B.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 132-37 as § 132-39.
§ 132-37 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 132-39
127:235
Any and all restrictions on water use shall apply equally to all
customers of the municipal water system, including those customers
residing outside the municipal limits. In any instance where a fine is not
paid within 30 days or where a municipal fine cannot be imposed, the
Town shall have the right to discontinue service.
C.
The restrictions contained in §§ 132-37 and 132-39 shall not apply to
the outdoor irrigation of golf courses. [Added 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
469]
D.
§ 132-39 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 132-39
127:236
Chapter 134
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
25.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 119.
Water — See Ch. 132.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 134-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended:
BUILDING PERMIT — The permit required by the Carroll County Zoning
Ordinance and § 135-262 of the Hampstead Town Code for buildings,
structures and additions.[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 308]
CAPITAL BUDGET — A separate budget dedicated to financing capital
improvements. 17
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS — Any and/or all of the following and including
acquisition of land, construction, improvements, equipping and installing of
same and which facilities are identified in the capital improvements plan to
be financed by the imposition of an impact fee:
COSTS — The monetary value of a capital project to include administrative,
legal, planning, engineering and construction costs.
DEVELOPMENT — Activity that requires issuance of a building
permit.[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 308]
IMPACT FEE — Any charge, fee or assessment levied as a condition of
issuance of a building permit when any portion of the revenues collected
is intended to fund any portion of the costs of capital improvements or any
public facilities.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any development of residential
units.[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 308]
SITE — The land on which development takes place.
A. Parks and recreational facilities.
B. Water treatment and distribution facilities.
C. Police facilities.
Other facilities, the costs of which may be substantially attributed to
new development.
D.
17.Editor's Note: A definition of "capital improvements" which immediately followed was
repealed 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 308.
§ 132-39 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 134-1
134:237
TOWN — The Town of Hampstead.[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 308]
ZONING DISTRICTS — Those areas designated in the Zoning Ordinance
as being reserved for specific land uses, subject to development and use
regulations specified in the ordinance.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The official adopted zoning map and text
regulating all the development and land use in the Town of Hampstead,
State of Maryland. 18
§ 134-2. Applicability of fee. [Amended 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 324]
This chapter shall be uniformly applicable to development that occurs
within or is annexed into the boundaries of the Town.
§ 134-3. Imposition of fee. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 308;
9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 324]
§ 134-4. Calculation of fee.
From and after November 11, 1997, when an application is filed with
the Town for a building or structure requiring the issuance of a building
permit by the Carroll County Bureau of Permits and Inspections, an
impact fee is hereby levied and imposed on the real property on which
the building or structure is or is to be located. The Town shall not issue
a zoning certificate until such impact fee has been paid.
A.
From and after August 3, 1999, when previously developed property
is annexed into the Town, an impact fee will be imposed for any lot
on which there is a dwelling at the time the annexation resolution is
adopted by the Mayor and Council. Said fee shall be paid as may be
provided for in the resolution annexing the property.
B.
Impact fees shall not exceed the cost of providing capital improvements
for which need is reasonably attributable to those developments or
newly annexed areas that pay the fees. The fees shall be spent on
new or enlarged capital improvements that reasonably benefit those
developments or newly annexed areas that pay the fees.
C.
Impact fees that are assessed against new development or newly
annexed areas shall be assessed in such a manner that any new
development or annexation having the same impact on capital facilities
shall be assessed the same impact fee.
D.
The Town shall calculate the amount of the applicable impact due for
each building permit by:
(1) Determining the applicable designated development area;
A.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Zoning.
§ 134-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 134-4
134:238
§ 134-5. Payment of impact fee; collection of unpaid fees.
§ 134-6. Administration of impact fee.
The Town shall establish separate accounts and maintain records for each
such account whereby impact fees collected can be segregated.
§ 134-7. Use of funds.
Verifying the number and type of residential dwelling units and
type of nonresidential development for which each building permit
is sought;
(2)
(3) Determining the applicable per unit impact fee; and
Multiplying the applicable per unit impact fee by:
(a) The appropriate number of residential dwelling units; or
The quantity of the appropriate parameter for nonresidential
development.
(b)
(4)
The Impact Fee Schedule to be used in making the calculations
specified in Subsection A of this section is contained in the Impact
Fee Schedule in § 134-Appendix A.19 The Impact Fee Schedule may be
modified from time to time by the Council of the Town of Hampstead by
resolution after a public hearing. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
308]
B.
If the development for which a building permit is sought contains a mix
of uses, the Town must separately calculate the impact fee due for each
type of development.
C.
The impact fee shall be paid by the owner to the Town prior to the
issuance of a building permit, and no zoning certificate shall be issued
until such fee is collected. The amount of the impact fee assessment
shall be set as of the date of application for the building permit. A
building permit shall not be issued until any applicable impact fee has
been paid. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 308]
A.
Unpaid impact fees are a lien against the real property upon which
a building or structure is to be erected and shall be levied, collected
and enforced in the same manner as are Town real property taxes and
shall have the same priority and bear the same interest and penalties
as Town real property taxes for lien purposes.
B.
The impact fee imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition
to any other fees which may be imposed by any federal, state or county
governmental agency.
C.
19.Editor's Note: The Impact Fee Schedule is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 134-4 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 134-7
134:239
§ 134-8. Bonding of excess facility projects.
The Town may issue bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of
indebtedness in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be
provided by law in furtherance of the provision of capital improvement
projects. Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates
or other obligations of indebtedness for such projects may included impact
fees and other Town revenues as may be allocated by the Mayor and Council
of the Town of Hampstead. Impact fees paid pursuant to this chapter,
however, shall be restricted to use solely and exclusively for financing
directly, or as a pledge against bonds, revenue certificates and other
obligations of indebtedness for the cost of capital improvements as specified
herein.
§ 134-9. Effect of impact fee on zoning and subdivision regulations.
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or provision
of capital improvements subject to Chapter 135, Zoning, and Chapter 119,
Subdivision of Land, or the regulations of the Town, which shall be operative
and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such
development.
All impact fees collected under this chapter shall be used solely for
financing, in whole or in part, the capital costs of public facilities,
services, improvements and equipment required to accommodate and/
or benefit growth, construction or development, with the purpose that
new growth, construction and development pay a proportionate fair
share of the costs and expenses.
A.
Nothing in this chapter shall release, relieve or in any way decrease
a developer's obligation for assuming sole responsibility for financing
the construction of all on-site and off-site improvements that are
determined and are required by the Town or other applicable
governmental authority to be constructed in accordance with approved
plans, public works agreements and related documents.
B.
Nothing in this chapter shall release, relieve or in any way decrease
a developer's obligation to the Town for full payment of any and all
other required fees and assessments, mandatory conveyances of land,
execution of documents and for meeting any and all other requirements
that are specified in this Code.
C.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the use of funds by the Town
from other sources to supplement or augment any special capital
benefit assessment fees collected under this chapter.
D.
§ 134-7 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 134-10
134:240
§ 134-10. Impact fee as additional and supplemental requirement.
The impact fee is additional and supplemental to and not in substitution
of any other requirements imposed by the Town on the development of
land or the issuance of building permits. It is intended to be consistent
with and to further the objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan,
the capital improvements plan and other Town policies, ordinances and
resolutions by which the Town seeks to ensure the provision of public
facilities in conjunction with the development of land. In no event shall a
property owner be obligated to pay for capital improvements in an amount
in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this chapter, but provided
that a property owner may be required to pay, pursuant to Town ordinances,
regulations or policies, for other capital improvements in addition to the
impact fee for capital improvements as specified herein.
Chapter 135
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
25.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 113.
Sediment control and grading — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 119.
Water — See Ch. 132.
Development impact fees — See Ch. 134.
§ 134-10 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 134-10
134:241

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 135-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 135-2. Effective date; applicability.
This chapter shall take effect on the 26th day of December 1972, and shall
apply to all lands, buildings, properties and their uses within the corporate
limits of the Town of Hampstead.
§ 135-3. Definitions and word usage.
Promote the health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the
community by regulating and restricting the height, number of stories
and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot that
may be occupied; the density of population; the size of lots, yards,
courts and other open spaces; and the location and use of buildings,
structures and land for trade, industry, residence and other purposes.
A.
B. Provide for adequate light and air.
C. Prevent congestion and undue crowding of land.
D. Secure safety from fire, panic and other danger.
E. Conserve the value of property.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms used are herein defined
as follows:
ACCESSORY USE — A use of a building, lot or portion thereof, which is
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the main building or
lot.
AGRICULTURE or AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES — The raising of farm
products for use or sale, including animal or poultry husbandry, and the
growing of crops, such as grain, vegetables, fruit, grass for pasture or
sod, trees, shrubs, flowers and similar products of the soil.
APARTMENT — An area within a structure arranged or designed for
occupancy by one family.
APARTMENT HOUSE — Any building arranged, designed or used for
rent or occupancy, or cooperatively owned by its occupants, having
three or more family units, and with a yard, compound, service or
utilities in common.
BEDROOM — A room marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to
function primarily for sleeping.[Added 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 429]
BOARD — Refers to the Board of Appeals.
A.
§ 135-1 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-3
134:243
BUILDING LINE — The line established by law, beyond which a
building shall not extend, as determined herein by front, side and rear
yards.
BUILDINGS — Any structure enclosed within exterior walls for the
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or chattels.
COMMISSION — Refers to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMMUNICATION ANTENNA — A directional or omnidirectional
device which transmits or receives communication, including radio,
television and personal wireless services. A communication antenna is
mounted on a communication tower or on another structure or building.
"Communication antenna" does not include amateur radio operator
antennas which are accessory to a residential use and television
antennas which are accessory to a residential use.[Added 10-13-1998
by Ord. No. 319]
COMMUNICATION TOWER — A structure to support radio, television
and personal wireless transmission antenna; microwave relay tower;
monopole; and similar structures for transmission or reception and
retransmission of electronic signals. Communication towers include
accessory equipment buildings that do not have office space.[Added
10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 319]
COMMUNICATION TOWER COMPLEX — [Added 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 319]
COMPANION ANIMAL — Any animal that is commonly kept by persons
as a pet or for companionship, including but not limited to domesticated
dogs and domesticated cats.[Added 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 479]
CONDITIONAL USES — Uses which are specified for Board of Appeals
approval prior to authorization and which uses, after public hearing,
may be approved conditionally or disapproved in accordance with
§ 135-265. The term "conditional use" shall constitute the same
meaning as "special exception," specified as one of the general powers
of the Board of Appeals in accordance with Article 66B of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
CONSTRUCTION STARTED — For the purposes of this chapter,
construction will be deemed to have begun when all of the necessary
excavation and piers and/or footings of one or more buildings or
structures covered by the permit have been completed.
(1) A freestanding tower stands without support of guy wires or cables.
A guyed tower depends upon a pattern of supporting cables for its
stability.
(2)
Any single parcel of land on which are situated or proposed to be
situated two or more communication towers; or
(1)
More than one tower being used for a common purpose or
enterprise and location on contiguous parcels.
(2)
§ 135-3 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-3
134:244
DWELLING — Any building which is arranged, designed or used, in
whole or in part, for residential purposes, but not including a tent,
cabin, trailer or mobile home or a room in a hotel or motel.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A detached building or a group of
attached and semidetached buildings, designed for or used exclusively
for residential purposes by more than two families or more than two
housekeeping units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
used exclusively for residential purposes by one family or one
housekeeping unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building with one dwelling
unit above the other (duplex) or two semidetached dwelling units
located on abutting lots or on the same lot, separated by a party wall
without openings, in either case designed for or used exclusively for
residential purposes by not more than a total of two families or more
than two housekeeping units. 20 [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
226]
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any animal that is not normally domesticated in the
United States or is wild by nature. Exotic animals include but are not
limited to any of the following orders and families, whether bred in the
wild or captivity, and also any of their hybrids with domestic species.
The animals listed in parentheses are intended to act as examples and
are not to be construed as an exhaustive list or limit the generality of
each group of animals, unless otherwise specified:[Added 9-21-2010
by Ord. No. 479]
Nonhuman primates and prosimians (monkeys, chimpanzees,
baboons).
(1)
Felidae (lions, tigers, bobcats, lynx, cougars, leopards, jaguars, not
domesticated cats).
(2)
(3) Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals, not domesticated dogs),
(4) Ursidae (all bears).
(5) Reptilia (all venomous snakes, all constricting snakes).
(6) Crocodilia (alligators, crocodiles).
(7) Proboscidea (elephants).
(8) Hyaenidae (hyenas).
Artiodactyla (hippotamuses, giraffes, camels, not cattle or swine or
sheep or goats).
(9)
(10)Procyonidae (raccoons, coatis).
20.Editor's Note: The former definition of “essential utility equipment,” which previously
followed this definition, was repealed 1-19-1993 by Ord. No. 230.
§ 135-3 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-3
134:245
EXPLOSIVES — Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the
primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion.
EXTRACTIVE OPERATIONS — The extracting or mining of sand, gravel,
limestone, soapstone or building stone.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit.
FARM — An area of land used for agricultural purposes, as defined in
this section, and which provides a primary source of income for the
occupant or owner.
FARM ANIMAL — Any animal commonly used by persons for use,
draft or pleasure purposes. The definition of "farm animal" includes
but is not limited to: poultry, rabbits, cattle, swine, sheep, goats and
horses.[Added 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 479]
FENCE — Any structure or barrier that is naturally grown or
constructed for purposes of confinement, means of protection or use as
a boundary.[Added 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 429]
FERAL CAT — A domestic cat that does not appear by its behavior or
appearance and possibly location found to have been domesticated. A
domestic cat that is not tame and behaves as if it were wild.[Added
6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 500]
FLEX SPACE — A building that is designed in modular bays to
accommodate business of varying sizes, and used for offices, research
and development, light manufacturing, assembly, storage, sales, and
similar uses, including business community support retail up to 15% of
the buildings in the project. Flex space buildings have rear loading only
and generally have 25% or more of the space in any bay devoted to
office use.[Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
GARAGE SALE — Also called a "yard sale" or "moving sale." The
occasional sale of surplus personal property held on premises by the
owner or occupant of a lot in a residential district.[Added 12-12-2006
by Ord. No. 429]
GARAGE, RESIDENTIAL — An accessory building, portion of a main
building or building attached thereto used for the storage of private
motor vehicles, 50% of which may be for the storage of a commercial
vehicle.
GARAGE, SERVICE — A garage, other than a residential garage, where
motor vehicles, trailers or other types of equipment are stored,
equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
(11)Marsupialia (kangaroos, opossums).
Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, not horses or donkeys or
mules).
(12)
(13)Edentara (anteaters, sloths, armadillos).
(14)Viverridae (mongooses, civets, and genets).
§ 135-3 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-3
134:246
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Carroll County Department of
Health.[Amended 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 429]
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION — Refers to the Historic District
Commission authorized in accordance with Article 66B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
HOME-BASED BUSINESS — An in-home commercial activity operated
in a residential dwelling by one or more family members who reside
within the dwelling.[Added 3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 408]
HOME OFFICE or OCCUPATION — An in-home office or economic
activity operated in a residential dwelling by a family member residing
within the dwelling.[Added 3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 40821]
HOSPITAL, CLASS A — A hospital which does not primarily treat
communicable diseases, insane or feebleminded patients, epileptics,
drug addicts or alcoholic patients and is not a penal or correctional
institution.
HOSPITAL, CLASS B — A hospital which does primarily treat the types
of cases noted in a Class A hospital above and which may be a penal or
correctional institution.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — The division of a tract of land, which is eminently
suitable for industrial use, into small tracts or parcels, according to a
Comprehensive Plan, for occupancy by a group of industries and which
has streets and utilities.[Amended 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 316]
KENNEL — Any building or structure and/or land used, designed or
arranged for the housing, boarding, breeding or care of more than
three adult dogs, which are kept or bred for hunting, sale, exhibition
or domestic use, or other domestic animals which are kept or bred for
profit, but not including those animals raised for agricultural purposes.
LOT — A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a principal building and its accessory buildings and uses, including
all open spaces required by this chapter, having frontage on a street as
defined herein.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two or more streets at their
intersection, where the interior angle of the intersection does not
exceed 135°. A lot abutting a curved street may be considered a corner
lot if the angle of the roadway curve is less than 135°.[Amended
12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 429]
LOT FRONTAGE — The front of a lot shall be construed to be the
portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard
requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent
to streets shall be considered "frontage," and yards shall be provided
as required herein, except that not more than one rear yard shall be
required.
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "home occupation."
§ 135-3 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-3
134:247
LOT MEASUREMENTS —
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in
the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Carroll County or a lot
or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has
been so recorded.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building or of land lawfully
existing at the time this chapter becomes effective and which does not
conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.
NURSING HOME — Includes:
OPEN SPACE — Land provided and deemed necessary and desirable
for present and future residents and citizens of the area, including such
land in stream valleys, natural woods, areas of unusual natural scenic
beauty, local play lots, recreational walkways, pathways and planting
areas in residential subdivisions.
PLANNED BUSINESS CENTER — Three or more retail stores or
service establishments designed as a unit and primarily served by
common accessories, such as signs, parking lots, arcades and
walkways.
"Depth" is the average horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the rear lot line.
(1)
"Width" shall mean the horizontal distance between side lot lines,
measured at the midpoints of the side lot lines.
(2)
Rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes for children and
homes providing chronic and convalescent care.
(1)
An extended care, intermediate care or personal care facility, as
defined within Maryland State Health Department regulations.
(2)
An institution which admits two or more individuals for care, and
who are not related to the owner or administrator.
(3)
A domiciliary care facility, as further defined within Maryland State
Health Department regulations.
(4)
An institution which admits four or more aged and/or disabled
nonrelated individuals who are not gainfully employed, and which
maintains the necessary facilities and provides a protective
institutional or home-type environment.
(5)
A treatment facility for emotionally disturbed children and for
adolescents, as further defined within Maryland State Health
Department regulations.
(6)
An institution for the treatment of emotionally disturbed children
and/or adolescents, with overnight accommodations for two or
more nonrelated individuals.
(7)
§ 135-3 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-3
134:248
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — A district classified as "R-40,000,"
"R-20,000," "R-10,000" or "R-7,500."[Added 10-24-1995 by Ord. No.
281]
RESTAURANT — Any establishment of which the principal business is
the sale of food and of which the principal method of operation is to
serve food ordered from a menu to seated customers at a table, booth or
counter inside the establishment. However, a snack bar or refreshment
stand at a public or nonprofit community swimming pool, playground or
park, operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility, shall
not be deemed to be a "restaurant."[Added 10-24-1995 by Ord. No.
281]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — Any establishment where ready-to-eat
food primarily intended for immediate consumption is available upon
a short wait and packaged or presented so that it can readily be
eaten outside the premises where it is sold and where facilities for onpremises
consumption of food are insufficient for the volume of food
sold.[Added 10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 281]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD CAFETERIA — Any establishment where
ready-to-eat food is available upon a short waiting time and served
to customers on a tray through a cafeteria line for consumption at a
table, booth or counter inside the establishment.[Added 10-24-1995
by Ord. No. 281]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD CARRY-OUT — Any establishment where
ready-to-eat food primarily intended for immediate consumption is
available upon a short waiting time and packaged or presented so
that it can readily be eaten away from the premises where it is sold
and where there are no facilities for on-premises consumption of
food.[Added 10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 281]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD DRIVE-IN — Any establishment where
ready-to-eat food primarily intended for immediate consumption is
available upon a short waiting time and packaged or presented so
that it can readily be eaten outside the premises and whose principal
method of operation is to serve food to customers in motor
vehicles.[Added 10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 281]
RETIREMENT HOMES — Specifically designed multi-dwelling-unit
buildings consisting of efficiency and one-bedroom dwelling units, to
which occupancy is restricted to elderly citizens.
SANITARY FILL — Any premises used primarily for the disposal of
garbage or any refuse by dumping, reduction, incineration or burial.
SERVICE STATION — Any area of land including buildings and other
structures thereon that are used to dispense motor vehicle fuels, oil and
accessories at retail, where minor repair service is incidental and no
storage or parking space is offered for rent.
§ 135-3 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-3
134:249
SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance between the
building line, as defined herein, and the related front, side or rear
property lines.
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display, illustration or
device which is affixed or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a
building, structure or land and which directs attention to a product,
place, activity, person, institution or business.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered
upon the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — A sign structure which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not
necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such
sign is located.
STABLE, PRIVATE HORSE — An accessory structure designed for the
shelter, feeding and care of no more than two horses or ponies which
are maintained on the property as pets or for domestic use, as
distinguished from agricultural or commercial stables.
STREET or HIGHWAY or ROAD — Any street existing or which may be
approved by the Commission. The word "street" shall also mean "road,"
"highway," "boulevard," "avenue," "lane" or "court."
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, the use of which requires a
fixed location on the ground or is attached to something having such
location, but not including fences; power, gas, water, sewage or
communication lines or poles, towers or pole structures; sidewalks;
driveways; or curbs.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots or parcels for immediate or future sale, lease or building
development. If a new street is involved, "subdivision" shall mean any
division of a tract or parcel of land.[Added 10-10-1995 by Ord. No.
276]
TEMPORARY USE — Any use which has been authorized under the
provision of this chapter, which is not unlimited as to the time in which
such use shall legally continue.
USE-IN-COMMON DRIVE — A private drive or road that does not
meet the definition of "street" under this chapter but serves as a
common vehicular access to more than one residential lot. All usein-
common drives serve only as access to the lots on the drive and
cannot be considered as streets for legal frontage as required by this
chapter.[Added 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 429]
UTILITIES — Roads (public and private), underground or overhead
electrical, gas, communications, stormwater management, water
quality, water and sewerage systems, including poles, towers or pole
structures, wires, lines, mains, drains, dams, swales, outfalls, sewers,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, public telephone stations, police call
§ 135-3 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-3
134:250
boxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, regulating and measuring devices
and the structures in which they are housed and other similar
equipment, structures and accessories in connection therewith. It does
not include buildings, yards or stations used for storage, repair or
processing of equipment or material and does not include buildings,
yards, stations or substations for transforming, boosting or switching
purposes, where such facilities are constructed on the
ground.[Amended 1-19-1993 by Ord. No. 230]
VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGN (ELECTRONIC) — A sign capable of
displaying words, symbols, figures and/or images electronically. This
definition shall include light-emitting diode (LED) or similar
screens.[Added 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 476]
VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGN (MANUAL) — A sign which is capable
of change of copy through the manual changing of text, symbols or
numbers. These signs also are referred to as "reader board
panels."[Added 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 476]
VARIANCE — A relaxation of the regulations and requirements listed
in § 135-259, where such variance will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not
the results of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this
chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.[Amended
10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 281]
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a principal building(s) and/
or principal use, which lies between such building(s) and/or principal
use and the lot line and is open and unoccupied from the ground
up.[Amended 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 429]
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the front lot line and the nearest line of the principal
building. Where a lot abuts or adjoins two or more streets each yard
adjoining or abutting a street shall be considered a front
yard.[Amended 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 429]
YARD, FRONT (PRIMARY) — The Planning and Zoning Commission
may, as part of the site plan or subdivision review process, designate
one front yard on any corner lot as the primary front yard. Where such
designation does not exist on the approved site plan or subdivision
plat, the Planning and Zoning Commission may, upon the request of
the property owner, designate one front yard of any corner lot as the
primary front yard.[Added 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 429]
YARD, FRONT (SECONDARY) — On any corner lot where a primary
front yard has been properly designated by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, all other front yards shall be considered secondary front
yards.[Added 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 429]
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the principal
building.
§ 135-3 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-3
134:251
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest
line of the principal building and extending from the front yard to the
rear yard.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — A written statement issued by the Zoning
Administrator authorizing buildings, structures or uses in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
Word usage. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number;
words in the plural number shall include the singular number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. "Now" shall
mean at the time of the adoption of these regulations; "hereafter" shall
mean after the adoption of these regulations. The word "person" shall
include a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation, as well as an individual. [Amended 7-10-2001 by Ord.
No. 346]
B.
§ 135-3 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-3
134:252
ARTICLE II
Districts, Maps, Boundaries
§ 135-4. Districts established. [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
226; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 352; 2-12-2008 by Ord. No. 440;
7-8-2008 by Ord. No. 449; 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 452]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Hampstead is hereby divided
into districts as follows:
H Historic Zoning District
R-120,000 Residence District
R-40,000 Residence District
R-20,000 Residence District
R-10,000 Residence District
R-7,500 Residence District
R-O Residential Office District
R-B Residential Business District
B-L Local Business District
B-G General Business District
I-R Restricted Industrial District
G-C Groundwater Conservation District
P-C Public Conservation District
§ 135-5. Zoning Map.
§ 135-6. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
The districts shall be of the number, size and shape as shown on
the Zoning Map of the Town of Hampstead, and said map, with the
necessary symbols, legends and explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
made and declared to be a part of this chapter. As evidence of the
authenticity of said map, it shall be signed by the Mayor and Council of
the Town of Hampstead upon the adoption of these regulations.
A.
The Zoning Map, based on the Comprehensive Plan, Hampstead and
Vicinity, by Crockett Associates, as adopted by the Mayor and Council
of Hampstead on September 7, 1972, as amended, is hereby made a
part of this chapter as the Zoning Map of Hampstead.22
B.
22.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 210, adopted 11-24-1986, adopted the Official Zoning Map for the
Town of Hampstead. Resolution No. 1986-4, adopted 11-24-1986, adopted the
Comprehensive Plan and Major Street Plan for the Town of Hampstead. Copies of these
enactments are on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 135-4 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-6
134:253
§ 135-7. Public buildings, structures and uses. [Added 10-14-2008
by Ord. No. 452]
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
A.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following property lines or
platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines.
B.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be
construed as following Town limits.
C.
Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
D.
Boundaries which are drawn parallel to road lines and which do not
coincide with property lines or lot lines, and where not designated to
dimensions, shall be deemed to be 200 feet back from the nearest road
center line.
E.
Boundaries are in unsubdivided property or where a district boundary
divides a lot the boundaries shall be determined by the use of the map
scale as shown thereon.
F.
Where a district boundary line, as shown on the Zoning Map, divides a
lot which was a single ownership and of record at the time of enactment
of this chapter, the use authorized thereon and the other district
requirements applying to the least restricted portion of such lot under
this chapter shall be considered as extending to the entire lot, provided
that the more restricted portion of such lot is entirely within 50 feet
of said dividing district boundary line. The use so extended shall be
deemed to be conforming.
G.
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the use of
land, buildings, structures, or premises by the Town of Hampstead,
including the location, erection, reconstruction, extension,
enlargement, conversion or alteration of buildings, structures, parking
areas, appurtenances, utilities or any other public improvements, may
be located in any zoning district as principal permitted uses. Such
governmental use of land or development shall be subject to the
approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission where required by
Article 66B23; however, the requirements of any zoning district such as
lot sizes, setbacks or height restrictions shall not apply.
A.
Any property owned by the Town of Hampstead, Carroll County or the
State of Maryland may be designated on the Town of Hampstead's
Zoning Map as "Public Conservation" and may be used for any public
purpose in accordance with § 135-7A where such uses may include
but are not limited to public buildings, public schools, public parks,
B.
23.Editor's Note: See Art. 66B, Land Use, of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 135-6 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-7
134:254
§ 135-8. Administrative regulations. [Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No.
456]
§ 135-9. (Reserved)
conservation areas, recreational areas, stormwater management
facilities and utilities.
The zoning district of any property acquired by the Town of Hampstead,
Carroll County or the State of Maryland may be changed to Public
Conservation upon the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the approval of the Town Council.
C.
Any property zoned Public Conservation sold, donated or otherwise
conveyed to any nongovernmental entity may be rezoned to another
zoning district as recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and approved by the Town Council. [Amended 3-15-2017
by Ord. No. 517]
D.
The Mayor and Town Council may, upon the recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, adopt administrative regulations to
govern certain aspects of planning, zoning and land use. A list of
adopted regulations shall be maintained in this chapter.
A.
The following regulations have been adopted by the Mayor and Town
Council:
(1) Accessory uses (residential).
(2) Temporary uses.
(3) Standard pavement section for residential streets.
(4) Standard pavement section for commercial/industrial streets.
B.
All adopted regulations shall be maintained in the Town Hall and
published on the Town's website.
C.
Adoption, amendment or repeal of administrative regulations shall
require the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the majority vote of the Town Council.
D.
§ 135-7 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-9
134:255

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 135-10. Main Street Revitalization Area design review. [Added
7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 336; amended 3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 409]
The Main Street Revitalization Area has been established in the Town
of Hampstead Main Street Revitalization Plan adopted on February 8,
2000. A map of the Revitalization Area is hereby made and declared a
part of this chapter as set forth in § 135-5 of the Town Code.
A.
Within the Main Street Revitalization Area, the Hampstead Planning
and Zoning Commission shall provide design review.
A review is required for those projects that involve a substantial
change in the appearance of a building or structure or the
landscape and where approval of a site plan or site plan
amendment is required. A review is also required for the demolition
of a building or structure and relocating a building or structure.
(1)
Review shall include any elements of a formal site plan deemed
necessary by the Commission including, but not limited to,
landscaping, site design, exterior illumination, signage, off-street
parking, architectural elevations and exterior building materials.
(2)
B.
The review procedure seeks to encourage rehabilitation and new
construction in a manner that will promote visual harmony, enhance
the historical integrity and develop creative design solutions. While
the design guidelines will not dictate architectural styles, they will
suggest a variety of design options for achieving compatibility within
the Revitalization Area.
A preapplication conference is recommended prior to conducting
work within the Main Street Revitalization Area. Applicants should
call or visit the Zoning Administrator prior to making application
to discuss proposed design changes and to determine what level of
information is required for submittals.
(1)
An application shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
When completed, the application, required drawings, and
specifications shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator to begin
the review process. Applicants are encouraged to review the
adopted Main Street Revitalization Plan.
(2)
No fees are charged for the Main Street design review and
approval process except for any of those fees associated with site
plan review and approval, where applicable.
(3)
When the project would require a formal site plan in accordance
with Chapter 135, the site plan and design documents, including
architectural elevations shall be submitted and reviewed
concurrently.
(4)
C.
§ 135-10 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-10
134:257
§ 135-11. Minimum nature of regulations.
The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land except as hereinafter provided.
§ 135-12. Compliance required.
Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises
shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof or other structure
shall be located, erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or
altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
district in which it is located.
§ 135-13. Nonconforming uses. [Amended 7-10-2001 by Ord. No.
346; 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 453]
Any building, structure or premises lawfully existing at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, or lawfully existing at the time that this chapter
is subsequently amended where such amendment created the specific
nonconformity with this chapter, may continue to be used even though
such building, structure or premises does not conform to use, dimensional
regulations or other requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
When the project does not require a site plan, the Commission shall
review the application and may meet with the applicant at the site
of the proposed work, within 45 days of receipt of the application.
Immediately following the review of the application, the Zoning
Administrator will schedule a formal review of the application for
the next available regular meeting of the Hampstead Planning and
Zoning Commission.
(5)
The Zoning Administrator shall notify property owners adjacent to
the proposed work site at least seven days prior to the date of the
meeting at which the application will be reviewed.
(6)
The Commission shall review and approve and disapprove projects
during normal monthly meetings. Applicants are encouraged to
prepare a presentation to be given at this review. No Town permits
can be processed or variances heard until this formal review with
the Commission is completed.24
(7)
Alterations and changes of use.
Structural alterations of a building or structure or the use of a
parcel, lot or tract of land which does not conform to the provisions
of this chapter shall be allowed only if the building or structure
(1)
A.
24.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(8), which immediately followed this subsection and
required Main Street design review prior to hearing a request for variance, was repealed
11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 493.
§ 135-10 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-13
134:258
to be altered or the parcel, lot or tract of land to be used is in
conformance with the requirements of the zoning district in which
it is located.
Upon application, the Board of Zoning Appeals ("the Board") may
approve the structural alteration of a building or structure or the
use of a parcel, lot or tract of land which is not in conformance
with the provisions of the zoning regulations, provided that such
alteration or extension of use is restricted to an additional area not
exceeding 35% of those existing buildings, structures, parcels, lots
or tracts of land devoted to a nonconforming use except that no
alteration, extension or expansion shall be permitted for:
(a) Junkyards.
Nonconforming signs, including off-premises signs
(billboards).
(b)
An increase in the number of living units for a two-family or
multifamily dwelling.
(c)
(2)
Applications for the alteration, extension or expansion shall be
granted or denied on the same legal standard as for zoning
variances.
(3)
If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a
building, structure or premises may, with approval of the Board, be
changed to another nonconforming use which, in the opinion of the
Board, is of the same or a more appropriate use or classification.
(4)
Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more
appropriate use in the opinion of the Board, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a less appropriate use or classification.
(5)
Repairs or improvements to public order or statutory requirement.
[Amended 5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 525]
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a structure in
accordance with an order of a public official who is charged with
protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be
unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition, provided that
such restoration is not otherwise in violation of this chapter.
(1)
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the structural
alteration of a building or structure when such alteration is
required to assure compliance with requirements related to the
Americans with Disabilities Act,25 provided that such alteration is
not otherwise in violation of this chapter.
(2)
B.
25.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 135-13 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-13
134:259
Uses or structure accessory to principal nonconforming use or
structure (accessory uses).
No use or structure that is accessory to a principal nonconforming
use or structure shall continue after such principal use or structure
shall have been terminated, unless it shall thereafter conform to all
the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
(1)
A nonconforming use of land or of a structure that is accessory to
a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use in any other
structure shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged, or increased
in intensity.
(2)
C.
Ordinary repair and maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental
repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of nonbearing
walls, nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, may be
performed on any nonconforming structure, provided that this work
shall not result in an extension or expansion of the nonconforming uses
and providing that all necessary permits are properly secured.
D.
Subdivision. A lot or parcel where a nonconforming use shall not be
subdivided unless such subdivision results in the conformity of both or
all subdivided lots or parcels.
E.
Cessation of use. No building, structure or premises where a
nonconforming use has ceased for six months or more shall thereafter
be used, except in conformance with this chapter. The actual use of
the building, structure or premises shall be the determining factor in
determining whether a nonconforming use has ceased for six months.
The intention of the property owner shall not be a factor in determining
whether the nonconforming use has ceased for six months. However,
time spent on repairs or improvements pursuant to the requirements,
as detailed in § 135-13B, may be excluded from the time calculation
upon showing to the Zoning Administrator the nature of the work and
the amount of time needed for completion of the work. [Amended
5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 525]
F.
Extinguishment of use.
The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to extinguish the
nonconforming use status of any building, structure, premises or
use where the nonconforming building, structure, premises or use:
(a) Has ceased pursuant to Subsection F.
Has been in any way unlawfully expanded or altered to include
modification without a valid building permit or occupancy
without a valid use and occupancy permit.
(b)
Has been in any way unlawfully used or occupied except as
authorized by this chapter.
(c)
(1)
G.
§ 135-13 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-13
134:260
§ 135-14. Uses prohibited under other laws.
Any existing or proposed use which is determined to be in conflict with any
existing ordinance or laws of the Town of Hampstead or law regulation of
the State of Maryland or other governmental agency shall be prohibited,
even though such use may be allowed under the terms of this chapter.
§ 135-15. Use of land for agricultural purposes.
Except for compliance with yard requirements and distance requirements
set forth in § 135-20, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of land for
agricultural purposes or the construction or use of buildings or structures
incident to the use for agricultural purposes of the land on which such
buildings or structures are located.
§ 135-16. Existing buildable lots. [Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
493]
Any lot which was a buildable lot under the terms or regulations in effect
at the time of the adoption of this chapter and which was established
or recorded at that time shall be deemed a buildable lot subject to the
provisions of Article XXX.
§ 135-17. Use of same yard for more than one building prohibited.
No part of a minimum required yard or other open space provided about
any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this chapter shall be included as part of a minimum required yard or other
open space required under this chapter for another building or structure.
Has been demolished without an approved demolition permit
and/or an approved building permit to erect the replacement
structure.
(d)
The Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice of the
extinguishment of a nonconforming use. Any appeal of this finding
shall be subject to the rules and requirements of this chapter and
must be made within 30 days of the date of decision.
(2)
Declaration of a nonconforming use. The Zoning Administrator shall
have the authority to declare a property a lawful and valid
nonconforming use. To make such finding, the property owner shall
present to the Zoning Administrator sufficient evidence to make a
factual determination that the structure, building, premises or use
lawfully existed before the adoption of this chapter or before any such
amendment that created the lawful nonconforming use. The property
owner shall bear the burden of proof under the evidentiary standard
of Maryland zoning law. Any appeal of this finding shall be subject to
the rules and requirements of this chapter and must be made within 30
days of the date of decision.
H.
§ 135-13 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-18
134:261
§ 135-18. Major Road Plan.
In an area where a Major Road Plan has been duly adopted in accordance
with Article 66B, Annotated Code of Maryland, 1957 Edition, showing a
proposed new highway or street or a proposed relocation or widening of
an existing highway or street, no building or part of a building shall be
permitted to be erected within the lines of such proposed highway or street
except as provided hereinafter:
§ 135-19. Utilities equipment and towers. [Amended 1-19-1993 by
Ord. No. 230; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 319]
The Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning certificate for such
construction as applied for, provided that the Maryland State Highway
Administration, the County Roads Department or appropriate authority,
upon and within 30 days of written notice thereof, does not reaffirm and
substantiate its plans to provide such construction in accordance with
the Major Road Plan.
A.
The owner of the property so affected shall, following the expiration
time of such written notice, have the right to appeal to the Board the
refusal of a zoning certificate, and the Board may give approval to
build if it should find, after public hearing and upon the evidence and
arguments presented to it upon such appeal, that:
The entire property of the appellant, of which the area affected by
the Major Road Plan forms a part, cannot yield a reasonable return
to the owner unless such appeal is granted.
(1)
Balancing the interest of the general public in preserving the
integrity of the Plan and the interest of the owner of the property
in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of such permit
is required by consideration of reasonable justice and equity.
(2)
B.
Utilities, as defined and enumerated in § 135-3, exclusive of
communication towers, shall be permitted in any district and are
exempt from lot area, lot width and yard requirements. However, the
plans of any overhead electric transmission line of 40 kilovolts or more,
on metal or wooden poles or towers or pole structures, or of any crosscountry
telephone trunk line, including microwave, transmission pipe
line or trunk sewer line, proposed to be erected or installed in any
district shall be submitted before the beginning of construction to the
Commission for its review and approval.
A.
The following uses, exclusive of communication towers, shall be
conditional uses in all zoning districts: buildings, yards, stations or
substations for transforming, boosting, switching or pumping purposes
where such facilities are constructed above ground; and telephone
exchanges.
B.
C. Communication towers and communication antennas.
§ 135-18 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-19
134:262
Communication towers are prohibited in all R districts, the C
District and the H District.
(1)
Communication towers are permitted as a conditional use in all I
districts and all B districts subject to the conditions and exceptions
noted hereafter, imposed elsewhere in this subsection, imposed
elsewhere in Chapter 135, imposed elsewhere by law and subject
to the following:
A minimum setback of a distance equaling the height of the
tower plus any communication antenna. The setback shall be
measured from the base of the tower to the boundary line of
the property owned, leased or controlled by easement by the
applicant.
(a)
Subject to a minimum distance requirement of a distance
equaling the height of the tower and any communication
antenna plus 200 feet from all R districts, the H District and
the C District or the nearest part of any existing dwelling,
school, church or institution for human care, in any other
district.
(b)
Subject to a minimum setback from all overhead transmission
lines of a distance equaling two times the height of the tower
plus any communication antenna.
(c)
Subject to site plan approval by the Commission pursuant to
§ 135-250D.
(d)
(2)
Communication tower complexes are permitted as a conditional
use in the I districts subject to the conditions and exceptions
noted hereafter, imposed elsewhere in this subsection, imposed
elsewhere in Chapter 135, imposed elsewhere by law and subject
to the following:
A minimum setback of a distance equaling twice the height of
the towers plus any communication antenna. The setback shall
be measured from the base of the tower to the boundary line
of the property owned, leased or controlled by easement by the
applicant.
(a)
Subject to a minimum distance requirement of a distance
equaling twice the height of the tower and any communication
antenna plus 200 feet from all R districts, the H District and
the C District or the nearest part of any existing dwelling,
school, church or institution for human care, in any other
district.
(b)
Subject to a minimum setback from all overhead transmission
lines of a distance equaling two times the height of the tower
plus any communication antenna.
(c)
(3)
§ 135-19 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-19
134:263
Subject to site plan approval by the Commission pursuant to
§ 135-250D.
(d)
Communication antennas erected on existing structures other than
communication towers shall be allowed in any district, provided
that the height of the antenna does not exceed 1/3 of the height of
the existing structure and the total height of the existing structure
and antenna does not exceed 200 feet.
(4)
No permit to construct a communication tower may be issued
unless the applicant demonstrates to the Board of Zoning Appeals
need for the tower and that the applicant has exhausted all
alternatives to constructing a tower. Applicants are required to
prove need by:
Demonstrating via statement or other evidence that, in terms
of location, and construction, there are no existing towers,
buildings, structures, elevated tanks, etc., able to provide the
antenna platform required;
(a)
Evidence required.
Providing evidence, including coverage diagrams and
technical reports, demonstrating that collocation on
existing sites is not technically possible in order to serve
the desired need. Collocation is not possible if:
Planned equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of existing and approved towers, considering
existing and planned use of those towers, and existing
and approved towers cannot be reinforced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost;
[a]
Planned equipment will cause radio frequency
interference with other existing or planned equipment
for that tower, and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost;
[b]
Existing or approved towers do not have space on
which planned equipment can be placed so it can
function effectively and at least in parity with other
similar equipment in place or planned; or
[c]
Other reasons make it impracticable to place the
equipment planned by the applicant on existing and
approved towers.
[d]
[1]
[2] Providing such other information as may be required.
(b)
If it is determined that the requirements of Subsection
C(5)(b)[1][a] and [b] above have been met, an application for
(c)
(5)
§ 135-19 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-19
134:264
§ 135-20. Distance requirements.
Any uses or buildings subject to compliance with this section shall be
located at least 200 feet from any lot in an R district or any lot which is part
of a duly recorded subdivision or any lot occupied by a dwelling, school,
church or institution for human care not located on the same lot as said use
or building.26
§ 135-21. Animals.27 [Added 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 479]
a zoning certificate may be considered pursuant to the
requirements of this section.
An application for a zoning certificate for a communication tower
must be accompanied by an affidavit from the applicant stating that
space on the proposed tower will be made available to future users,
when possible.
(6)
Except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other
federal or state agencies, no tower may use artificial lighting or
strobe lighting at night.
(7)
An applicant for a zoning certificate for a communication tower
must execute an agreement with the Town, in a form legally
sufficient to the Town, requiring the removal of the tower within
six months after the tower ceases to function as a communication
tower.
(8)
In reviewing any application or site plan under this section, among
other things, an agency shall consider the extent to which the
proposed use seeks to:
Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful
design, siting and vegetative screening;
(a)
Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure and falling ice through engineering and careful siting of
tower structures;
(b)
(c) Lessen traffic impacts on surrounding residential areas; and
Maximize the use of new communication towers in order to
reduce the number of towers needed.
(d)
(9)
The Zoning Administrator, Board of Zoning Appeals and the
Planning Commission can refer any application to appropriate
agencies for comment.
(10)
26.Editor's Note: Former § 135-17, Ponds, lakes and stabilization lagoons, which previously
followed this section, was repealed 1-19-1993 by Ord. No. 230.
27.Editor's Note: Former § 135-21, Compliance with Landscape Manual, added 3-12-1996 by
Ord. No. 287, was repealed 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 414.
§ 135-19 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-21
134:265
Purpose. The purpose of this section of the Town's Zoning Ordinance
is to support the keeping of companion animals in residential areas
while protecting public health, safety and welfare. The intent is to
differentiate between the responsible keeping of animals traditionally
kept as pets, such as domesticated cats and dogs, and the keeping,
breeding and/or sale of farm animals and exotic animals. In broad
terms, companion animals—in reasonable number—are permitted in all
residential districts. The keeping of farm animals is limited to areas
where agricultural activity is allowed. The keeping of exotic
animals—except in limited and specific situations—is prohibited.
A.
Companion animals.
Keeping, harboring, breeding or possession of companion animals
in compliance with local, county, state and federal law is permitted
in any residential zoning district.
(1)
The total number of companion animals permitted on any
residential property is six. Fish kept in aquaria or small mammals
such as hamsters or gerbils kept in cages shall not count against
this total.
(2)
The maximum number of dogs permitted on any residential
property is three.
(3)
The maximum number of cats permitted on any residential
property is three.
(4)
B.
Farm animals. Keeping, harboring, breeding or possession of farm
animals is permitted in any zoning district where agricultural activity
is allowed, subject to the setback requirements in § 135-20 and all
local, county, state and federal laws, except as follows. [Amended
5-12-2011 by Ord. No. 488]
The keeping of up to eight chickens shall be permitted in any
zoning district where:
The principal permitted use is a detached single-family
dwelling on a lot of one acre or more in size.
(a)
(b) No person shall keep any rooster.
(c) No person shall slaughter any chickens on the premises.
The chickens shall be provided with both an enclosed hen
house and a fenced outdoor enclosure.
(d)
The chickens must be kept in the hen house or fenced outdoor
enclosure at all times and shall not be allowed to run free.
(e)
The hen house shall be a covered, well-ventilated structure
providing a minimum of two square feet per chicken.
(f)
(1)
C.
§ 135-21 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-21
134:266
The outdoor enclosure shall be adequately fenced to contain
the chickens and to protect the chickens from predators.
(g)
The hen house must be kept in a clean, dry and sanitary
condition at all times.
(h)
The outdoor enclosure shall be cleaned on a regular basis to
prevent the accumulation of animal waste.
(i)
No hen house or enclosure shall be located closer than 100
feet to any occupied structure on an adjacent lot. Enclosures
shall also comply with the setback requirements for accessory
buildings and structures set forth in the Town’s accessory use
regulations, where such structures shall be considered sheds.
(j)
The owner of the property shall secure a permit from the Town
for keeping chickens, where the fee for such permit shall be
set by a resolution of the Council.
(k)
Exotic animals. Keeping, harboring, breeding or possession of exotic
animals is prohibited in all zoning districts except for the following:
A lawful and accredited zoological park or aquarium which
complies with this chapter and all other local, state and federal
laws.
(1)
A lawful and accredited wildlife sanctuary or nature preserve
which complies with this chapter and all other local, state and
federal laws.
(2)
A lawful and accredited scientific, medical or educational research
facility which complies with this chapter and all other local, state
and federal laws.
(3)
D.
Exceptions. The requirements of § 135-21 shall not apply to:
(1) Licensed humane societies.
(2) Animal control officers.
(3) Licensed veterinary hospitals or clinics.
Licensed uses involving animal breeding, shelter, care, services or
sales in business zoning districts where such use is permitted by
this chapter.
(4)
Persons participating in a trap/neuter/release program for feral
cats, who engage in an ongoing management of a feral cat colony.
(Persons participating in a trap/neuter/release program must keep
documentation on each cat in the program and provide it to the
Zoning Administrator, if requested.) [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 500]
(5)
E.
§ 135-21 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-22
134:267
§ 135-22. Traffic visibility across corner lots.28 [Amended 3-15-1993
by Ord. No. 254]
In any C, H or R District or any corner lot, no fence, structure or planting
that would interfere with traffic visibility across the corner shall be erected
or maintained within 20 feet of the intersection of the road right-of-way
lines.
§ 135-23. Major subdivisions in R-120,000 Districts. [Amended
3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 254; 2-12-2008 by Ord. No. 440]
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a minor subdivision of land, as herein
defined, in any district; provided, however, that a major subdivision of land,
as herein defined, for residential purposes in any portion of an R-120,000
District shall, following any required technical review and prior to any
approval, be subject to a final determination by the Commission to ensure
compliance with the following requirements:
§ 135-24. Home office or occupation. [Added 3-8-2005 by Ord. No.
408]
That such proposed major subdivision for residential development has
been adequately demonstrated as being in accord and not in conflict
with or running contrary to any element of the Town's Master Plan.
A.
That any one or combination of essential community facilities and
services determined necessary by the Commission, in accordance with
Article XXIX, are either available or adequately insured to be made
available for such proposed residential development in major
subdivisions which would be adequate and which could reasonably be
expected and required.
B.
That the tract or area proposed for major residential subdivision
development is determined by the Commission as being suitable for
such proposed residential development in accordance with Article
XXIX.
C.
A home office or occupation shall be permitted as an accessory use
in any residential zoning district. A home office or occupation shall be
subject to the following performance criteria:
A single home office or occupation shall be permitted in a
residence. No outside employees are permitted to work in the home
office or occupation.
(1)
The home office or occupation shall not occupy more than 25% of
the dwelling.
(2)
A.
28.Editor's Note: See also § 127-12, Obstructions to vision.
§ 135-22 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-24
134:268
§ 135-25. Home-based business. [Added 3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 408]
The home office or occupation shall not generate any more traffic
or need for parking than would normally result from residential
occupancy.
(3)
Any activity related to the home office or occupation shall be
conducted in such a manner as to give no outward appearance of
business. No sign indicating a home office or occupation shall be
permitted
(4)
The following list is provided as examples of permitted home offices
or occupations. This list is not intended to be exclusive, but merely
illustrative.
An in-home office for a professional or a business owner where the
principal work is conducted and equipment is stored off premises,
like landscaping firms, general contractors, etc.
(1)
(2) An Internet or mail-based business.
An in-home studio for an artist, sculptor, composer or author where
work is sold off premises.
(3)
(4) Art or music lessons for a single pupil.
A typing or document preparation service, tax preparation service
or other administrative or consulting services where meetings with
clients are conducted off premises.
(5)
The homebound employment of a physically, mentally or
emotionally handicapped person who is unable to work away from
home by reason of his or her disability.
(6)
B.
A home-based business shall be permitted as an accessory use in any
residential zoning district but shall not be permitted in a planned unit
development. A home-based business shall be subject to the following
Only one home-based business shall be permitted in a residence.
The employees of a home-based business shall be limited to the
owners-occupants of the residence and no more than one outside
employee.
(1)
The home-based business shall not occupy more than 50% of the
dwelling.
(2)
The home-based business shall not generate any more traffic or
need for parking than would normally result from residential
occupancy.
(3)
The conduct of a home-based business shall not detract from the
residential character of the dwelling or the surrounding
neighborhood. The sign for a home-based business shall be limited
(4)
A.
§ 135-24 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-25
134:269
§ 135-26. (Reserved)
§ 135-27. (Reserved)
§ 135-28. (Reserved)
§ 135-29. (Reserved)
to an unlit sign three square feet per face in size and must be
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
The following is a general list of examples of home-based businesses
that are permitted. This list is not intended to be exclusive, but merely
illustrative.
(1) Art or music lessons for more than one but less than four pupils.
An administrative, service or consulting business where meetings
with clients are conducted on premises.
(2)
(3) A single-chair barber or beauty shop.
(4) A sewing, tailoring, seamstress or dressmaking in-home business.
B.
All home-based businesses shall possess a zoning certificate issued by
the Zoning Administrator.
C.
§ 135-25 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-29
134:270
ARTICLE IV
R-120,000 District
[Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218; 1-19-1993 by Ord. No. 230;
2-12-2008 by Ord. No. 440]
§ 135-30. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-120,000 District is to prescribe a zoning category for
those areas where, because of natural geographic factors and existing land
uses, it is considered feasible and desirable to conserve open spaces, water
supply sources, woodland areas, wildlife and other natural resources. This
district may include extensive steeply sloped areas, stream valleys, water
supply sources and wooded areas adjacent thereto.
§ 135-31. Applicable regulations.
The following regulations and the applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the R-120,00 District.
§ 135-32. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-33. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
Agriculture, as defined in § 135-3, except that woodland intended to be
cleared for cultivation or pasturing shall be subject to review by the
Board, and provided that any greenhouse heating plant or any building
or feeding pens in which farm animals are kept shall comply with the
distance requirements specified in § 135-20.
A.
B. Forests, forestation and wildlife preserves.
Publicly owned or private parks including golf courses, riding trails,
summer or winter resort areas, hunting, fishing or country clubs, game
preserves and similar uses for the purpose of preserving and enjoying
the natural resources of the property.
C.
Water supply works, flood control or watershed protection works and
fish and game hatcheries.
D.
Single-family detached dwellings, provided that the minimum lot size
shall be maintained at three acres, and subject to §§ 135-18 and 135-23.
E.
Public utility structures other than essential utility equipment, as
enumerated in the definition of "essential utility equipment" in § 135-3.
A.
Trap, skeet, rifle or archery ranges, including gun clubs, provided
that such use shall be five times the distance requirement specified in
§ 135-20.
B.
§ 135-30 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-33
134:271
§ 135-34. Accessory uses.
§ 135-35. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 523]
Except on farms, no principal structure shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet
in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed 2 stories or 30 feet in
height, except as provided in § 135-258.
§ 135-36. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall apply, except as hereinafter
modified in Article XXX:
Lot
Area
(acres)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Dwellings 3 300 50 50 50
Other uses 5 300 50 100 50
Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals or kennels with or without runways,
provided that the minimum area is 10 acres for any of the aforesaid
uses and provided that any structure or area used for such purposes
shall be subject to twice the distance requirement as specified in
§ 135-20, and, in any event, such structure or use shall not be located
closer than 400 feet from any property line of the subject property.
C.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use or authorized conditional use.
A.
One private stable as defined in § 135-3 in a rear yard on a lot or tract
of three acres or more and as hereinafter regulated:
No less than 1/2 the distance requirements of § 135-20, provided
200 feet from a dwelling on an adjoining lot or tract of land, and/or
200 feet from any dwelling on a lot or tract of land across the road
from the lot or tract in question.
(1)
No less than 1/2 the distance requirements of § 135-20, provided
adjoining or across the road from unimproved but buildable lots or
tracts of land.
(2)
No less than 1/4 the distance requirements of § 135-20, provided
300 feet from a dwelling on an adjoining lot and/or 300 feet from a
dwelling on a lot across the road from the lot in question.
(3)
An in-fee strip or portion of a panhandle or flag lot abutting or
next adjacent to the lot or tract in question shall not be considered
as the adjoining lot or tract of land in determining space
requirements.
(4)
B.
§ 135-33 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-37
134:272
§ 135-37. (Reserved)
§ 135-38. (Reserved)
§ 135-39. (Reserved)
§ 135-37 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-39
134:273

ARTICLE V
H Historic Zoning District
[Amended 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 357]
§ 135-40. Purpose. [Amended 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 455]
The Historic Zoning District is intended to provide opportunities for the use
and adaptive reuse of properties of historical significance while providing
for the protection, enhancement, preservation and appropriate use of such
properties. Specifically, the district is intended to:
§ 135-41. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
Safeguard the heritage of Hampstead as embodied and reflected in the
structures found in the district.
A.
B. Stabilize and improve property values of local historic structures.
C. Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past.
D. Strengthen the economy of the Town.
Promote the use of historic structures, sites and districts for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the residents of Hampstead and the
surrounding community.
E.
F. Maintain the Town of Hampstead’s unique, local “sense of place.”
Churches and other places of worship. [Amended 10-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 455]
A.
B. Single-family dwellings.
Museums, visitor's centers, libraries or cultural, civic, educational or
social uses as determined by the Commission.
C.
Conversion and alteration of a building to accommodate two or more
families, provided that the requirements of Article XXI, as well as the
requirements of the Health Department, are complied with.
D.
Professional and administrative offices. [Added 10-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 455]
E.
Inns, bed-and-breakfasts and hotels. [Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No.
455]
F.
Taverns, brew pubs and restaurants, except any fast-food restaurants
as defined by § 135-3. [Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 455]
G.
H. Specialty retail stores. [Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 455]
§ 135-40 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-41
134:275
§ 135-42. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
[Amended 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 455]
Conditional uses requiring Board authorization shall be as follows:
§ 135-43. Actions requiring approval of Planning and Zoning
Commission.
§ 135-44. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-45. Required conditions.
Coffee shops, tea rooms and artisan bakeries. [Added 10-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 455]
I.
J. Bookstores. [Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 455]
Any permitted or conditional use in the B-L District not enumerated in
§ 135-41.
A.
Prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate for the construction,
alteration, repair, moving or demolition of any structure within this
district, and where such changes would solely affect the exterior
appearance of a structure which is visible or intended to be visible from
an adjacent public way, approval must be granted by the Planning and
Zoning Commission in accordance with the requirements of Article 66B
and such other requirements as said Planning and Zoning Commission
may legally require in granting such approval.
A.
Adaptive reuse of an historic building shall require submission and
approval of a site plan.
B.
Those accessory uses customarily incidental and accessory to any
permitted principal use or authorized conditional use and where such
accessory uses do not detract from the historic nature of the property
as determined by the Commission.
A.
Any addition or alterations to the exterior of an existing structure shall
preserve the historic character of the building. Any building, renovation
or addition shall be consistent with the architecture, construction and
materials of the existing structure. Within the Main Street
Revitalization Area, the architecture, construction and materials shall
be consistent with the design guidelines in the Main Street
Revitalization Plan.
A.
Off-street parking shall be restricted to the rear or side yard of the lot,
unless otherwise permitted by the Commission.
B.
C. Drive-through facilities or services shall not be permitted.
D. Business signage shall be approved by the Commission.
§ 135-41 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-46
134:276
§ 135-46. Height regulations.
Height regulations shall be as enumerated in § 135-65 for residential uses
and § 135-116 for commercial uses. The height regulations herein shall not
be interpreted to require alteration of an existing structure where such
alteration would diminish the historic character of a building.
§ 135-47. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. [Amended
10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 455]
Lot area, lot width and yard requirements shall be enumerated in § 135-76
for residential uses and § 135-117 for commercial uses. The yard
requirements herein shall not be interpreted to require alteration of an
existing structure where such alteration would diminish the historic
character of a building.
Lot Area
Lot Width
(feet)
Dwellings and other
principal permitted uses
20,000 square feet 100
Churches or places of
worship
2 acres 200
§ 135-48. (Reserved)
§ 135-49. (Reserved)
§ 135-46 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-49
134:277

ARTICLE VI
R-40,000 Residence District
[Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 226]
§ 135-50. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide a location for single-family
residential development, the individual lots of which contain a minimum
of 40,000 square feet. This district is generally not intended to be served
with public water or sewerage facilities, although, in special situations, it
may be. The district would generally coincide with areas designated for lowdensity
residential development on the Town Master Plan.
§ 135-51. Applicable regulations.
The following regulations, including the applicable regulations of other
articles, shall apply in the R-40,000 Residence District.
§ 135-52. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-53. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
Conditional uses requiring Board authorization shall be as follows:
Agriculture, as defined in § 135-3, provided that any building or feeding
pen in which farm animals are kept shall comply with distance
requirements as specified in § 135-20.
A.
B. Churches, schools and colleges.
C. Dwellings, single-family.
Buildings and properties of a cultural, civic, educational, social or
community service type, such as libraries, ponds and playgrounds and
community centers, but not storage yards, warehouses or service
garages.
D.
Antique shops; arts and crafts shops where operated solely by the
resident.
A.
Beauty shops or barber shops, provided that they are one-chair
operations and that a resident provides all services in connection with
the operation.
B.
Nursing and/or retirement homes, hospitals (Class A), medical and
dental clinics subject to prior approval of the site development plan and
the exterior design of the structure by the Commission.
C.
D. Funeral establishments.
§ 135-50 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-53
134:279
§ 135-54. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-55. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 523]
No principal structure shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet in height, and no
accessory structure shall exceed 2 stories or 20 feet in height, except as
provided in § 135-258.
§ 135-56. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the
modified requirements of Article XXX:
Golf courses, country clubs and similar recreational uses privately
owned and/or operated.
E.
F. Nursery schools or child-care centers.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses not considered essential
utility equipment, as enumerated in the definition of "essential utility
equipment" in § 135-3.29
G.
Conversion and alteration of a building existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter (December 26, 1972) to accommodate two
families, provided that the requirements of Article XXI and the Health
Department are complied with.
H.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use or authorized conditional use.
A.
B. Incidental home or farm occupations.
C. Existing cemeteries, when accessory to a church.
D. Guesthouses in accessory buildings.
Swimming pools, tennis courts and other similar courts when accessory
to a residence.
E.
The keeping of not more than four roomers or boarders by a resident
family.
F.
29.Editor's Note: The definition of "essential utility equipment" was repealed from § 135-3 by
Ord. No. 230, adopted 1-19-1993.
§ 135-53 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-56
134:280
Lot Area
Lot
Width
(feet) Density
Front
yard
depth
(feet)
Side
Yard
Width
(each,
feet)
Rear
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Dwellings 40,000 square
feet
150 -- 60 20 50
Churches 2 acres 200 -- 100 50 50
Schools,
elementary
20 acres 500 -- 150 100 50
Schools, high 30 acres 600 -- 150 100 50
Colleges 30 acres 600 -- 150 100 50
Hospitals 10 acres 500 -- 150 100 50
Utilities 5 acres 200 -- 150 25 50
Other permitted
and
conditional uses
40,000 square
feet
150 -- 60 25 75
Nursing homes 45,000 square
feet
150 1 bed per
3,000 square
feet*
50 min.** 40 min.** 50 min.**
Retirement homes 45,000 square
feet
150 1 dwelling unit
per 3,000
square feet*
50 min. 40 min. 50 min.
NOTES:
* For those areas in excess of 180,000 square feet, the determination of the density factor will be
made by the Commission and the Health Department upon review and approval of the site
development plan.
** As lot area increases above the minimum 45,000 square feet, increased provisions for side and rear
yards shall be determined by the Commission and the Health Department based on the site
development plan.
§ 135-57. (Reserved)
§ 135-58. (Reserved)
§ 135-59. (Reserved)
§ 135-56 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-59
134:281

ARTICLE VII
R-20,000 Residence District
§ 135-60. Purpose.
The purpose of this R-20,000 Residence District is to provide a location for
single-family residential development, the individual lots of which contain
a minimum of 20,000 square feet (or approximately two families per acre).
The area may or may not be served with public water and/or public
sewerage facilities, and, for reason of this larger lot size in the urban
locations of the Town, more open space is obtained and noticeable in this
residence district than others.
§ 135-61. Applicable regulations.
The following regulations and the applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the R-20,000 Residence District.
§ 135-62. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-63. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
Conditional uses requiring Board authorization shall be as follows:
Agriculture, as defined in § 135-3, provided that any building or feeding
pens in which farm animals are kept shall comply with distance
requirements specified in § 135-20.
A.
B. Churches, schools and colleges.
C. Single-family dwellings.
Buildings and properties of a cultural, civic, educational, social or
community service type, such as libraries, ponds and playgrounds and
community centers, but not storage yards, warehouses or service
garages.
D.
Family day-care home, as defined by state law, caring for six or fewer
children, provided that state requirements are complied with.30 [Added
6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 223]
E.
A. Antique shops.
B. Beauty parlors or barbershops.
Nursing and/or retirement homes, hospitals (Class A) and medical and
dental clinics, subject to prior approval of the site development plan
and exterior design of the structure by the Commission.
C.
30.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, which listed conversion and alteration of a building to
accommodate two families, was repealed 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218.
§ 135-60 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-63
134:283
§ 135-64. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-65. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 523]
No principal structure shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet in height, and no
accessory structure shall exceed 2 stories or 30 feet in height, except as
provided in § 135-258.
D. Funeral establishments.
Golf courses, country clubs, private clubs of a nonprofit nature and
similar recreational uses which are privately owned and/or operated.
E.
F. Nursery schools or child-care centers.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses not considered essential
utility equipment, as enumerated in the definition of "essential utility
equipment" in § 135-3.31
G.
Conversion and alteration of a building existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter to accommodate two families, provided that
the requirements of Article XXI, as well as the requirements of the
Health Department, are complied with. [Added 3-20-1989 by Ord.
No. 218]
H.
Family day-care home, as defined by state law, caring for more than six
children, provided that state requirements are complied with. [Added
6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 223]
I.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use or authorized conditional use.
A.
B. Incidental home or farm occupations.
C. Existing cemeteries, when accessory to a church.
D. Guest house in an accessory building.
Swimming pools and tennis and other similar courts when accessory to
a residence.
E.
The keeping of not more than four roomers or boarders by a resident
family.
F.
G. One private stable as regulated in § 135-34B.
31.Editor's Note: The definition of "essential utility equipment" was repealed from § 135-3 by
Ord. No. 230, adopted 1-19-1993.
§ 135-63 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-66
134:284
§ 135-66. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Article XXX:
Use
Lot
Area
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot
Area
per Family
or
Density
Front
Yard Depth
(feet)
Side
Yard
Width
(each, feet)
Rear
Yard Depth
(feet)
Dwellings 20,000
square feet
100* 20,000 square
feet
40 20 50
Churches 2 acres 200 20,000 square
feet
100 50 50
Schools,
elementary
5 acres 400 -- 150 100 50
Schools, high 10 acres 500 -- 150 100 50
Colleges 15 acres 500 -- 150 100 50
Hospitals
(Class A)
5 400 150 100 50 --
Nursing home 45,000
square feet
150 1 bed per
3,000 square
feet**
50
minimum***
40
minimum***
50
minimum***
Retirement
homes
45,000
square feet
150 1 dwelling unit
per 3,000
square feet
50
minimum***
40
minimum***
50
minimum***
Funeral
establishments
2 acres 150 -- 100 30 50
Public
utilities*
20,000
square feet
100 -- 40 25 50
Other
principal
permitted or
conditional
uses
20,000
square feet
100 -- 40 25 50
§ 135-66 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-66
134:285
NOTES:
* A corner lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of 125 feet.
** For those areas in excess of 180,000 square feet, the determination of the density factor will be
made by the Commission and the Health Department upon the review and approval of the site
development plan.
*** As lot area increases above the minimum of 45,000 square feet, increased provision for front,
side and rear yards shall be determined by the Commission and the Health Department based on the
site development plan.
§ 135-67. (Reserved)
§ 135-68. (Reserved)
§ 135-69. (Reserved)
§ 135-66 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-69
134:286
ARTICLE VIII
R-10,000 Residence District
§ 135-70. Purpose. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 465]
The purpose of the R-10,000 Residence District is to provide for smaller lot
sizes (10,000 square foot minimum) for single- and two-family dwellings,
based on the use of public water and sewerage facilities. This district
also enables the use of multifamily structures, but only in a planned unit
development.
§ 135-71. Applicable regulations.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the R-10,000 Residence District.
§ 135-72. Principal permitted uses. [Amended 12-9-1974 by Ord.
No. 165; 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218; 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 223;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 465]
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-73. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
[Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218; 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 223;
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 402; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 465
Conditional uses requiring Board authorization shall be as follows:
§ 135-74. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses shall be as follows:
A. Single-family dwellings.
Family day-care home, as defined by state law, caring for eight or fewer
children, provided that state requirements are complied with.
B.
C. Multifamily dwelling units, but only in a planned unit development.
D. Planned unit development, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII.
Two-family dwellings, except that no dwelling unit in a planned unit
development shall be modified to a two-family dwelling.
A.
Clubs, fraternities, lodges or similar nonprofit organizations, provided
that any buildings or structures are located subject to the distance
requirements specified in § 135-20.
B.
C. Community centers and swimming pools associated therewith.
Family day-care home, as defined by state law, caring for more than
eight children, provided that state requirements are complied with.
D.
§ 135-70 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-74
134:287
§ 135-75. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 523]
No principal structure shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet in height, and no
accessory structure shall exceed 1 1/2 stories or 25 feet in height, except as
provided in § 135-258.
§ 135-76. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. [Amended
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 226]
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Article XXX:
Use
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot
Area
per Family
(square
feet)
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Sid
Yard
Width
(each,
feet)
Rear
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Single-family
dwellings
10,000 70* 10,000 35 12 40
Two-family dwellings 15,000 75* 7,500 35 12 40
Semidetached (1/2
building):
Interior lot 7,500 37.5 7,500 35 12 (1 side) 40
Corner lot 10,000 70 10,000 35 25 (1 side) 40
Clubs, fraternities,
etc.
20,000 100 -- 35 20 40
Planned unit
development
Subject to the provisions of Article XXVII
Other principal
permitted or
conditional uses
Same as specified in R-20,000 District
Boarding or tourist
homes
20,000 100 -- 35 20 40
NOTES:
* A corner lot shall have a minimum width at the building line of 125 feet.
§ 135-77. (Reserved)
Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use or authorized conditional use.
A.
B. Keeping of roomers or tourists by a resident family.
§ 135-74 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-78
134:288
§ 135-78. (Reserved)
§ 135-79. (Reserved)
§ 135-78 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-79
134:289

ARTICLE IX
R-7,500 Residence District
§ 135-80. Purpose. [Amended 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 454]
The purpose of the R-7,500 District is to enable a greater number of
dwellings per acre in the urban areas of the Town, where both public
water and sewerage facilities are available. The minimum lot size for singlefamily
dwellings is 7,500 square feet. This district also enables the use of
multifamily structures, but only in a planned unit development.
§ 135-81. Applicable regulations.
The following regulations and the applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the R-7,500 Residence District.
§ 135-82. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-83. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
[Amended 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 223; 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 454]
Conditional uses requiring Board authorization shall be as follows:
A. Single-family dwellings. [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 226]
B. Multifamily dwellings, but only in a planned unit development.32
C. Planned unit development, subject to Article XXVII.33
Family day-care home, as defined by state law, caring for eight or fewer
children, provided that state requirements are complied with. [Added
6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 223; amended 10-14-2008 by Ord. No.
454]
D.
A. Two-family dwelling unit.
Convalescent centers, nursing homes, assisted-living facilities and/or
retirement homes, subject to prior approval of the site development
plan and exterior design of the structure by the Commission.
B.
Family day-care home, as defined by state law, caring for more than
eight children, provided that state requirements are complied with.
C.
32.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Boarding- or lodging houses, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 454. This ordinance also
relettered former Subsection D as Subsection C.
33.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, listing principal permitted uses in the R-10,000
District, and Subsection F, added 12-9-1974 by Ord. No. 165, listing a physician's
professional office, both of which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed
10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 454, which ordinance also relettered former Subsection G as
Subsection D.
§ 135-80 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-84
134:291
§ 135-84. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-85. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 523]
No principal structure shall exceed 3 stories or 45feet in height, and no
accessory structure shall exceed 1 1/2 stories or 25 feet, except as provided
in § 135-258.
§ 135-86. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Article XXX:
Use
Lot
Area
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot
Area
per Family
or Density
(square
feet)
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Side
Yard
Width
(each,
feet)
Rear
Yard
Depth
(feet)
1-family, 1 and
1 1/2 stories
7,500 square
feet
60* 7,500 25 8 35
1-family, 2 and
2 1/2 stories
7,500 square
feet
60* 7,500 25 10 40
2-family, 1 and
1 1/2 stories
10,000
square feet
80* 5,000 25 10 40
2-family, 2 and
2 1/2 stories
10,000
square feet
80* 5,000 25 12 40
Semidetached (1/
2) building
Interior lot 5,000 50 5,000 25 12 (1 side) 40
Corner lot 6,000 60 6,000 25 25 (1 side) 40
Clubs,
fraternities, etc.
1 acre 150 -- 25 25 40
Nursing homes 45,000
square feet
150 1 bed
3,000**
50 min.*** 40 min.*** 50 min.***
Retirement homes 45,000
square feet
150 1 dwelling
unit per
3,000**
50 min. 40 min. 50 min.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any principal
use or authorized conditional use.
A.
§ 135-84 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-86
134:292
Use
Lot
Area
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot
Area
per Family
or Density
(square
feet)
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Side
Yard
Width
(each,
feet)
Rear
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Planned unit
development
10 acres Subject to the provisions of Article XXVII
Other permitted
or conditional
uses
20,000
square feet
100 -- 25 20 40
NOTES:
* A corner lot shall have a minimum with of 100 feet.
** For those areas in excess of 180,000 square feet, the determination of the density factor will be made
by the Commission and the Health Department upon the review and approval of the site development
plan.
*** As lot area increases above the minimum of 45,000 square feet, increased provisions for front, side
and rear yards shall be determined by the Commission and the Health Department based on the site
development plan.
§ 135-87. (Reserved)
§ 135-88. (Reserved)
§ 135-89. (Reserved)
§ 135-86 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-89
134:293

ARTICLE X
R-O Residential Office District
[Added 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 353]
§ 135-90. Purpose.
The Residential Office District is intended to provide areas for residential
uses and professional and administrative offices. The purpose of the district
is to preserve and enhance the residential character of the locality involved,
while allowing office uses whose nature is highly compatible with singlefamily
dwellings (e.g., low traffic generation, similar scale, and similar
intensity). Within the Main Street Revitalization Area, the district protects
the essential residential element of downtown Hampstead while offering
increased reuse opportunities for existing dwellings.
§ 135-91. Building character.
Any addition or alterations to the exterior of an existing or former residence
shall not alter the residential character of the building. Any building,
renovation or addition shall be consistent with the architecture,
construction and materials of neighboring structures. Within the Main
Street Revitalization Area, the architecture, construction and materials
shall be consistent with the design guidelines in the Main Street
Revitalization Plan. Any new building shall be residential in design and
appearance.
§ 135-92. Business character.
The business shall be carried on entirely within the principal building.
The business shall not substantially injure the value of adjoining property
and shall be in harmony with the surrounding land uses. The business
shall not materially endanger the public health and safety, or constitute a
public nuisance. The business shall not cause any noise, odors, effluent,
smoke, dust, vibrations, electrical interference, bright or flashing light, or
other objectionable conditions detectable at or beyond the lot line. The
business shall be consistent with the purpose of the district, with the
Town's Comprehensive Plan, and with the Main Street Revitalization Plan,
if located in the Revitalization Area. No sale of goods on the premises is
allowed except for sales which are incidental to the provision of services.
§ 135-93. Parking and traffic.
Off-street parking shall be restricted to the rear or side yard of the
lot, unless otherwise permitted by the Commission. Within the
Revitalization Area, reasonable and appropriate off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the Commission during the site
plan process and shall be based on the parking needs of the proposed
use, the availability of on-street or off-street parking in the vicinity of
the proposed use and congruence with the Main Street Revitalization
A.
§ 135-90 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-93
134:295
§ 135-94. Signage.
No exterior business signs shall be allowed except one unlit sign not
exceeding six square feet per face.
§ 135-95. Setbacks and height. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
523]
Setbacks shall be established to be congruent with adjacent properties and
consistent with the Main Street Revitalization Plan within the Main Street
Revitalization Area. In the absence of developed adjacent properties, the
district shall use the setbacks of the R-7500 District. In all instances, the
Commission shall have the authority to determine appropriate setbacks in
the site plan approval process. New principal structures shall not exceed 45
feet in height, and no new accessory structure shall exceed 1 1/2 stories or
25 feet in height, except as provided in § 135-258.
§ 135-96. Site plan requirement.
A building permit or zoning certificate for any business shall not be issued
by the Town without an approved site plan that conforms to the standards
in the Town Code.
§ 135-97. (Reserved)
§ 135-98. (Reserved)
§ 135-99. (Reserved)
Plan. The Commission may approve a site plan with no off-street
parking if deemed appropriate.
A business shall not require regular or frequent deliveries of goods or
materials of such bulk or quantity, nor the parking of customers' or
clients' vehicles in numbers or frequency over and above the normal
traffic associated with the dwelling as a residence.
B.
§ 135-93 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-99
134:296
ARTICLE XI
R-B Residential Business District
[Added 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 354]
§ 135-100. Purpose.
The R-B Residential Business District is intended to provide the opportunity
for low-intensity commercial development consistent with the general
character of a residential neighborhood. These businesses also should be
compatible with adjoining neighborhoods.
§ 135-101. Applicable regulations.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the R-B Residential Business District.
§ 135-102. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses or structures shall be:
§ 135-103. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
Conditional permitted uses or structures shall be:
§ 135-104. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-105. Required conditions.
Any use or structure permitted and regulated as a principal permitted
use in a B-L, R-O, or R-10,000 District, except as may be hereinafter
modified.
A.
Any use or structure permitted and regulated as a conditional use in a
B-L District, except as hereinafter modified.
A.
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any
permitted principal use or authorized conditional use.
A.
Any addition or alterations to the exterior of an existing or former
residence shall not alter the residential appearance of the building.
Any building, renovation or addition shall be consistent with the
architecture, construction and materials of neighboring structures.
Within the Main Street Revitalization Area, the architecture,
construction and materials shall be consistent with the design
guidelines in the Main Street Revitalization Plan.
A.
Any new building or structure shall be residential in design and
character and shall not exceed 3,000 square feet (first floor) and 6,000
square feet (total).
B.
§ 135-100 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-105
134:297
§ 135-106. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
523]
New principal structures shall not exceed 45 feet in height and no new
accessory structure shall exceed 1 1/2 stories or 25 feet in height, except as
provided in § 135-258.
§ 135-107. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
Setbacks shall be established to be congruent with adjacent properties and
consistent with the Main Street Revitalization Plan within the Main Street
Revitalization Area. In the absence of developed adjacent properties, the
zone shall use the setbacks of the R-7500 District. In all instances, the
Commission shall have the authority to determine appropriate setbacks in
the site plan approval process.
§ 135-108. Site plan requirement.
A building permit or zoning certificate for any business shall not be issued
by the Town without an approved site plan that conforms to the standards
in the Town Code.
§ 135-109. (Reserved)
Any addition to an existing building shall not exceed 50% of the existing
floor space, but in no instance exceed the size as restricted in
§ 135-105B.
C.
All business, services or processing shall be conducted wholly within a
completely enclosed building, except for off-street automobile parking
and loading areas and public utility uses.
D.
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall
be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse matter or watercarried
waste.
E.
Off-street parking shall be restricted to the rear or side yard of the lot,
unless otherwise permitted by the Commission.
F.
G. Drive-through facilities or services shall not be permitted.
Business signage shall be limited to 10 square feet per face.
Freestanding signs shall not be mounted higher than six feet from
ground level. When lighted, all signs shall use indirect light in such a
manner as not to illuminate neighboring properties. All signage must be
consistent with the design guidelines in the Main Street Revitalization
Plan.
H.
§ 135-105 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-109
134:298
ARTICLE XII
B-L Local Business District
[Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 226;
3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 355]
§ 135-110. Purpose.
The B-L Local Business District is intended to provide the opportunity for
lower-intensity commercial development. Stores, businesses and offices in
the district should be useful to the majority of neighborhood residents
and economically supportable by nearby populations. These businesses
also should blend with adjoining neighborhoods and have significantly less
impact than uses normally permitted in a General Business (B-G) District.
Within the Main Street Revitalization Area, the use of B-L zoning shall be
consistent with the adopted Main Street Revitalization Plan.
§ 135-111. Applicable regulations.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the B-L Local Business District.
§ 135-112. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
A. Art, antique, gifts, china, and luggage shops.
Artisan bakeries, coffee houses, doughnut shops and retail bakeries less
than 3,000 square feet in size. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No.
438]
B.
Banks, credit unions, and financial institutions without drive-through
facilities.
C.
D. Bed-and-breakfasts.
E. Book and stationery stores, and newsstands.
Business offices such as real estate broker, insurance agent,
stockbroker and manufacturer's agent offices, and similar uses.
F.
Commercial amusements conducted within a building, including
billiard parlors, game rooms or theaters.
G.
H. Drugstores and confectionery, sundries and tobacco shops.
I. Dwellings as permitted and regulated in R-10,000 District.
Grocery stores, vegetable, fruit and meat markets, and delicatessens
(under 20,000 square feet).
J.
Laundry and dry-cleaning pickup stations, where no work is done on
the premises, and self-service laundries.
K.
§ 135-110 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-112
134:299
§ 135-113. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
Conditional uses requiring Board authorization shall be as follows:
L. Museums, visitor centers, historic and cultural exhibits and libraries.
Music, art or dancing schools, music and record shops, and preschools
and day-care centers.
M.
N. Parking lots.
O. Parks, playgrounds, and playfields.
Personal services such as beauty shops, barbershops, shoe repair, and
tailor shops.
P.
Q. Photographic supplies and studios, and artists' supplies.
Planned unit business centers, subject to the provisions of Article XXV.
[Amended 6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 369]
R.
S. Private clubs and lodges.
Professional offices such as accountant, architect, attorney, engineer,
land surveyor, optometrist, medical, chiropractic and dental offices (but
not a clinic, massage parlor or hospital), and similar uses.
T.
Retail stores for the servicing of the surrounding neighborhood with
convenience items, such as dry goods, household items, electrical
appliances and home furnishings; variety stores; shoe stores; hardware,
paint and garden stores; jewelry sales and jewelry repair stores; and
apparel stores (under 10,000 square feet).
U.
V. Adult day-care facilities. [Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 471]
Any other retail business or service establishment which is determined
by the Commission to be of the same general character as the above
permitted retail business or service uses, but not including any use
which is a permitted or conditional use in the B-G District and which,
in the judgment of the Commission, is not consistent with the purpose
of the B-L District as defined in § 135-110. [Amended 10-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 471]
W.
Banks, credit unions, and financial institutions with drive-through
facilities.
A.
B. Churches.
C. Funeral establishments.
D. Guesthouses.
E. Liquor stores and taverns.
F. Medical or dental clinics.
§ 135-112 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-113
134:300
§ 135-114. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-115. Required conditions.
Medical or dental laboratories, and manufacture of prosthetic
appliances, dentures, eyeglasses, hearing aids and similar products.
G.
H. Restaurants.
Schools not enumerated in § 135-112. [Amended 6-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 369]
I.
The following businesses or operations that involve the production,
storage, distillation, manufacturing, processing, distribution, and
wholesale and retail sale of liquor, beer, wine, coffee, and/or cider made
from produce grown or produced off site. The hosting of tours and
tastings of such products incident to such businesses or operations
conducted on the premises. Such business or operations must be
conducted in an enclosed building. Such operations shall be in
compliance with any and all local and state liquor laws and licensing
requirements and Health Department regulations, and shall possess
any and all licenses which may be required by Carroll County, the Town
of Hampstead, and/or the State of Maryland: [Added 6-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 528]
(1) Microdistillery.
(2) Microbrewery.
(3) Microwinery.
(4) Coffee-roasting operations.
J.
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any
permitted principal use or authorized conditional use.
A.
All business, services, processing and storage shall be conducted
wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for off-street
automobile parking and loading areas and public utility uses. Retail
goods shall be displayed outside only during normal business hours.
A.
Goods shall consist primarily of new or reconditioned merchandise or
of bona fide antiques.
B.
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall
be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse matter or watercarried
waste.
C.
§ 135-113 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-116
134:301
§ 135-116. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
523]
No principal structure shall exceed 50 feet, except as provided in § 135-258.
§ 135-117. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Article XXX:
Use
Lot
Area
Lot
Width
Lot
Area
per
Family
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Dwellings Same as in R-10,000 District
Principal
permitted or
accessory
uses
-- -- -- 20 10* 10*
Planned unit
business
center
Subject to Article XXV
NOTES:
* Where adjoining any R district, not less than 25 feet.
Setbacks shall be established to be congruent with adjacent properties and
consistent with the Main Street Revitalization Plan within the Main Street
Revitalization Area. In the absence of developed adjacent properties, the
zone shall use the setbacks of the R-7500 District. In all instances, the
Commission shall have the authority to determine appropriate setbacks in
the site plan approval process.
§ 135-118. (Reserved)
§ 135-119. (Reserved)
§ 135-116 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-119
134:302
ARTICLE XIII
B-G General Business District
[Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 226; 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 231;
1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 265; 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 284; 3-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 356]
§ 135-120. Purpose.
The B-G General Business District is intended to provide the opportunity
for higher-intensity commercial development while preserving the small
town character of Hampstead. Stores, businesses and offices in the district
should be economically viable and useful to the greater Hampstead area.
Within the Main Street Revitalization Area, the use of B-G zoning shall be
consistent with the adopted Main Street Revitalization Plan.
§ 135-121. Applicable regulations.
§ 135-122. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
The following regulations in this article and applicable regulations
contained in other articles shall apply in the B-G General Business
District.
A.
The distance requirements specified in § 135-123 for certain
commercial uses shall apply to buildings or structures connected with
the operation of such commercial uses and to the outside display or
storage of products or materials of any kind. The distance requirements
shall not apply to accessory uses or structures such as off-street parking
areas, stormwater management facilities, business and directional
signs, dumpsters and drive-through stacking spaces.
B.
The distance requirements specified in § 135-123 shall not apply to fastfood
restaurants with drive-through facilities, service stations, service
garages and automobile sales and service establishments legally
existing prior to February 12, 1996.
C.
Any commercial use or structure permitted as regulated in the B-L
District. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 407]
A.
B. Animal hospitals, when all activities are conducted within the building.
Retail, commercial and industrial bakeries 3,000 square feet or greater
in size. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 438]
C.
D. Business colleges and commercial schools.
E. Churches.
F. Clinics, hospitals and similar uses.
G. Commercial parking lots and garages.
§ 135-120 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-122
134:303
§ 135-123. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
Conditional uses requiring Board authorization shall be as follows:
H. Fast-food carry-out restaurants without drive-through facilities.
I. Fast-food restaurants without drive-through facilities.
J. Grocery stores and supermarkets.
K. Hotels, motels, apartment hotels and guesthouses.
L. Household and electrical repair shops.
M. Laundry and dry-cleaning establishments.
N. Liquor stores.
O. Mortuaries.
P. Nursing homes.
Q. Radio and television studios.
Retail stores such as dry goods, household electrical appliances and
home furnishing stores; variety stores; shoe stores; hardware, paint and
garden stores; jewelry sales and jewelry repair stores; apparel stores;
and music and record shops.
R.
S. Restaurants.
Shops for painters, plumbers, paperhangers, electricians, upholsterers
and others of a similar nature without storage yards.
T.
Shops for business service, such as addressing and mailing, advertising
and distributing, multigraphing, blueprinting and printing.
U.
Automobile sales and service establishments, if located at least 300 feet
from the boundary line of any residence district.
A.
B. Bus terminals and taxicab stations, and car rentals.
Car washes, if located at least 300 feet from the boundary line of any
residence district.
C.
D. Drive-in theaters, bowling alleys, and skating rinks.
Fast-food restaurants with drive-through facilities, if located at least
300 feet from the boundary line of any residence district.
E.
Fast-food carry-out restaurants with drive-through facilities, if located
at least 300 feet from the boundary line of any residence district.
F.
G. Fast-food cafeteria restaurants.
§ 135-122 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-123
134:304
Fast-food drive-in restaurants, if located at least 300 feet from the
boundary line of any residence district.
H.
Lumberyards and building supplies, bulk storage yards (not including
bulk storage of flammable liquids), and outdoor storage yards and lots;
provided that the outdoor storage yard shall not be closer than 25 feet
to any public street and any residence district and that the yard shall
be completely enclosed, except for necessary ingress and egress, by a
solid fence or wall not less than eight feet high. This subsection shall
not permit wrecking yards, junkyards or yards used in whole or in part
for scrap or salvage operations or for processing.
I.
J. Outdoor commercial amusements, except traveling carnivals or fairs.
K. Schools not enumerated in § 135-122.
Service stations and service garages, if located at least 300 feet from
the boundary line of any residence district.
L.
M. Taverns.
N. Woodworking or carpentry shops.
O. Sheet metal or machine shops.
Tattoo parlors or body piercing establishments, if located at least 300
feet from the boundary line of any residence district. [Added
10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 47134]
P.
Facilities for the storage of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats,
campers, trailers, if located at least 300 feet from the boundary line of
any residence district. [Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 471]
Q.
Inpatient or outpatient facilities for the treatment of alcohol and/or
drug abuse, if located at least 300 feet from the boundary line of any
residence district. [Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 471]
R.
Construction, conversion or alteration of a building within the General
Business district to become a venue for the purpose of conducting offtrack
betting in accordance with the Maryland Racing Commission,
subject to the following conditions: [Added 4-11-2017 by Ord. No.
51835]
The use shall be fully licensed and approved by the Maryland
Racing Commission;
(1)
The building to be converted or altered is not within the Main
Street Revitalization Area as detailed in § 135-10 of the Town Code;
(2)
(3) The requirements of Articles XXI and XXII of this chapter are met;
S.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection P as Subsection S.
35.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection S
as Subsection T.
§ 135-123 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-123
134:305
§ 135-124. Accessory uses.
Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and incidental to any
principal permitted use or authorized conditional use, including business
signs pertaining to uses on the premises, provided that such signs are
located as regulated in Article XXII.
§ 135-125. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
523]
No principal structure shall exceed 50 feet in height, except as provided in
§ 135-258.
§ 135-126. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Article XXX:
Use
Lot
Area
Lot
Width
Lot
Are
per
Family
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Dwellings Same as in R-10,000 District
Principal
permitted or
accessory
uses
-- -- -- 20 10* 10*
(4) All Health Department requirements are met; and
The requirements of Chapter 120 of the Town Code relating to site
plans are met.
(5)
Self-service storage/mini-storage facilities, subject to the following
requirements: [Amended 1-9-2018 by Ord. No. 52236]
Self-service storage/mini-storage shall not be located in the Main
Street Revitalization Area;
(1)
Exteriors of buildings shall be brick, siding or similarly acceptable
material; and
(2)
Conversion or alteration of an existing property or building within
the Business General Zoning District shall not be allowed.
(3)
T.
Any conditional use permitted and as regulated in the B-L District,
except as modified.
U.
36.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection T as Subsection U.
§ 135-123 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-126
134:306
Use
Lot
Area
Lot
Width
Lot
Are
per
Family
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Planned unit
business
center
Subject to Article XXV
NOTES:
* Where adjoining any R district, not less than 25 feet.
Setbacks shall be established to be congruent with adjacent properties and
consistent with the Main Street Revitalization Plan within the Main Street
Revitalization Area. In the absence of developed adjacent properties, the
zone shall use the setbacks of the R-7500 District. In all instances, the
Commission shall have the authority to determine appropriate setbacks in
the site plan approval process.
§ 135-127. (Reserved)
§ 135-128. (Reserved)
§ 135-129. (Reserved)
§ 135-126 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-129
134:307

ARTICLE XIV
I-R Restricted Industrial District
[Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 231; 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 300; 37
10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 319]
§ 135-130. Purpose. [Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
§ 135-131. Applicable regulations.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the I-R Restricted Industrial District.
§ 135-132. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
The Restricted Industrial (I-R) District is established to provide areas
for light industrial uses, particularly uses that offer a wide range of
employment opportunities. This district is designed to have high
performance standards and to accommodate uses that can be located
in close proximity to commercial uses, and in locations convenient
to residential areas without creating nuisances or overburdening
infrastructure. The performance standards of the IR district reflect the
Town's commitment to stewardship of the natural environment and
to sustainable development. This includes industrial development that
affords local residents the opportunity to work close to home. The
standards also reflect the increasing scarcity of groundwater in the
Piedmont Plateau.
A.
The district regulations are designed to permit the operations of most
offices, research, manufacturing and "flex space" activities. The intent
of the regulations is to respect the broad authority of the Planning
and Zoning Commission under state law to determine the design,
architecture and site layout of a development to ensure that the
industrial uses in the district do not deleteriously effect other uses
within the district, adjoining property owners, the community or the
environment. The IR district is meant for industrial, not commercial,
uses. Some incidental commercial or retail uses are permitted that
service the industrial uses within the industrial area or that do not
depend upon intensive visits by customers from outside the industrial
area.
B.
Business offices of all types: professional, corporate, government and
nonprofit.
A.
B. Biomedical technology facilities and laboratories.
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance was disapproved by the Mayor 7-16-1997 and passed despite
disapproval 8-12-1997.
§ 135-130 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-132
134:309
Computer research, software development and data processing
services.
C.
Professional training centers, except truck and heavy equipment
operator schools. [Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
D.
E. Engineering, scientific and other research-development-type facilities.
Flex space as defined in § 135-3. [Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No.
444]
F.
G. Office parking garages.
H. Medical clinics.
Establishments for production, processing, assembly, manufacturing,
compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products; except food and beverage products and
those particular heavy industrial uses set forth in § 135-135R.
I.
J. Call center operations.
Establishments for warehousing, wholesaling or distribution of
products not manufactured on the premises and having less than
150,000 square feet of gross floor area. Establishments for
warehousing, wholesaling or distribution of products not manufactured
on the premises having greater than 150,000 square feet of gross floor
area and which exist and are in operation at the time of annexation
into the Town, and expansions thereof, shall not be subject to a limit
on gross floor area. [Added 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 321; amended
8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 492]
K.
Construction and contractors' facilities including offices, shops and
interior storage for general construction, electrical, plumbing, HVAC,
roofing and other similar firms. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
L.
M. Sheet metal or fabrication shops. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
Carpentry, woodworking or furniture-making facilities. [Added
4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
N.
Sign contractors and sign painting shops. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord.
No. 444]
O.
Recycling centers, except for the storage and recycling of tires. [Added
4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
P.
Wholesale printing, publishing and lithography businesses. [Added
4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
Q.
Telecommunications facilities, excluding communication towers.
[Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
R.
§ 135-132 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-132
134:310
§ 135-133. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
[Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 321; 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
Laboratories, chemical, physical and biological. [Added 4-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 444]
S.
T. Clothing and shoe manufacturing. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
Agriculture and viticulture for interim use on an undeveloped parcel
greater than 10 acres, where irrigation is not required and where any
buildings or feeding pens in which farm animals are kept shall comply
with the distance requirements of § 135-20. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord.
No. 444]
U.
A. Radio and television facilities and studios.
Except as otherwise authorized by § 135-132K, establishments for
warehousing, wholesaling or distribution of products not manufactured
on the premises and having 150,000 square feet or more of gross floor
area, provided that, in the opinion of the Board, the use will not create
an objectionable traffic condition on any roads in the surrounding area
or generate a nuisance to surrounding properties by reason of traffic.
[Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 492]
B.
Any use and/or uses of land in an I-R district including those listed
in § 135-132 where the projected or actual use of municipal water in
gallons per day exceeds the groundwater recharge rate as established
by the Maryland Department of the Environment.
C.
Conversion or alteration of a building existing prior to September 1,
2014, to become a church or place of worship, where the original parcel
of land is less than 10 acres and the entire building is used solely by
the church, provided that the requirements of Article XXI, as well as the
requirements of the Health Department, are complied with and subject
further to the requirements of Chapter 120, relating to site plan review.
[Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 50738]
D.
The Board may consider the authorization of the following uses in an
I-R District which is part of a contiguous area of 200 acres or more of
industrial zoning, provided that:
The Board finds that there is at least one or more of the above
permitted uses existing in the district;
(1)
The authorization of the use at the location proposed will not
serve to overwhelm or transform the district contrary to its stated
purpose;
(2)
The location of the use on the proposed site is determined
appropriate in relation to existing uses in or adjoining the district;
(3)
E.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D
through F as Subsections E through G, respectively.
§ 135-132 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-133
134:311
§ 135-134. Accessory uses.
The use does not exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area
unless otherwise noted;
(4)
The use is intended primarily to serve the needs of the employees
and users of the I-R District development;
(5)
The use is oriented within the site rather than any adjoining public
road; and
(6)
Any signage advertising the use is oriented to employees within the
site:
(a) Advertising agencies.
(b) Banks, savings and loan institutions.
(c) Business machine sales, rental and service establishments.
(d) Temporary employment agencies.
(e) Drugstores.
(f) Newsstands.
Personal service establishments such as, but not limited to,
barber and beauty shops, optical goods stores and dry-cleaning
establishments.
(g)
(h) Printing and reproduction service establishments.
(i) Restaurants of any type with no drive-through facilities.
(j) Security services.
(k) Stationery or office supply shops.
(l) Computer hardware and software stores.
Day-care facilities and nursery schools, provided that no single
facility occupies more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
(m)
(7)
In granting or denying a conditional use, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall consider the intent of the I-R district, the potential impact on
adjacent uses, the potential of the industrial site to support the
requested conditional use, the risk that the requested use will attract
substantive traffic from outside of the industrial site and the capacity of
public facilities including public water and sewer necessary to support
the requested conditional use.
F.
No variance of the three-thousand-square-foot limit may be granted
without the review and approval of the Town Council.
G.
§ 135-133 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-134
134:312
§ 135-135. Prohibited uses. [Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
Any uses not specifically set forth as permitted under §§ 135-132, 135-133
and 135-134 are prohibited. For the purposes of preventing
misinterpretation and for emphasis, the following uses are expressly
prohibited within the I-R Restricted Industrial District:
Accessory uses are permitted within buildings of principal permitted
uses. Accessory uses shall not occupy more than 5% of the gross floor
area of the building or all of the buildings on the lot in which they exist.
No single accessory use shall occupy more than 3,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
(1) Day-care facilities and nursery schools.
(2) The retail sale of products manufactured on the site.
(3) Cafeteria.
(4) Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities.
Uses customarily accessory and incidental to any principal
permitted or authorized conditional use.
(5)
A.
No variance of the five-percent requirement or the three-thousandsquare-
foot limit may be granted without the review and approval of the
Town Council.
B.
A. Outdoor advertising signs (billboards).
B. Residential dwelling units.
C. Department stores.
D. Supermarkets or convenience stores.
Restaurants, except as authorized § 135-135D. This shall include any
freestanding restaurant or any restaurant with drive-through facilities.
E.
F. Gas stations.
G. Automotive, motorcycle, implement sales, service and repair.
H. Storage or parking of school or recreation vehicles.
I. Mini storage facilities.
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments except as permitted by
§ 135-133D.
J.
K. Truck or motor freight terminals.
L. Heliports.
§ 135-134 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-135
134:313
The sale, display or storage of merchandise or goods, the performance
of any commercial service or any sales or solicitation of sales on
parking lots, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways or otherwise outside
the confines of buildings or enclosures. The Commission may approve
outdoor areas for the storage of materials, but only where any such
storage area is completely screened from the view of adjoining uses,
contiguous properties and adjoining roadways.
M.
Vending machines of any kind installed or operated out of doors or
upon the exterior of any part of the premises, except telephones, postal
facilities and automatic teller machines.
N.
O. Outdoor public address system or loudspeaker.
Outdoor advertising promotions, including aerial balloons, except for
on-premises signs authorized by Article XXII.
P.
Q. Bulk storage of flammable materials for resale.
Heavy industrial uses, to include:
(1) Abattoir.
(2) Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture.
(3) Asphalt mixing plant.
(4) Blast furnace.
(5) Boiler works.
(6) Concrete mixing or batching plant.
(7) Distillation of coal, wood or bones.
(8) Distillation of turpentine or varnish.
(9) Emery cloth manufacture.
(10)Fertilizer manufacture.
(11)Fireworks or explosives manufacture or storage.
(12)Fish canning, curing, grinding or smoking.
Garbage incineration other than in municipal plants or incidental
to the operation of hotels, eating establishments and dwellings.
(13)
(14)Glue, size or gelatin manufacture.
Grinding, cooking, boiling, rendering or storing of slaughterhouse
refuse, or animal refuse, or rancid fats or refuse of dead animals.
(15)
(16) Iron, steel or copper works or foundries.
(17)Lime, cement, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
R.
§ 135-135 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-135
134:314
§ 135-136. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
523]
No principal structure shall exceed 3 stories or 50 feet in height, except as
provided in §135-258. When located within the I-R District, which is part of a
contiguous area of 200 acres or more of industrial zoning, an office building
may be erected to a height of no more than 5 stories.
§ 135-137. Lot area; lot width; building area; yards.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
provisions of Article XXX:
(18)Manufacture of concrete or mortar.
Petroleum, alcohol or asphalt refining, mixing or manufacture or
storage.
(19)
(20)Pyroxylin or celluloid manufacture.
(21)Pulverizing of charcoal or coal.
(22)Smelting of iron.
(23)Soap manufacture.
(24)Stockyards.
(25)Sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture.
(26)Tanning, curing or storing of raw hides or skins.
(27)Tetra-ethyl lead precipitate or liquid manufacture.
(28)Vinegar manufacture.
(29)Wool pulling and scouring.
(30)Yeast plants.
Any other similar use which, in the opinion of the Board, might
be injurious, noxious or offensive by reason of odor, fumes, dust,
smoke, vibration, noise or other cause.
(31)
A. Lot area. None.
Lot width. A lot shall have a width of not less than 150 feet at the
building line.
B.
Building area. Not more than 50% of the area of each lot or tract may
be occupied by buildings, and not more than 80% of the area shall be
paved and occupied by buildings or other uses.
C.
D. Yards.
§ 135-135 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-137
134:315
§ 135-138. Performance requirements.
These regulations are intended to ensure a high quality environment in
regards to health, safety and aesthetics. Establishments must meet all
applicable state and federal requirements, as well as other Carroll County
and Town of Hampstead regulations.
Front yard, 30 feet unless confronting an R district, then the front
yard shall be increased to 50 feet.
(1)
Side yard, 30 feet unless adjacent to an R district, then the side
yard shall be increased to 75 feet, except none required when a
side yard abuts a railroad right-of-way.
(2)
Rear yard, 30 feet unless adjacent to an R district, then the rear
yard shall be increased to 75 feet, except none required when a
rear yard abuts a railroad right-of-way.
(3)
No operation or uses shall be permitted or maintained which cause
or produce any of the following effects discernible outside the
improvements or affecting any property in the surrounding area:
Noise or vibration that is objectionable because of its volume,
duration, intermittent beat, frequency or shrillness.
(1)
(2) Smoke.
(3) Noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases.
(4) Obnoxious or offensive odors.
(5) Dust, dirt or fly ash.
(6) Unusual fire or explosive hazards.
Emanation of intense glare or heat or electromagnetic, microwave,
ultrasonic, laser or other radiation.
(7)
Any other condition which will endanger public health and safety
or be detrimental to the environment.
(8)
A.
All permitted and conditional uses and accessory activities shall be
confined within completely enclosed buildings with the exception of
off-street parking spaces, off-street loading facilities, signs and
recreational facilities. [Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
B.
Truck loading, vehicle storage and dumpster spaces shall be situated
to the rear or side of the building(s). If not totally screened by other
buildings which are part of the project, truck parking and loading,
and dumpster areas shall be completely shielded from the adjacent
roadway(s). This may be accomplished by orientation, screen walls,
mounding, landscaping or a combination of the above.
C.
§ 135-137 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-138
134:316
§ 135-139. Design guidelines. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
The Commission may adopt design guidelines for any zoning district or
districts in addition to guidelines enumerated herein.
All mechanical equipment, including roof-mounted, shall be enclosed or
screened so as to be an integral part of the architectural design.
D.
Truck parking, delivery and loading areas are not permitted within 100
feet of any R district.
E.
Automobile parking areas are not permitted within 25 feet of any R
district.
F.
Outdoor storage shall be limited to areas approved on the site and all
such approved areas must be completely screened. Outdoor storage
areas may not be located less than 200 feet from any residential
district. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
G.
Any change in tenancy or occupancy shall require a zoning certificate
issued by the Zoning Administrator to certify that the change in tenancy
or occupancy conforms to the requirements of the zoning regulations
and the approved site plan. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
H.
Bulk storage of fuel oil, gasoline or liquefied petroleum shall be limited
to aboveground tanks no greater than 2,000 gallons and all such
storage shall occur in such a manner as to minimize any possibility of
leakage and groundwater contamination. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord.
No. 444]
I.
Any development where the cumulative gross floor area of the
structure(s) exceeds 25,000 square feet shall have included with the
site plan a water conservation plan to include an evaluation of potential
water reuse options and requirements for mandatory water use
reductions during drought emergencies imposed by the local governing
body or State of Maryland. [Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 444]
J.
Any new building or structure shall maximize the use of water saving
plumbing and processes including water-saving fixtures and waterreclamation
devices to the extent practicable. [Added 4-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 444]
K.
Exterior lighting.
Lighting may be used which serves security, safety and operational
needs but which does not directly or indirectly produce deleterious
effects on abutting properties or which would impair the vision of
a vehicle operator on adjacent roadways. Lighting fixtures must be
shielded or hooded so that the lighting elements are not exposed to
normal view by motorists, pedestrians, or from adjacent dwellings
and so that they do not unnecessarily light the night sky. Site
(1)
A.
§ 135-138 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-139
134:317
lighting should use full cutoff fixtures as specified by the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).
All exterior lighting, except security lighting, must be turned off
between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless located on the site of a
commercial or industrial use which is open for business during that
period.
(2)
(3) Wiring to light poles and standards must be underground.
Building facades may be illuminated with soft lighting of low
intensity that does not draw inordinate attention to the building.
The light source for the building facade illumination must be
concealed.
(4)
Building entrances may be illuminated using recessed lighting in
overhangs and soffits, or by use of spotlighting focused on the
building entrances with the light source concealed (e.g., in
landscaped areas). Direct lighting of limited exterior building areas
is permitted when necessary for security purposes.
(5)
Buffering of adjacent uses.
The development must provide for the buffering of adjacent uses
where there is a transition from one type of use to another use and
for the screening of mechanical equipment and service and storage
areas. The buffer may be provided by distance, landscaping,
fencing, changes in grade, and/or a combination of these or other
techniques.
(1)
Buffering must be designed to provide a year-round visual screen
in order to minimize adverse impacts. It may consist of fencing,
evergreens, berms, rocks, boulders, mounds, or a combination
thereof.
(2)
A development must provide sufficient buffering when
topographical or other barriers do not provide reasonable
screening and where there is a need to buffer the activities of the
planned use from adjoining properties.
(3)
The width of the buffer may vary depending on the nature of the
area. Within densely built-up areas, a buffer with dense plantings,
fencing, or changes in grade may be five feet to 10 feet in width. A
buffer with moderate levels of planting should be 10 feet to 15 feet
in width. In suburban and rural settings, the width of the vegetated
buffer should be increased to a minimum of 25 feet. Areas adjacent
to service, loading, or storage areas should be screened by dense
planting, berms, fencing, or a combination thereof.
(4)
B.
Storage of materials. Exposed nonresidential storage areas, exposed
machinery, and areas used for the storage must have sufficient setbacks
and screening (such as an opaque fence or a dense evergreen hedge) to
C.
§ 135-139 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-139
134:318
provide a visual buffer sufficient to minimize their impact on abutting
uses and users of public streets.
Collection receptacles. All dumpsters or similar large collection
receptacles for trash, recyclables or other waste materials must be
located on level surfaces which are paved or a durable and dustfree
surface as approved by the Commission. Where the dumpster or
receptacle is located in a yard which abuts a residential or institutional
use or a public street, it must be screened by fencing or landscaping.
D.
Landscaping. Landscaping must be provided in accordance with the
Carroll County Landscape Manual. The site design should include an
emphasis on native Maryland species and drought-resistant plants.
Irrigation or watering systems should use only recycled water or
rainwater collected on site. The Commission may require any industrial
development to submit a water conservation plan as part of the site
plan approval process.
E.
Building placement.
The site design should avoid creating a building surrounded by
a parking lot. In urban areas, buildings should be placed close
to the street, in conformance with existing adjacent setbacks. In
undeveloped areas, buildings should be set well back from the road
so as to conform with the small-town character of the area.
(1)
Where two or more buildings are proposed, the buildings should be
grouped and linked with sidewalks; tree planting should be used to
provide shade and break up the scale of the site. Plantings should
be provided along the building edge, particularly where building
facades consist of long or unbroken walls.
(2)
F.
Building entrances.
The main entrance to the building should be oriented to the street
unless the parking layout or the grouping of the buildings justifies
another approach, and should be clearly identified as such through
building and site design, landscaping, and/or signage.
(1)
At building entrance areas and dropoff areas, site furnishings such
as benches and sitting walls and, if appropriate, bicycle racks shall
be encouraged. Additional plantings may be desirable at these
points to identify the building entrance and to complement the
pedestrian activity at this point.
(2)
G.
Sidewalks. Where an existing or planned public sidewalk is interrupted
by a proposed project driveway, the sidewalk material must continue to
be maintained across the driveway, or the driveway must be painted to
distinguish it as a sidewalk. Further, if street trees exist on an adjacent
property, street trees must be planted, in a like manner, on the new site.
H.
I. Parking.
§ 135-139 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-139
134:319
§ 135-140. (Reserved)
Where possible, parking lots should be located to the side or rear of
the building. Parking areas should be separated from the building
by a minimum of five to 10 feet. The use of shared parking, shared
driveways and the cross-connection of parking lots is encouraged.
(1)
If the parking is in front, a generous landscaped buffer between
road and parking lot is to be provided. Unused areas should be kept
natural, as field, forest, wetland, etc.
(2)
Landscaping around and within parking lots shades hot surfaces
and visually "softens" the hard surface look of parking areas.
Parking areas must be designed and landscaped to create a
pedestrian-friendly environment. A landscaped border should be
created around parking lots. Any parking lot containing 10 or more
parking spaces must include one or more landscaped islands within
the interior of the lot. There must be at least one island for every 20
spaces. Landscaping must screen the parking area from adjacent
residential uses and from the street.
(3)
Landscaped roadside buffers.
Whenever the area between the street and the front of the building
is used for parking or vehicle movement, a vegetated buffer strip
must be established along the edge of the road right-of-way. This
buffer strip must soften the appearance of the site from the road
and must create defined points of access to and egress from the
site.
(1)
The Commission may also require a landscaped buffer between the
street and sidewalk in cases where the building fronts on the public
street to create an appropriate pedestrian-friendly environment.
(2)
J.
Building orientation. New buildings within a developed area should be
compatible with the neighborhood such that they reflect the overall
building bulk, square footage, dimensions, placement of the building on
the lot and rhythm of buildings and spaces along the street edge and
minimize the visual impact on the neighborhood. The visual impact of
a building shall be measured by its relationship to other buildings on
the lot, design of the front of the building, and the rhythm of buildings
and open spaces along the street. The design of buildings fronting on a
public street(s) shall be oriented to the street(s).
K.
Building scale. When large new buildings or structures are proposed
in built-up areas where their scale (size) and other features may be
significantly different from that which already exists in the immediate
neighborhood, care must be taken to design the new building or
structure so that it is compatible with its neighbors. This may include
making the building appear small, using traditional materials, styles
and/or proportions.
L.
§ 135-139 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-141
134:320
§ 135-141. (Reserved)
§ 135-142. (Reserved)
§ 135-143. (Reserved)
§ 135-141 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-143
134:321

ARTICLE XV
G-C Groundwater Conservation District
[Added 7-8-2008 by Ord. No. 44939]
§ 135-144. Purpose.
The G-C Groundwater Conservation district is intended to provide the
opportunity for environmentally sensitive commercial and/or industrial
development while preserving significant environmental features,
encouraging environmentally sensitive and sustainable "green" design and
construction methods, minimizing impervious surface, maximizing
groundwater recharge and protecting the aquifer. The intent of the district
is to allow a mix of low- to moderate-intensity industrial and commercial
uses while maintaining high performance standards that protect the
environment, balance water use with groundwater recharge and minimize
any deleterious effect on adjoining uses including residential areas. The
further intent is to promote the use of emerging sustainable technologies in
the design and construction of buildings, roads and parking areas.
§ 135-145. Applicable regulations.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the G-C Groundwater Conservation District.
§ 135-146. Principal permitted uses.
Principal permitted uses or structures shall be:
Agriculture or viticulture where irrigation is not required and where
any buildings or feeding pens in which farm animals are kept shall
comply with the distance requirements of § 135-20. This excludes
concentrated livestock or poultry feeding operations or any other
intensive agricultural activities determined by the Planning and Zoning
Commission to be incongruent with the purpose of this chapter.
A.
B. Forestry and tree farming.
Parks and such recreational uses as are consistent with the purpose and
intentions of this section.
C.
D. Wildlife refuges and ecological sanctuaries.
E. Water impoundments and wells for water supply.
F. Conservation areas and nature trails.
G. Municipal and public utility structures.
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. XV, I-G General Industrial District,
as amended.
§ 135-144 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-147
134:323
§ 135-147. Conditional uses requiring Board authorization.
Conditional permitted uses or structures shall be:
§ 135-148. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses shall be as follows:
§ 135-149. Prohibited uses.
For the purposes of avoiding misinterpretation and providing guidance to
the Board of Zoning Appeals and the Planning and Zoning Commission as
to the legislative intent of the G-C District, the following uses are expressly
prohibited in the G-C District:
§ 135-150. Required conditions.
Low- to moderate-intensity, environmentally sensitive, sustainable
commercial or industrial uses that are determined by the Board of
Zoning Appeals ("the Board") to be congruent with the intent and
purposes of this article. Examples of such uses may include but are not
limited to professional offices, technology-based businesses, research
and development facilities, commercial/retail uses and light assembly
and manufacturing.
A.
In granting or denying a conditional use or uses, the Board of Zoning
Appeals ("the Board") shall consider the intent of the G-C district, the
potential impact on significant environmental features, the congruency
of the proposed use or uses with the site including all natural features,
the capacity of public facilities, the environmental sensitivity of the
proposed uses and structures and other considerations deemed
reasonable by the Board. Before convening any hearing on a request
for a conditional use or uses in the G-C district, the Board shall allow
at least 60 days to receive reports from the Mayor and Council, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Zoning Administrator
concerning the requested conditional use or uses. The Board shall not
have the authority to grant any variance from the required conditions
in § 135-149.
B.
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any
permitted principal use or authorized conditional use.
A.
A. Residential dwellings.
B. Any prohibited use in the I-R district (§ 135-135).
C. Car washes.
D. Automotive or vehicle service, maintenance or repair facilities.
E. Laundry or dry-cleaning facilities.
§ 135-147 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-150
134:324
Any development in the G-C District shall require the preparation of an
Environmental Site Delineation (ESD) in conformance with the Carroll
County development regulations. The Planning and Zoning Commission
("the Commission") may require the preparation of an Environmental
Impact Study (EIS) where the parameters and scope of such study
shall be established by the Commission. The developer shall bear all
costs associated with the preparation of all environmental reports. All
environmental reports shall be prepared by a public entity such as a
unit of local government or an independent private firm approved by
the Commission.
A.
The water consumption of any use or uses in the G-C district shall not
be greater than the groundwater recharge of the lot or parcel upon
which the use is located. The projected water consumption of any new
development or proposed change in use shall be calculated in gallons
per day by a certified engineer hired by the Town. The recharge rate
shall be calculated in gallons per acre per day as established by the
Maryland Department of the Environment for the Town of Hampstead.
All water consumption and recharge calculations shall be enumerated
on the site plan. No change of use shall be approved where the
cumulative water use of the development shall exceed the standard
described herein.
B.
Any new building or structure shall comply with the Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) standards for silver
certification or a standard deemed equivalent by the Commission. The
developer shall be responsible for the cost of the Town hiring a
consultant to certify that the site plans and construction drawings
conform to the LEED or other approved environmental standard. The
Commission may establish a higher standard if deemed appropriate by
the Commission.
C.
All vegetation and landscaping shall be drought-resistant native
Maryland species as recommended by the Maryland Department of
Natural Resources. Outdoor irrigation of plants or trees shall be
prohibited except where irrigation water is derived from recycling,
reuse or reclamation.
D.
Any new building or structure shall maximize the use of water saving
plumbing and processes, including water-saving fixtures and waterreclamation
devices.
E.
Any development where the cumulative gross floor area of the
structures exceeds 10,000 square feet shall have included with the
site plan a water conservation plan to include a water loss reduction
element, a water use education element, an evaluation of potential
water reuse options and requirements for mandatory water use
reductions during drought emergencies imposed by the local governing
body or the State of Maryland.
F.
§ 135-150 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-150
134:325
Any development shall minimize to the extent practicable the coverage
of impervious surfaces. Impervious coverage of any parcel shall be
limited to no more than 60%.
G.
The stormwater management facilities for any new buildings or
structures shall make the maximum possible use of infiltration. The
postdevelopment groundwater recharge rate for the site shall be equal
to or greater than the predevelopment groundwater recharge rate of
the site as reviewed and approved by the Carroll County Stormwater
Engineer or an engineer hired by the Town. There shall be no increase
in the peak discharge rate for the ten-year storm event between preand
postdevelopment.
H.
Any development shall maintain, protect and preserve to the extent
possible any significant environmental features such as ponds,
wetlands, streams, steep slopes, specimen trees or other natural
features as deemed significant by the Commission. The Commission
may establish buffer zones around ponds, wetlands, streams
(intermittent or perennial), steep slopes or other environmental
features.
I.
The Commission may impose other requirements, terms or conditions
on development as deemed necessary to ensure any development in
the G-C district meets the purposes and intent of this article. The
Commission is also authorized to prepare additional regulations related
to development in the G-C district for the review and approval of the
Town Council.
J.
The Commission has the authority to establish the height, lot area
and lot width requirements through the site plan and/or subdivision
process, except that no lot shall be smaller than one acre. The
Commission shall establish such requirements to meet the goals of
the G-C District to include minimizing any disruption to adjoining
properties, preserving any significant environmental features,
decreasing water use, increasing groundwater recharge and protection
and the other objectives as described in this article.
K.
§ 135-150 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-150
134:326
ARTICLE XVI
Resource Protection Overlay Zone
[Added 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 376]
§ 135-151. Purpose.
§ 135-152. Delineation of Overlay Zone.
The purpose of the Resource Protection Overlay Zone is to provide for
the protection and conservation of endangered and threatened animal
species and wildlife and fisheries habitat by preventing development
that would disrupt significant species and/or habitat and ensuring the
design of nearby development is done in such a manner as not to
degrade significant species and/or habitat.
A.
Of principal concern is the identified habitat area for the state and
federally listed bog turtle. With regard to the bog turtle, the goal of
this article is to protect, maintain, restore and improve the hydrological
and ecological conditions of the wetlands in which the bog turtle lives.
The hydrology of the bog turtle habitat is sustained by groundwater
and surface water flows. This article is designed to regulate future
land use within the wetlands’ watershed to prevent negative hydrologic
impacts to the bog turtle habitat and to identify and preserve migratory
corridors for the species. This article also delineates areas where
development may occur in compliance with performance standards and
where such development does not materially harm the bog turtle or its
habitat.
B.
The Resource Protection Overlay Zone applies to any area mapped
by the Maryland Department of Environment, Maryland Department
of Natural Resources or United States Fish and Wildlife Service as
habitat for any species appearing on the official state or federal list
of endangered or threatened species. The Resource Protection Overlay
Zone shall include a minimum buffer area of 300 feet around any
defined habitat area. In the case of the bog turtle species, the Overlay
Zone shall extend to the limits of the topographic surface watershed
of the identified bog turtle habitat as delineated in the Bog Turtle
Resource Protection Overlay Zone Map kept on file in the Hampstead
Town Offices.
A.
The Overlay Zone is subdivided into four separate zones as follows:
Zone 1. This zone is defined as the wetlands which the bog turtle
is known to inhabit, and those wetlands they are likely to inhabit
as shown on the “Bog Turtle Resource Protection Overlay Zone
Map.” The specific boundary of Zone 1 is defined in the field
by determining the wetland boundary using the 1987 Corps of
Engineers Wetland identification and Delineation Manual.
(1)
B.
§ 135-151 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-152
134:327
§ 135-153. Application to other zoning districts.
The Resource Protection Overlay Zone shall overlay the existing zoning
districts created by the Zoning Ordinance and its terms and conditions
shall supersede any requirements of said underlying districts, unless the
underlying requirements are more restrictive than those set forth here, in
which case the more restrictive shall govern.
§ 135-154. Compliance with natural resource management plans.
Any permitted or exceptional uses within the Resource Protection Overlay
Zone shall comply with all adopted federal, state or local natural resource
management plans.
§ 135-155. Requirement for exceptional use permit.
All new structures and changes of use extending into the Resource
Protection Overlay Zone shall require an exceptional use permit except as
otherwise permitted in this chapter. If an exceptional use permit is required,
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not approve any preliminary or
final subdivision, site plan or change of use for any property that extends
into a Resource Protection Overlay Zone until such permit has been
granted.
§ 135-156. Process for exceptional use permit.
Zone 2. This zone is defined as a three-hundred-foot zone measured
horizontally from the Zone 1 boundary or the topographic boundary
of the watershed, whichever is less.
(2)
Zone 3. This zone includes the channel of all tributaries flowing
into the Zone I wetlands, including intermittent streams as shown
on the Bog Turtle Resource Protection Overlay Zone Map, located
outside of Zones 1 and 2. Zone 3 also includes a one-hundred-fiftyfoot
buffer zone measured horizontally from the top of all perennial
stream channel banks and in all directions from the headwaters of
such tributaries or to the topographic boundary of the watershed,
whichever is less and a one-hundred-foot buffer zone measured
horizontally from the top of all intermittent stream channel banks
and in all directions from the headwaters of such tributaries or to
the topographic boundary of the watershed, whichever is less. Zone
3 also includes all vegetated wetlands located in the watershed
but not in Zone 1 or 2. The specific boundaries of these wetlands
are defined in the field by determining the wetland boundary using
the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetland Identification and Delineation
Manual.
(3)
Zone 4. This zone is defined as those portions of the topographic
surface watershed which are not included in Zones 1, 2 or 3. Within
Zone 4, surface and groundwater are presumed to flow into the
identified bog turtle habitat.
(4)
§ 135-152 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-156
134:328
Upon the approval of a concept subdivision or site plan where the area
of disturbance or where any change of use extends into Zones 1, 2 or
3, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall begin a formal review
of the probable effects of the proposed structure or change in use
on significant habitat and species. In determining whether an adverse
impact will occur, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consult
with representatives of the Maryland Department of Environment,
Maryland Department of Natural Resources and United States Fish and
Wildlife Service and any other such agencies as deemed appropriate by
the Commission.
A.
Where a new structure or change of use is proposed within Zone 4
the Planning and Zoning Commission may require an exceptional use
permit.
In determining whether an exceptional use permit shall be
required, the Commission shall consider:
The size, intensity and type of proposed new structures or
changes in use including the amount of impervious surface.
(a)
The cumulative effect of new structures or changes in use
within the Overlay Zone.
(b)
Specific elements of proposed new structures or changes in
use which present a risk to surface or groundwater including
but not limited to storage and/or use of hazardous materials,
fuels, volatile organic compounds or other such materials.
(c)
The ability of stormwater best management practices as
described in § 135-157 to mitigate the hydrological impact
from proposed new structures or changes in use.40
(d)
(1)
If the Commission determines an exceptional use permit is
required, the applicant for subdivision or site plan approval or
change of use shall comply with the process defined in § 135-156C.
(2)
B.
Biological survey.
As part of the preliminary subdivision or site plan process or
change of use, the Commission shall require a biological survey.
The survey shall be prepared by a qualified biologist approved
by the Commission. Report preparation shall be at the applicant’s
expense. The biological survey shall contain the following
elements:
A location map and site plan showing topography and all
existing and proposed structures and roads, and the proposed
project site or sites;
(a)
(1)
C.
40.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(1)(e), regarding comments from various government
agencies, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-11-2014 by Ord. No.
503.
§ 135-156 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-156
134:329
§ 135-157. Performance standards.
(b) The method of survey;
A review and incorporation of any existing biological
assessment or survey.
(c)
(d) A map of the environmentally sensitive species and/or habitat.
A description and assessment of potential impacts of the
proposed development on the species and/or habitat;
(e)
A recommendation of mitigation measures which will reduce
those impacts;
(f)
A recommendation of whether the Commission should find
that the concept subdivision, site plan or change of use as
submitted will result in a material adverse impact to the
habitat or species for which the Resource Protection Overlay
Zone was established.
(g)
If mitigation measures are recommended, an assessment of
whether such mitigation measures will reduce the impact from
the proposed subdivision, site plan or change of use to a level
where the impact on the species or habitat is not materially
adverse.
(h)
The biological survey will be submitted to the Commission within
90 days of submission of the preliminary site, subdivision plan or
change of use. Copies of the biological survey and the preliminary
site or subdivision plan shall be provided to the Maryland
Department of Environment, Maryland Department of Natural
Resources and United States Fish and Wildlife Service and any
other such agencies as deemed appropriate by the Commission to
allow for comment. Within not less than 45 days or not more than
90 days of the issuance of the biological survey, the Commission
shall convene a meeting to allow public comment on the biological
survey and to approve or deny the exceptional use permit. All
consulted agencies shall receive written notice of the meeting and
the meeting shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation for the area.
(2)
An exceptional use permit may be granted by the Commission only
where the Commission finds that the probable effect of the new
structure or change in use will not result in a material adverse impact
on the habitat or species for which the Resource Protection Overlay
Zone was established. The Commission shall consider making
compliance with any recommendations made by commenting agencies
and/or any recommendation found in the biological survey a condition
of approval for any site plan, subdivision or change of use.
D.
§ 135-156 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-157
134:330
In considering approval of an exceptional use permit, the Commission
shall consider the following general performance standards:
Removal of indigenous vegetation and land disturbance, such as
grading, excavation, paving, and fill, in or within the Overlay Zone
shall be limited to that necessary for the structural improvements
and access. Modifications to the proposal shall be made for siting,
location, design, bulk, vegetation removal, and grading where such
modifications are necessary to prevent a materially adverse impact
on the species and/or habitat.
(1)
Where feasible, the development will use native species consistent
with and found in the Overlay Zone.
(2)
Any commercial or industrial development within the Overlay Zone
will require an integrated pest management plan minimizing the
use of herbicides and pesticides.
(3)
A.
The following specific performance standards shall apply to the zones
within the Overlay Zone:
No work shall be allowed in Zone 1 that will result in any shortterm
or long-term adverse impacts to the local population of the
bog turtle.
(1)
No work shall be allowed in Zone 2 that will result in any shortterm
or long-term adverse impacts to the local population of the
bog turtle. Work within Zone 2 should be generally limited to
those specific activities which are part of a bog turtle management,
habitat enhancement or restoration plan with following additions:
Normal maintenance of land in commercial agriculture without
enlargement as to the geographic extent of the commercial
agricultural activity.
(a)
Commercial agriculture use when directly related to the
production or raising of agricultural commodities, provided
such work is done:
[1] In a manner as to prevent erosion and siltation.
In compliance with the recommendations of any adopted
bog turtle management, habitat enhancement or
restoration plan adopted by a state or federal agency.
[2]
In accordance with all applicable local, state and federal
laws.
[3]
(b)
(c) Maintenance and repair of existing fencing.
(d) Keeping of livestock and management of beehives.
Restoration and management of riparian zone vegetation and
stream channel restoration projects.
(e)
(2)
B.
§ 135-157 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-157
134:331
§ 135-158. Violations, remedies and penalties.
§ 135-159. (Reserved)
No work shall be allowed in Zone 3 that results in any longterm
adverse impacts to the local population of the bog turtle.
Work within Zone 3 should be generally limited to those activities
allowed in Zone 2 with the following additions:
Work on land used primarily and directly in the raising of forest
products under a planned program.
(a)
Construction, reconstruction, operation and maintenance of
public utilities.
(b)
(3)
The watershed area of Zone 4 is significant in protecting and
enhancing groundwater quantity and quality, surface water
quantity and quality, and flood control. To provide and protect for
these interests, no work shall be allowed in Zone 4 that does not
provide adequate stormwater management practices through the
use of the following best management practices:
There will be no increase in peak discharge for the one-year,
two-year or ten-year storm event.
(a)
Infiltration/recharge of stormwater shall be emphasized as the
primary best management practice.
(b)
Ninety percent of the stormwater occurring from any new
impervious surface must be infiltrated/recharged.
(c)
Areas that remain pervious shall be stabilized with vegetation.
Native species found in the Overlay Zone shall be used for
vegetative stabilization where feasible.
(d)
Cuts or trenches that extend below the seasonal high
groundwater elevation shall be analyzed with respect to their
impact on groundwater flows.
(e)
(4)
The Commission, Council, or any owner or occupant of neighboring
property may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent or terminate any violation of this
article, and the Circuit Court of Carroll County is hereby granted
jurisdiction to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A.
Any violation of this article may be also be prosecuted as a municipal
infraction subject to a fine of $1,000 for each violation. Each day such a
violation is found to exist shall be deemed a separate offense subject to
cumulative fines and other penalties. The remedies provided for in this
section are cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any
other remedies provided by the law.
B.
§ 135-157 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-159
134:332
ARTICLE XVII
(Reserved)
§ 135-160. through § 135-169 (Reserved)
§ 135-160 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-160
134:333

ARTICLE XVIII
(Reserved)
§ 135-170. through § 135-179 (Reserved)
§ 135-170 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-170
134:335

ARTICLE XIX
(Reserved)
§ 135-180. through § 135-189 (Reserved)
§ 135-180 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-180
134:337

ARTICLE XX
(Reserved)
§ 135-190. through 135-200 (Reserved)
§ 135-190 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-190
134:339

ARTICLE XXI
Off-Street Parking
[Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. 347;
7-8-2008 by Ord. No. 448]
§ 135-201. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish standards ensuring the availability
and safe use of off-street parking areas. It is intended that any use of land
involving the arrival, departure, or temporary storage of motor vehicles,
and all structures and uses requiring the delivery or shipment of goods as
part of their function, be designed and operated to:
§ 135-202. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANGLED PARKING — Any parking space that is not parallel or
perpendicular to the curb or aisle.
FREE STANDING RETAIL — Single retail sales facility of up to 20,000
square feet in size that is situated independently on a building lot and for
which associated parking serves exclusively that facility.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total floor area of all floors of a building.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A ground cover such as cement, asphalt, or
packed clay or rock through which water cannot penetrate.
Promote traffic safety by assuring adequate places for storing of motor
vehicles off the street, and for their orderly access and egress to and
from the public street;
A.
B. Prevent the creation of surplus parking;
Reduce hazards to pedestrians and increase pedestrian access between
and within sites;
C.
D. Reduce impervious surface areas and resultant stormwater runoff;
Protect adjoining lots and the general public from nuisances and
hazards such as:
Noise, glare of headlights, dust and fumes resulting from the
operation of motor vehicles;
(1)
(2) Glare and heat from parking lots; and
(3) Lack of visual relief from expanses of paving.
E.
F. Promote shared parking opportunities where available;
G. Protect the environment by promoting sustainable development.
§ 135-201 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-202
134:341
INDUSTRIAL PLANT — Structure or complex of structures used for
manufacturing, assembling, fabricating, warehousing, and related
activities.
LARGE-SCALE ("BIG BOX") RETAIL — Single retail sales facility that has
greater than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area and is contained in a
single building.
OFF-STREET PARKING — Parking spaces provided outside of the right-ofway
of a street or highway.
ON-STREET PARKING — Parking spaces provided within the right-of-way of
a street or highway.
PARKING AREA — That portion of a lot set aside, marked, posted, or
intended for parking. This includes circulation areas, loading and unloading
areas, parking spaces and aisles, landscaped areas, bikeways, and
walkways.
PARKING STALL OR SPACE — A space in which a single car may be parked.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or a person's personal goods or
apparel. This category includes uses such as barber shops, beauty salons,
shoe repair shops, and dry cleaners.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Ground cover through which water can penetrate
at a rate comparable to that of water through undisturbed soils.
SHARED PARKING — When parking spaces are shared among different
structures or uses, or among mixed uses, and can include properties with
different owners.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance visible to a driver from his/her position
to other objects or vehicles, when at a point of turning or when stopping a
vehicle.
TRAVEL LANE — The driving portion of the parking area. The parking aisle
provides access to each space.
WALKWAY — Any path or way which is specifically designated primarily for
pedestrian travel.
§ 135-203. Applicability.
No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the
erection of a new building, the enlargement or increase in the net floor area
of an existing building, the development of a use not located in a building, or
the change from one type of use to another, unless off-street parking spaces
and loading bays are provided in accordance with this article.
§ 135-204. General requirements.
All off-street parking and loading facilities required by this article for
any use shall be maintained throughout the operation of that use.
A.
§ 135-202 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-204
134:342
§ 135-205. Minimum required parking spaces.
Within the Main Street Revitalization Area as defined by the Hampstead
Main Street Revitalization Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be empowered to determine the off-street parking requirements
of any permitted use. In making this determination, the Commission
shall consider the nature of the use, the number of employees, the
anticipated traffic and the availability of shared parking opportunities.
Within the Main Street Revitalization Area, parking areas should be
located to the side or rear of structures where practicable or in a
location consistent with contiguous developed properties.
B.
Outside the Main Street Revitalization Area, on-street parking within
public or private streets shall not be used to satisfy the off-street
parking or overflow requirements prescribed by this article.
C.
The minimum number of parking spaces required for uses not
specifically listed below shall be the same as that required for the most
similar specified use as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
A.
For the following uses of buildings hereafter erected or uses
established, changed or enlarged after the effective date of this article
shall be provided per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless
otherwise indicated:
(1) Bank: three spaces.
(2) Large-scale ("big box") retail: five spaces.
(3) Freestanding retail: four spaces.
(4) General office building: four spaces.
(5) Industrial plant: two spaces.
(6) Medical office: eight spaces.
(7) Nursing home: three spaces.
(8) Restaurant: 10 spaces.
(9) Planned business and shopping centers: five spaces.
(10)Bed-and-breakfast: one space per room.
(11)Personal services: four spaces.
Day-care centers: one space per four children at maximum
capacity.
(12)
(13)Churches and places of worship: one space per three seats.
(14)Museums and libraries: three spaces.
(15)Social organizations: four spaces.
B.
§ 135-204 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-205
134:343
§ 135-206. Design standards.
In providing required parking facilities, the minimum standard shall be:
(16)Public and private schools: one space per three classroom seats.
(17)Single- and two-family residences: three spaces per dwelling unit.
Multifamily residences: two and one-half parking spaces per
dwelling unit.
(18)
(19)Automotive service garage: three spaces per repair bay.
(20)Tavern: 15 spaces.
(21)Funeral home: 10 spaces.
(22)Planned business center: five spaces.
(23)Wholesale warehouse or distribution: one space.
Where shared or cooperative parking opportunities exist within 300
feet of the principal use, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
reduce the required number of parking spaces by up to 15%. Such
approval may be subject to specific terms and conditions.
C.
Size. Each parking space shall be at nine feet wide by 20 feet long and
rectangular in shape. The length may be reduced to 18 feet where the
width of the parking space abuts a landscaped area to allow vehicle
overhang.
A.
Markings. All parking spaces shall be delineated by appropriate fixed
curbing, painted lines (a minimum of four inches wide), or other fixed
markers. All off-street parking areas shall be arranged and marked as to
provide for orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking and storage of
vehicles. Individual parking spaces shall be clearly defined. Directional
arrows and traffic signs shall be provided for safe and convenient traffic
flow. Each space or area for the handicapped or other special parking
shall be clearly marked to indicate the intended use, and shall be so
located as to facilitate its use. All markings and traffic signs shall be
maintained through the duration of the use.
B.
Surface. All parking lots should be constructed of concrete or asphalt
and have concrete curbs on the perimeter. The Commission may
approve paving blocks or a similar porous surface determined to be
durable and dust-free by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any
such surface must allow for durable surface markings such as paint.
C.
Angle. The preferred parking angle is 90°. Angled parking (60° or 45°)
is permitted when one-way circulation is required or on narrow lots that
will not accommodate ninety-degree parking.
D.
Public rights-of-way. No parking space shall force vehicles to back into
a public right-of-way.
E.
§ 135-205 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-206
134:344
Ingress and egress. All parking spaces shall allow for reasonable and
convenient ingress and egress. All required parking spaces shall be
available and accessible at all times for vehicular parking purposes.
With the exception of residential driveways, no parking spaces shall be
located so as to require the moving of any vehicle on the premises in
order to enter or leave any other space.
F.
Parking aisles. The parking aisle width shall be 15 feet for one-way
traffic using angle parking or parallel parking. The parking aisle width
shall be 25 feet for two-way traffic and for traffic using ninety-degree
(perpendicular) parking. All circulation lanes, private roads and
parking aisles shall have minimum turning radii of 20 feet. Parking
aisles may not be obstructed except by emergency or public utility
vehicles in the performance of official duties.
G.
Access road. An access road connecting roads and/or parking areas
shall be 15 feet for one-way traffic and 20 feet for two-way traffic.
Access roads may not be obstructed except by emergency or public
utility vehicles in the performance of official duties.
H.
Parking area setbacks. Parking spaces, aisles and access drives which
are generally parallel to abutting roads shall be set back a minimum of
10 feet from any public street right-of-way line.
I.
Landscaping. Landscaping shall be installed where required by Town
or Carroll County Code or where required as a condition of approval.
For those parking facilities where landscaping is not required, the
developer is encouraged to install landscaping to improve the
appearance of his premises and of the general neighborhood.
Landscaping shall be perpetually maintained.
J.
Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided for all parking facilities
and access roads and the light source shall be shaded or shielded to
direct the light, including glare or reflection, away from adjoining or
facing properties premises and from public streets.
K.
Handicapped spaces. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped
shall be provided in accordance with any applicable codes pertaining
thereto.
L.
Pedestrian access. Parking lots shall be designed to allow pedestrians
to safely move from their vehicles to the building. On small lots, this
may be achieved by providing a sidewalk at the perimeter of the lot.
On larger lots, corridors within the parking area should channel
pedestrians from the car to the perimeter of the lot or to the building.
These corridors may be delineated by a paving material which differs
from that of vehicular areas and planted to provide shade. Small posts
or bollards may be included.
M.
Non-parking uses. Off-street parking areas may not be used for nonparking
activities. This includes but is not limited to the display, storage
N.
§ 135-206 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-206
134:345
§ 135-207. Off-street loading.
In all districts, uses that involve deliveries, shipments or removal of goods,
materials, supplies or waste by truck shall provide adequate off-street
loading and unloading facilities. For every building having a gross floor
area of 10,000 square feet or more, to be used for manufacturing, storage,
warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel,
hospital or other similar use, there shall be provided and maintained at
least one off-street loading space, plus one additional loading space for each
20,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in
excess of the first 10,000 square feet. Each loading space shall not be less
than 12 feet in width, 45 feet in length and 14 feet in clear height. Such
space may occupy all or any part of any required yard except a front yard.
No such space shall be located closer than 30 feet to any lot located in any
R district, unless the loading space is within a completely enclosed building.
§ 135-208. Off-street stacking and lanes for drive-through facilities.
All businesses which provide drive-through facilities for serving customers
within their automobile shall provide adequate off-street stacking spaces
and lanes which meet the following requirements.
or sale of goods or the long-term (greater than 24 hours) storage of
vehicles, including trailers.
Calculations. When measurements of the number of required spaces
result in fractions, the space requirements shall be rounded upward to
the next highest whole number.
O.
Each stacking space shall be computed on the basis of nine feet in width
and 20 feet in length. Each stacking lane shall be a minimum of 12 feet
in width.
A.
Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through facility
and parking lot shall be provided. Drive-through facilities shall be
designed in a manner which promotes pedestrian and vehicular safety.
B.
All drive-through facilities shall provide an escape lane which allows
other vehicles to pass those waiting to be serviced.
C.
The number of stacking spaces per service lane shall be provided as
follows:
(1) Bank: three spaces.
(2) Coffee or doughnut shop: six spaces.
(3) Fast-food restaurant: eight spaces.
(4) Pharmacy or drug store: four spaces.
(5) Car wash (automatic): entry six spaces/exit two spaces.
D.
§ 135-206 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-208
134:346
§ 135-209. (Reserved)
(6) Car wash (self service): entry three spaces/exit one space.
§ 135-208 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-209
134:347

ARTICLE XXII
Signs
[Amended 4-21-1986 by Ord. No. 204; 2-13-2001 by Ord. No. 339]
§ 135-210. Applicable regulations.
In order to properly integrate all regulating provisions affecting signs,
as defined in § 135-3, and to regulate such devices in an orderly and
comprehensive manner, it is hereby provided that such signs are subject to
regulations as set forth herein. These provisions shall apply equally to all
signs located in the Town of Hampstead.
§ 135-211. General conditions.
All signs shall be subject to the following general provisions:
No sign shall be permitted which becomes unsafe or endangers the
safety of a building, premises or person.
A.
No sign shall be permitted unless maintained in a good general
condition and reasonable state of repair as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
B.
If a sign becomes unsafe or falls into disrepair, the Zoning
Administrator shall order the sign be repaired, renovated, replaced or
removed. Such order shall be complied with as soon as practicable
but no more than 10 days of receipt of such order where a sign is
determined to be unsafe. Such order shall be complied with within
45 days of receipt of such order where a sign is determined to be in
disrepair. [Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 486]
C.
No sign shall be permitted which imitates or resembles an official
traffic control device or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of an official traffic control device or traffic sight lines.
Illuminated signs shall be so constructed as to avoid glare or reflection
on any portion of an adjacent highway or residential building.
D.
No sign shall be erected in the right-of-way for any road. [Amended
3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 486]
E.
Where a sign structure does not include advertising information for a
period of 180 continuous days, such sign structure shall be deemed
a violation thereafter and shall be removed. [Amended 3-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 486]
F.
Except for temporary signs and signs for home-based businesses,
signage within the Main Street Revitalization Area shall be reviewed
and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. [Amended
3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 486]
G.
§ 135-210 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-212
134:349
§ 135-212. Prohibited signs. [Amended 12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 381;
7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 435; 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 486]
The following signs are hereby expressly prohibited for erection,
construction, repair, alteration or relocation within the Town, except as
otherwise permitted in this chapter:
A. Pennants, streamers, balloons and other inflatable figures or devices.
B. Billboards and all other off-premises signs.
Signs with visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible
mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible
movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means,
except for clocks and other time-keeping devices.
C.
Signs that are animated with lights or illuminations which flash, move,
rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker or vary in color.
D.
E. Portable and wheeled signs.
Projecting signs, to wit, signs which are attached or otherwise affixed
to a building and project more than two feet beyond the wall surface of
such building to which the sign is attached or otherwise affixed thereto.
F.
G. Roof signs.
H. Signs on parked vehicles.
I. Signs on trees, rocks or utility poles.
J. Signs with obscene or indecent content.
Signs which imitate traffic control devices or imitate, interfere with,
obstruct the view of or might be confused with any authorized traffic
control sign, signal or other device.
K.
Window signage that obscures more than 25% of the visible window
area.
L.
Private signs on municipal or other property unless expressly
authorized by the Town.
M.
Signage that advertises or identifies a business, product or service that
is no longer in existence at that location.
N.
Commercial signage in any residential or R District, except as
authorized by this chapter.
O.
P. Signage that is over 50% obscured by vegetation.
Signage placed on private property without the written permission of
the property owner.
Q.
R. Signage placed in roadway islands.
§ 135-212 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-212
134:350
§ 135-213. Signs permitted without zoning certificate. [Amended
7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 435; 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 451; 5-14-2009
by Ord. No. 459; 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 486]
The following signs are permitted without zoning certificates in any district,
provided that the following conditions are adhered to:
S. Election or political signs on municipal property.
Temporary, unlit signs no greater than 32 square feet in size advertising
a community event or activity. For the purpose of this section, a
community event or activity shall be defined as an event or activity
sponsored by and/or for the direct benefit of a nonprofit organization
as defined by Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue
Code, as amended, and formed for the use, benefit and enjoyment of
its members to achieve religious, recreational, charitable, municipal or
educational pursuits.
A.
Temporary real estate signs, not exceeding 20 square feet, being
located on and advertising subject property for sale or lease.
B.
Temporary signs, not exceeding 100 square feet, located on and
advertising a new subdivision.
C.
Building contractors' and professional persons' temporary signs on
buildings under construction or repair, limited to a total area for all
signs of 150 square feet and to only such time as the construction and/
or repairs are occurring.
D.
E. Temporary political signs.
Incidental signs. An incidental sign is a permanent sign that has a
purpose secondary to the use of the property that provides information
rather than advertising. Examples of such signs are traffic directional
signs interior to the lot, including employee only parking, loading zone
only, and truck traffic only. Incidental signs on windows may include
credit card logos and hours of operation. An open sign shall be
considered incidental if it is less than two square feet in size. A business
shall be limited to one incidental sign per frontage to a public road. Any
sign with advertising, such as a business name, product or logo, shall
not be considered an incidental sign. Illuminated incidental signs shall
not flash, blink, move or scroll.
F.
The flag of the United States of America, the State of Maryland or the
Town of Hampstead and any other official flags as determined by the
Mayor. Display of flags shall comply with federal and state statutes
regarding flag display.
G.
H. Official notices posted by the Town of Hampstead or Carroll County.
I. Temporary window signs under the following conditions:
§ 135-212 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-213
134:351
Temporary window signage shall be limited to the Historic, BL and
BG Zoning Districts.
(1)
Temporary window signage shall not occupy more than 25% of any
window area. Where a business storefront has multiple windows,
the area of display can exceed 25% of any given window; however,
the overall area of display shall be limited to no more than 25% of
the total window area.
(2)
Temporary window signs may not be displayed for more than 45
consecutive days. The first day of display shall be marked in the
lower right-hand corner of the sign in a size and manner where
the date can be clearly read from the adjoining sidewalk or road.
Display of a temporary window sign without a date shall be a
violation of this chapter.
(3)
Displays of merchandise are not considered to be window signage
if such displays do not contain advertising.
(4)
Posters, fliers or other noncommercial signage advertising events
of community or public interest and less than four square feet in
size are not considered to be temporary window signage.
(5)
Temporary banners under the following conditions:
Temporary banners shall be limited to the Historic, BL and BG
Zoning Districts.
(1)
Temporary banners shall be smaller than 32 square feet in size per
face.
(2)
Temporary banners shall not obscure windows and shall be firmly
mounted or affixed onto a building or structure.
(3)
Temporary banners may not be displayed for more than 30
consecutive days. The first day of display shall be marked in the
lower right-hand corner of the banner. Display of a temporary
banner without a date shall be a violation of this chapter.
(4)
Temporary banners advertising a specific event must be removed
within three days after the event is over.
(5)
Temporary banners shall be limited to one per property at any time
except that a property with multiple commercial tenants shall be
allowed one temporary banner per tenant.
(6)
J.
Temporary sandwich boards under the following conditions:
Temporary sandwich shall be limited to the Historic, BL and BG
Zoning Districts.
(1)
Temporary sandwich shall be no taller than five in height and no
larger than 12 square feet per sign.
(2)
K.
§ 135-213 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-213
134:352
§ 135-214. Signs requiring zoning certificate.
All signs not specifically exempted by § 135-213 or 135-216 of this chapter
shall require a zoning certificate.
§ 135-215. Signs pertaining to uses on premises.
Business signs pertaining to a use on the premises are permitted as an
accessory use in all commercial districts, provided that the following
provisions are adhered to:
Temporary sandwich boards may only be displayed during normal
business hours and must be moved indoors when the business is
closed.
(3)
A. No such sign shall project over or into any street right-of-way.
Any sign which is attached to the ground shall be located in such
manner that traffic visibility is not impaired.
B.
The total area of all signs shall not exceed three times each linear foot
of the building wall most nearly parallel to or confronting the adjacent
street. Only one building frontage shall be used in computing the sign
area allowance, except on a corner lot, in which case an additional
25% of the total sign area allowed may be authorized. In no case
shall the area of any one sign exceed 150 square feet on any one
side. Computations of signs shall include all sides (where applicable),
including the entire face of the sign and any wall work incidental to
its decoration and shall include the space between letter figures and
designs or the space within letter figures and designs.
C.
D. No exterior sign shall exceed 15 feet in total height, if freestanding.
No business sign shall be so located where it obstructs the vision of
traffic using entranceways, driveways or any public road intersection.
E.
No sign shall be located in a road right-of-way. [Amended 3-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 486]
F.
Temporary signs are not permitted except as authorized in this chapter.
[Amended 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 486]
G.
Electronic variable-message signs may be permitted under the
following conditions: [Added 12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 381; amended
10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 419]
Such signs shall be limited to public or private schools, the
Hampstead Volunteer Fire Department or local, state or federal
government property.
(1)
On the premises of public or private schools, such signs may be
used for scoreboards on athletic fields or for general informational
use.
(2)
H.
§ 135-213 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-215
134:353
The design, dimensions, height, location and conditions of
operation of such signs shall be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and approved by the Town Council. [Amended
7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 434]
(3)
Manual variable-message signs (reader board panels) may be permitted
under the following conditions: [Added 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 47641]
The lettering and background of any such signs shall be consistent
in font, style and/or color with the lettering and background of the
permanent sign upon which the reader board panel is mounted.
(1)
Any such sign using plastic zip track or other method of replaceable
lettering shall have a secure, clear plastic or lexan cover.
(2)
Such signs shall be subordinate in size and location to the
permanent signage.
(3)
I.
Window signage may be permitted under the following conditions:
[Added 5-14-2009 by Ord. No. 459]
Such signage shall be generally limited to opaque letters, numbers
or symbols professionally painted upon or affixed to the window,
such as gold leaf or decal application, or hung, mounted or
displayed within one inch of the glass, unless another type of
window signage is approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(1)
The letters, numbers and/or symbols of such signage shall not
occupy more than 33% of any window area or more than 20% of
any glass or translucent door. The area of such signs painted on the
glass, or individual letter signs, shall be determined by creating an
imaginary rectangle, circle or oval encompassing all of the lettering
of the sign and measuring its area.
(2)
The background of all permanent window signage shall be
transparent.
(3)
The font, color and style of window signage shall be consistent with
the font, color and style of the other permanent signage on the
premises.
(4)
All permanent window signage shall be included in any tabulation
for the total permitted signage for a property pursuant to the limits
in § 135-215C.
(5)
J.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection I a Subsection J.
§ 135-215 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-216
134:354
§ 135-216. Temporary signs. [Amended 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 435;
3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 486]
Temporary business signs shall be permitted within local business and
general business zones subject to the following conditions, restrictions and
limitations herein:
§ 135-217. Continuance of legal nonconforming signs.
Unless lawfully removed by county or state action, legal nonconforming
signs may continue to be used, the copy may be changed, and such signs
may be rebuilt or replaced; provided, however, that notwithstanding the
All temporary signs except those enumerated in §§ 135-213 and
135-215 require a permit issued by the Town the Hampstead. The
charge for the permit shall be determined by resolution of the Town
Council.
A.
General conditions.
All temporary signs must be kept in good repair and are subject
to the general conditions listed in § 135-211. Failure to meet these
general conditions shall result in the revocation of the sign permit
or other enforcement as authorized by this chapter.
(1)
All temporary business signs shall be located only upon the zoning
lot upon which the special, unique or limited activity, service,
product or sale is to occur. Such signs may be located in any
required yard, but shall not extend over any lot line or within 15
feet of any point of vehicular access from a zoning lot to a public
roadway.
(2)
Temporary business signs shall not project higher than 12 feet,
as measured from base of sign or grade of the nearest adjacent
roadway, whichever is higher.
(3)
Temporary signs must be constructed of materials that present a
finished appearance. Rough cut and/or unfinished plywood is not
acceptable. The sign lettering should be professionally painted or
applied; a "yard sale" or "graffiti" look with hand-painted or paintstenciled
letters is not acceptable; however, chalkboard signs shall
be permitted. The written message of the sign should be kept to the
minimum necessary to communicate the name of the business or a
special message of the business.
(4)
Painting, writing or drawing on storefront windows or building
walls is prohibited as a form of temporary signage.
(5)
B.
Display without a valid permit. Unless otherwise authorized in this
chapter, display of any temporary sign without a permit shall be a
municipal infraction punishable by a fine of $50 per occurrence, with
each day of display constituting a separate occurrence.
C.
§ 135-216 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-217
134:355
provisions of § 135-13A, such nonconforming signs may not be enlarged
in height or area beyond that which existed on the enactment of this
amendment.
§ 135-218. Main Street Signage. [Added 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 435]
Design guidelines. Within the Main Street Revitalization Area, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve signage that the
Commission finds:
Adequately and effectively communicates the business identity and
type to the public;
(1)
Is pedestrian-oriented and as small in size and few in number as is
consistent with their purpose of communicating identification and
essential information;
(2)
Protects the Main Street Revitalization Area from sign clutter and
visual blight resulting from excessive and redundant signs;
(3)
Is architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials,
colors and details of the building and its vicinity and contributes to
the character of the historic Main Street Revitalization Area;
(4)
Reflects the vision of the Main Street Revitalization Plan. This
vision is articulated through the following preferences:
(a) Wood or stone rather than metal or plastic;
(b) Externally illuminated rather than internally lit;
(c) Monument rather than pole-mounted;
(d) Historic rather than modern;
(e) Smaller rather than larger;
(f) Tasteful rather than garish;
Professionally rendered rather than hand-drawn or homemade;
(g)
(h) Permanent rather than temporary.
(5)
A.
Temporary signs. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have
the authority to alter the conditions, restrictions or limitations on the
following temporary signs displayed within the Main Street
Revitalization Area:
Temporary signage directly related to the opening of a new
business for a period of no more than six months after the business
opens.
(1)
B.
§ 135-217 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-218
134:356
§ 135-219. (Reserved)
Prohibited signs. In addition to the signs prohibited by § 135-212, the
following signage shall be prohibited in the Main Street Revitalization
Area:
Electronic variable message signs as defined in § 135-215H, except
as permitted by this chapter.
(1)
Tube signs (signs with a light source supplied by neon or other gas
in tubes bent to form letters), except for open signs as defined in
§ 135-213G.
(2)
C.
§ 135-218 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-219
134:357

ARTICLE XXIII
Extractive Operations and Processing42
§ 135-220. (Reserved)
§ 135-221. (Reserved)
42.Editor's Note: Former § 135-110, General regulations, and § 135-111, Limestone
operations, which previously comprised Art. XVI, Extractive Operations and Processing,
were repealed 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 254.
§ 135-220 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-221
134:359

ARTICLE XXIV
(Reserved)43
§ 135-222. (Reserved)
43.Editor's Note: Former Art. XXIV, Cluster Subdivisions, as amended 8-20-1990 by Ord. No.
222, was repealed 2-12-2008 by Ord. No. 441.
§ 135-222 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-222
134:361

ARTICLE XXV
Planned Business Centers
§ 135-223. Types and authorization thereof. [Amended 1-19-1993 by
Ord. No. 230]
In any B-L or B-G District, the Commission may approve a neighborhood or
community-type shopping center of not less than two acres or more than 20
acres, subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth under this section.
§ 135-224. Approval by Planning Commission. [Amended 1-19-1993
by Ord. No. 230]
§ 135-225. Permitted uses.
The uses permitted in a planned business center shall be those retail
business, commercial and service uses and accessory uses permitted in the
B district in which the planned business center is located. No residential
use, heavy commercial or industrial uses shall be permitted or any use other
than such as is necessary or desirable to supply goods and services to the
surrounding area.
The developer of any such shopping center, prior to any construction,
shall present to the Commission for its review a development plan for
such proposed center. The development plan shall show such items
as the size of the project, the location and approximate shapes of
buildings, road ingress patterns, parking areas, storm drainage and
water and sewerage facilities and such other information as is
necessary for the Commission to give the necessary consideration.
A.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to ascertain whether the location,
size and other characteristics of the site, and the proposed plan, comply
with the following conditions:
That the plans provide for a shopping center consisting of one
or more groups of establishments in buildings of integrated and
harmonious design, together with adequate and properly arranged
traffic and parking facilities and landscaping, so as to result in an
efficient shopping center.
(1)
B.
The Commission shall, within a reasonable time after consideration of
a development plan for a shopping center project, issue to the office of
the Zoning Administrator a written report of its findings.
C.
The Commission shall approve such shopping center project, provided
that the requirements of this section are complied with.
D.
Upon receipt of written approval from the Commission, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the necessary zoning certificate.
E.
§ 135-223 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-226
134:363
§ 135-226. Prohibited uses.
Prohibited uses shall be as follows:
Amusement parks, commercial
Automobile, trailer or implement repair establishments
Bottling of soft drinks or milk or bulk distribution stations
Building material, sales or storage yards
Carpenter or woodworking shop
Circus
Drive-in theaters
Feed and grain sales and storage, including milling
Funeral establishments
Golf driving ranges
Hotels and apartment hotels
Kennels
Livery stables
Newspaper publishing establishments and printing shops
Riding academies
Sheet metal shops
Sign painting shops
Swimming pools
Target ranges
Truck or motor freight terminals or warehouses
Wholesale business, warehousing and service establishments
§ 135-227. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to a planned business center:
Building height. No building shall exceed the permitted height of the
B district in which the planned business center is located, except as
provided in § 135-258. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 523]
A.
Yards.
No building shall be erected within 50 feet of a public street rightof-
way line, and no parking lot or other facility or accessory use,
except permitted signs and plantings, shall be located within 10
feet of any public street right-of-way line.
(1)
No building shall be located within 50 feet of any other boundary
line, and any such line which adjoins an R district, if deemed
necessary by the Commission, shall be screened by a solid wall
(2)
B.
§ 135-226 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-227
134:364
or compact evergreen hedge, at least six feet in height, or by
such other screening device as may be deemed appropriate and
adequate.
Tract coverage. Buildings shall not be permitted to cover more than
25% of the total project area.
C.
Customer parking space. Off-street parking shall be provided as
required in Article XXI of this chapter. [Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord.
No. 218]
D.
Off-street loading shall be provided as required in Article XXI of this
chapter. Such facilities shall be in the rear of any building, unless the
Commission for good reason approves a location at the sides of any
such building, and shall not be included as part of any customer parking
space required herein. [Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218]
E.
Signs. In addition to signs permitted and as regulated in the B district
in which the shopping center project is located, one additional sign
not exceeding 200 square feet in area, containing the names of the
shopping center and/or the establishments located therein, may be
placed at any location within the boundaries of the project, but it shall
not exceed 30 feet in height. Any shopping center fronting on more than
one street may be permitted such a sign within the required yard area
along each street.44
F.
44.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIX, Industrial Parks, as amended, which previously followed
this section, was repealed 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 316.
§ 135-227 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-227
134:365

ARTICLE XXVI
Planned Industrial Development
[Added 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 487]
§ 135-228. Planned Industrial Developments.
Purpose.
A Planned Industrial Development is intended to allow flexible site
planning and building arrangements for industrial development
under a single plan so that innovative land-planning methods may
be utilized which create campus-like environments, foster natural
resource conservation and reduce traffic congestion. A PID is not
intended to encourage greater density of development but rather
to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land-planning
techniques which result in industrial development patterns that
conserve and create open space, reduce vehicle trips and provide
quality developments which enhance the surrounding area. The
goal is to create high quality, integrated industrial parks that fit
seamlessly within the community, are consistent with the adopted
Community Comprehensive Plan and which allow developers
considerably more flexibility than traditional site plan and
subdivision regulations.
(1)
A PID may be established in any industrial zoning district. These
regulations are designed to achieve the following objectives:
To permit a mixture of light industrial land uses in a master
planned environment that may not be possible within a
traditional zoning district and through standard subdivision
and site plan processes.
(a)
To provide an avenue for industrial development that utilizes
some privately owned and maintained infrastructure.
(b)
To promote an efficient development pattern that is sensitive to
existing topography, physical and environmental features and
adjoining properties.
(c)
To allow the phased subdivision of a large industrial parcel
in accordance with a master development plan without the
administrative burden of repeating the entire subdivision
application and approval process for every lot.
(d)
(2)
A.
Applicability. The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all
PIDs. All zoning regulations applicable in the underlying zoning district
shall apply to uses within the PID except as noted elsewhere in this
chapter.
B.
Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
C.
§ 135-228 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-228
134:367
COMMISSION — The Hampstead Planning and Zoning Commission.
MASTER DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — A contract between the
developer(s), property owner(s) and the Town of Hampstead
concerning the development of a PID.
MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A full site plan as defined by § 120-5
of the Hampstead Town Code the purpose of developing a PID.
PID — A planned industrial development.
Permitted, conditional and accessory uses. Permitted, conditional and
accessory uses shall be determined by the underlying zoning district of
the property. Appeals for conditional uses and variances shall be made
to the Board of Zoning Appeals under the provisions of this chapter.
D.
Ownership. The application for approval of a PID shall be made by a
person or corporate entity with fee simple ownership of the parcel(s)
comprising the proposed PID. An application for approval of a PID may
be made where there is a legal interest in ownership of the parcels
comprising the proposed PID subject to the recommendation of the
Town Attorney and approval of the Commission.
E.
Application. The application for a PID shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 120, Site Plans, of the Hampstead Town Code
except as otherwise noted in this article. The PID application will
contain the elements of a final full site plan as specified by § 120-5 of
the Hampstead Town Code and shall contain the following additional
elements:
A completed application for approval of a PID as provided by the
Zoning Administrator.
(1)
(2) A written description of the overall concept for the PID.
Architectural, engineering, or construction information sufficient
to give a clear understanding of the proposal and including front-
, side- and rearview renderings, shall be included with the
submission of the site plans. Where such information is not
provided, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve
"white box" site plans; however, no building permit shall be issued
for such "white box" site plans until the Commission has received,
reviewed and approved the aforementioned architectural,
engineering, or construction information.
(3)
A written description of the general method of development, the
proposed construction phasing and the operation of the PID.
(4)
(5) A copy of the proposed deed restrictions and covenants for the PID.
A master development agreement in the form prescribed by the
Town Attorney.
(6)
F.
§ 135-228 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-228
134:368
The percentage of the area to be dedicated as open space and/or
recreation areas and impervious surfaces.
(7)
The metes, bounds and form of any easements to be granted to the
Town.
(8)
Tabulations and calculations related to building area and any lot
coverage bonuses sought.
(9)
Any additional elements as determined necessary by the
Commission.
(10)
Minimum land area. The gross tract of land to be developed as a PID
shall be a minimum of five acres.
G.
Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size of any lot in a PID shall be one
acre.
H.
Building and impervious surface area.
Not more than 50% of the area of each lot or tract may be occupied
by buildings.
(1)
Not more than 80% of the area of each lot or tract may covered by
any impervious surface such as asphalt, concrete or buildings.
(2)
I.
Lot coverage bonuses. A lot coverage bonus is an increase in the area
of each lot which may be occupied by buildings and/or impervious
surfaces. The credits shall apply to building coverage or impervious
surface coverage but not both. The lot coverage bonus shall be
determined by the approved master development plan for the entire
site and may apply to every subdivided lot.
Open space. Maximum credit: 10%. The Commission may approve
an additional one-percent lot coverage bonus for each 1% of open
space dedicated to the public. Dedications shall be made in
accordance with Chapter 121 and shall be located to allow for
access and use by the public. The Commission shall consider
whether to accept or deny a proposed dedication based on its
functional value as public open space, its value as a preserve
natural area and any other factors deemed relevant by the
Commission. Public open space in a PID may overlap with the
minimum landscaping requirement or additional landscaping
credit. In any such dedication, a minimum of 1/2 acre is required,
except for the dedication of a pedestrian/bicycle trail.
(1)
Nonexclusive pedestrian/bicycle trail easement/right-of-way
dedication. Maximum credit: 10%. The Commission may approve
an additional one-percent lot coverage bonus for every 250 linear
feet of nonexclusive and improved pedestrian/bicycle trail
easement or right-of-way dedicated to the public. Any such trails
or walkways shall be located for access and use by the public. The
Commission shall consider whether to accept or deny a proposed
(2)
J.
§ 135-228 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-228
134:369
easement or right-of-way dedication based on its functional value to
pedestrian/bicycle access and movement, its conformance with the
Town's plan for pedestrian/bicycle facilities and any other factors
deemed relevant by the Commission. The width of the easement
or right-of-way shall be at least seven feet, with a reduction to
five feet for sensitive area management tracts or wetland buffers.
The improved trail shall be a minimum of four feet in width and
constructed per the requirements of the Commission.
Development standards. A PID shall comply with the zoning standards
in effect for the underlying zoning districts and other provisions in the
Town Code related to the subdivision and development of land with the
following exceptions:
A PID may utilize private streets, or a combination of public and
private streets, to provide access to building lots. Lot frontage to a
public road is not required.
(1)
All streets in a PID shall be constructed so as to provide access to
all building sites within the PID for public safety and emergency
service providers.
(2)
Roadway connections and/or right-of-way easements allowing
vehicular access to adjacent developed or undeveloped properties
shall be provided when appropriate as determined by the
Commission.
(3)
Stormwater facilities shall be designed to manage the entire PID
where individual lot stormwater design shall utilize best
management practices for water quality.
(4)
Additional site-specific development requirements pertaining to
the PID or individual lots within the PID may be established at the
time the PID request is being reviewed by the Commission.
(5)
If the development is to be implemented in phases, each phase
shall have adequate provision for access, parking, stormwater
management and other public improvements to serve the
development in accordance with the applicable criteria set forth.
Each phase shall be provided with temporary or permanent
transitional features, buffers, or protective areas in order to
prevent damage to completed phases, to future phases and to
adjoining property.
(6)
The Commission shall have the discretionary authority to
determine setbacks, building heights, lot widths, off-street parking
requirements or other similar requirements. The Commission shall
not have the authority to grant any exceptions or variances related
to uses including conditional uses.
(7)
K.
L. Standards for approval.
§ 135-228 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-228
134:370
The Commission shall consider the following in the approval of any
PID:
The design of the PID shall be congruent with the Town's
adopted Community Comprehensive Plan.
(a)
The design of the PID shall buffer industrial uses within the
PID from adjoining properties to the extent practicable.
(b)
The design of the PID shall be consistent with the industrial
design guidelines outlined in § 135-139 of the Hampstead Town
Code.
(c)
Private and public roads systems shall be designed to provide
for adequate access by public safety and service providers.
(d)
The PID shall conform to the adequate public facilities
provisions enumerated in § 120-9 of the Hampstead Town Code
where any exception thereof shall be granted in accordance
with the provisions set forth in § 120-14.
(e)
Connections for vehicular access between a PID and adjacent
properties shall be incorporated into the master development
plan when possible.
(f)
The approved master development plan and master
development agreement shall be sufficient to ensure the
developer and all subsequent property owners maintain the
PID in a manner consistent with the intent of the Commission
in granting the approval.
(g)
No master development plan shall be approved by the
Commission without receiving and reviewing reports from the
Town Attorney, Zoning Administrator and Town Council.
(h)
(1)
An approved PID site plan shall become a binding commitment
for the development of the specific elements approved for
development. The approved site plan may be transferred to another
person, corporation, or group of individuals or corporations upon
approval by the Commission.
(2)
Master development plan. The approved master development plan shall
have an executed master development agreement within one year of
the date of final approval and shall have construction started within
three years or the approval will automatically expire and the master
development plan must then be resubmitted for approval. The master
development plan will be subject to the regulations in force at the time
of resubmission.
M.
Subdivision within a PID. Upon approval of a PID and the ratification
of an approved master development plan, the owner of any parcel shall
have the right to apply for "fast track" approval of the subdivision of
the PID into parcels no smaller than one acre in size. The application
N.
§ 135-228 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-228
134:371
§ 135-229. (Reserved)
for any such subdivision shall not be subject to the requirements of
Chapter 119 except as noted herein or as determined by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. Such requirements may be codified in the
master development plan and/or the master development agreement.
Amendments.
Any change in an approved master development plan must be
approved by the Commission in accordance with § 120-13 of the
Hampstead Town Code.
(1)
Any change in an approved master development agreement must
be approved by the Town Council upon the recommendation of the
Commission.
(2)
O.
Appeals. Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the Commission
under this chapter may file an appeal of such decision to the Hampstead
Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of issuance of such final
decisions. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Board may seek
judicial relief in the Circuit Court for Carroll County. The Board may
overturn a decision of the Commission; however, the power to approve
a PID is reserved in whole to the Commission.
P.
§ 135-228 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-229
134:372
ARTICLE XXVII
Planned Unit Development
§ 135-230. Applicable regulations. [Amended 6-13-1995 by Ord. No.
267]
A planned unit development may be approved by the Commission, as
permitted in §§ 135-72 and 135-82, subject to all the following provisions.
No planned unit development shall be approved by the Commission until the
criteria referred to in § 135-233B have been adopted.
§ 135-231. Purpose and objectives.
§ 135-232. Area requirements. [Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No.
218]
Within the limit of these requirements, it is the purpose of the planned
unit development to provide suitable sites for relatively higher density
types of residential structures in areas zoned as R-10,000 and R-7,500
Districts and to permit the optimum amount of freedom and variety
in the design and management of such varying types of residential
structures, including one- and two-family units, townhouses and garden
apartments, within the areas designated.
A.
The following objectives are sought in providing for the planned unit
development:
To provide a more attractive and varied living environment than
would be possible through the strict application of R district
requirements.
(1)
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land.
(2)
To encourage a more intimate, efficient and aesthetic use of open
space.
(3)
To encourage variety in the physical development patterns of
residential areas.
(4)
B.
The proposed planned unit development shall normally include a tract
of land not less than 20 acres in an R-10,000 and R-7500 District.
A.
Where the acreage in a planned unit development project is 100 acres
or more, the Commission may approve the development plan as part of
the overall plan of a planned business center in which the B-L Business
District uses may be located in accordance with Article XXV; provided,
however, that such planned business center is located in a manner as
to be an integral part of the development itself and not as a means of
servicing adjacent areas or as a basis by which a business district may
be extended to adjacent properties.
B.
§ 135-230 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-233
134:373
§ 135-233. Designation of suitability.
§ 135-234. Dwelling units; other buildings. [Amended 3-20-1989 by
Ord. No. 218]
§ 135-235. Density. [Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218; 2-13-2018
by Ord. No. 521]
§ 135-236. Open space. [Amended 2-12-2008 by Ord. No. 442]
Common open space shall comprise not less than 25% of the gross area.
Such space shall include land area to be developed as recreational areas
or which is designated for the common use of all occupants of the planned
unit development and other residents if so designated on the plats, but
Land which is zoned properly and which meets the minimum
requirements may be designated by the Commission as suitable for a
planned unit development and may be developed by the owner, if he so
desires, according to the requirements and standards herein.
A.
No land or development project shall be designated as a planned unit
development unless it satisfactorily meets criteria set forth in § 120-9D.
Such criteria shall include but not be limited to present or potential
adequacy of schools and highway access. Designation as a planned unit
development does not guarantee that the plan will be granted future
approvals. The plan must satisfy all applicable state, county and Town
codes at the time of each subsequent approval. [Amended 6-13-1995
by Ord. No. 267; 11-28-1995 by Ord. No. 274; 2-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 521]
B.
Dwelling units may include single-family, two-family or multifamily
structures; based on density requirements, standards described, nature
of adjacent development and compensating features of the
development plan. The Commission may approve places of public
assembly, recreational buildings and accessory buildings if primarily
for use by persons residing with the planned unit development and if
located in a manner not detrimental to adjacent properties.
A.
The sum of the number of dwelling units in multifamily structures shall
not constitute more than 50% of all dwelling units of all types.
B.
The gross density of a planned unit development shall not exceed the
equivalent of four dwelling units per gross acre. Such density shall be
calculated as follows, as applicable to multifamily structures:
(1) Each efficiency apartment dwelling unit is equivalent to 0.75 unit.
Each one-bedroom, two-bedroom or three-bedroom multifamily or
apartment unit is equivalent to 1.00 unit.
(2)
A.
Calculation of gross acreage shall include all land within the PUD tract,
regardless of use.
B.
§ 135-233 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-236
134:374
shall not include streets, off-street parking areas or utility easements. The
Commission must be furnished satisfactory evidence, as a condition for
approval, that such open space area will be continued and that perpetual
maintenance is provided for in accordance with Chapter 121 of the
Hampstead Town Code.
§ 135-237. Water and sewerage systems.
Prior to accepting for approval a development plan for a planned unit
development, the Commission must be furnished satisfactory evidence that
acceptable community water and sewerage systems will be provided and
approved by the Health Department, as well as by any other agency having
jurisdiction over such matters.
§ 135-238. Development plan. [Amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No.
285]
§ 135-239. Standards for location of dwelling units. [Amended
3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218]
Applications for approval of a planned unit development must be
accompanied by a development plan prepared by a licensed architect,
registered civil engineer, professional landscape architect or other
qualified land planner. The development plan shall be to scale and
contain sufficient information to establish the identity of proposed uses,
grades and approximate dimensions and locations of proposed
structures, streets, parking areas, walkways, easements and property
lines.
A.
After approval of the development plan by the Commission, any
material change therein shall require a resubmission of such plan for
approval.
B.
The approved planned unit development (PUD) shall have an executed
public works agreement (PWA) and have grading permits issued within
one year of the date of final approval or the approval will automatically
expire and the PUD must be resubmitted for final approval. The PUD
will be subject to the regulations in force at the time of resubmission.
C.
Within 100 feet of any other property in an R district, dwellings shall be
of single-family types.
A.
As a condition of approval of a planned unit development in which
multifamily dwellings are proposed, the Commission shall require, over
and above other standards herein, that these uses be so arranged
and distributed and appropriately related to open space, single-family
dwellings and/or semidetached dwellings that higher densities are not
unreasonably and disproportionately concentrated in these locations so
as to concentrate traffic on minor residential streets.
B.
§ 135-236 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-240
134:375
§ 135-240. Area, yard and dwelling unit per building standards.
[Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 218; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 521]
Area requirement yard and dwelling unit per building standards shall be as
follows:
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Number
Dwelling
Units
per
Building
Single-family
Interior lot 7,000 60 25 10
(one)
20
(sum of
both)
35 1
Corner lot 7,500 70 25 20 (corner)
30
(for both)
35 1
Semidetached (1/2 building)
Interior lot 5,000 50 30 15 35 2
Corner lot 6,000 60 30 30 35 2
Apartment houses1
Interior yard 20,000 150 30 30 35 12
Street corner (3,000
square feet
per
apartment
unit)
150 30 30 35 12
Townhouses2
Interior lot 2,000 20 25 0 35 8
End dwelling (no
street corner)
3,000 30 25 10 35 8
End dwelling
(street corner)
4,000 40 25 20 35 8
§ 135-240 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-240
134:376
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Number
Dwelling
Units
per
Building
NOTES:
1 Where more than one apartment building is placed on a tract of land and all are considered
contiguous units, there shall not be less than 60 feet between the long dimensions of any buildings
or building groups, regardless of the relation between front and rear facades; not less than 25 feet
between the ends of the buildings, except that if opposing end walls contain windows that provide
over 25% of the light and ventilation to one or more living rooms, the minimum distance between
ends of buildings shall be 40 feet.
2 Individual townhomes shall be offset from the adjacent townhomes. The minimum distance between
end of group townhomes shall be 25 feet and shall include a minimum five-foot common open space
walkthrough.
§ 135-241. Height regulations. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
523]
No principal structure shall exceed 3 stories or 45 feet in height, and no
accessory structure shall exceed 1 1/2 stories or 25 feet in height, except as
provided in § 135-258.
§ 135-242. Parking requirements. [Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord. No.
218]
Off-street parking shall be provided as required in Article XXI of this
chapter.
§ 135-243. Public hearing.
Except as provided in Article XXXIV, no public hearing need be held on any
application for a planned unit development, provided that a public hearing
may be held by the Commission when it deems such hearing to be desirable
or necessary in the public interest.
§ 135-244. Responsibility of owners and applicants.
Prior to accepting a development plan for review, the Commission must
be satisfied that the owners of and/or applicants for a planned unit
development are financially able to complete the proposed development,
that they intend to start construction within one year following the
Commission's approval and that they intend to complete it within a
reasonable time as determined by the Commission.
§ 135-240 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-245
134:377
§ 135-245. (Reserved)
§ 135-246. (Reserved)
§ 135-247. (Reserved)
§ 135-248. (Reserved)
§ 135-249. (Reserved)
§ 135-245 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-249
134:378
ARTICLE XXVIII
(Reserved)45
§ 135-250. (Reserved)
45.Editor's Note: Former Art. XXVIII, Subdivision and Site Plan Approval, added 10-17-1988
by Ord. No. 216, as amended, was repealed 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 431. For current
provisions, see Ch. 119, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 120, Site Plans.
§ 135-250 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-250
134:379

ARTICLE XXIX
Major Subdivisions in R-120,000 Districts
[Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 254; 2-12-2008 by Ord. No. 440]
§ 135-251. Approval.
A major subdivision of land for residential purposes in any R-120,000
District may be approved by the Commission as permitted in §§ 135-32E and
135-52D subject to § 135-23 of this chapter and the following provisions.
§ 135-252. Purpose and intent.
The Commission finds that a portion of the police power of the State of
Maryland has been delegated to each county, to be exercised reasonably
in determining the manner and nature of development within each county.
The Maryland General Assembly has given much discretion to the several
counties in making such determinations, relying on the local jurisdiction's
knowledge of local conditions and the needs of its people and communities.
The Maryland General Assembly has further created numerous state
departments and agencies to provide consultation, advice, data and other
similar forms of assistance in the furtherance of establishing comprehensive
policies on which to base local county planning decisions for the general
good and welfare. Development pressures, caused by a myriad of complex
social and economic factors which transcend county lines (i.e., population
shifts, sewer moratoriums, accelerating inflation of land values and other
phenomena), are bringing increasing numbers of families into Carroll
County, necessitating the provision of additional public schools; solid waste
disposal sites; water, sewerage and storm drainage facilities; roads and
associated facilities; police, fire and related emergency-service-type
facilities; primary health care facilities; open space, floodplain management
and sediment control measures; and the increasing need for maintaining a
stable tax base. In recognition of the fundamental difference between the
diverse and unlimited "wants" of a growing community of people, and those
"needs" which are inherently limited (i.e., land, air and water resources),
it is imperative that plans, policies and decisions, insofar as it is humanly
possible, be weighed and ordered; first, in consideration of the fundamental
"needs" and, secondly, in consideration of the priority of "wants" which
ultimately involve the direct or indirect expenditure of limited public funds.
§ 135-253. Conditions of approval.
The following provisions, therefore, are set forth in planning for the
continued orderly development of Carroll County and in the pursuit of
these objectives: In designating a tract(s) or area(s) suitable for a major
subdivision of land for residential purposes in any R-120,000 District, the
Commission shall, pursuant to authority granted by Article 66B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, the Carroll County Zoning Ordinance and
the Subdivision Regulations of Carroll County, in addition to any other
applicable ordinances or regulations, require that adequate provision(s)
be incorporated in and made a part of any conditions of any approval to
§ 135-251 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-253
134:381
ensure the integrity and orderly use of the county's natural resources as
would promote the public necessity, health, safety, convenience, general
welfare, environment and the county's financial ability to provide and/or
receive essential community improvements, facilities and/or services. Such
conditions of approval may include and ensure adequate provisions for
such specific on- and off-site facilities and improvements as school sites;
solid waste disposal sites; open space, floodplain management and sediment
control measures; water, sewerage and storm drainage facilities; roads and
associated facilities; and police, fire and related emergency-type facilities,
including consideration for primary health care facilities. Whenever any
one or a combination of the aforesaid facilities and/or improvements is
deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the duly adopted
Official Master Plan for Carroll County and the authority conveyed by
Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Carroll County Zoning
Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations of Carroll County or any other
applicable ordinances or regulations and where any one or a combination
of the aforesaid facilities and/or improvements deemed necessary cannot
be provided or assured, then the Commission shall either disapprove or
defer designating those areas in question, in whole or in part, as suitable
for a major subdivision of land for residential purposes until such time
as those specific improvements and/or facilities deemed necessary can be
adequately provided or assured.
§ 135-253 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-253
134:382
ARTICLE XXX
Exceptions and Modifications
§ 135-254. Generally.
The regulations specified in this chapter shall be subject to the following
exceptions, modifications and interpretations.
§ 135-255. Lot area modifications.
§ 135-256. Setbacks.
Where the average setback line of at least two existing buildings, on lots
which are on the same side of the street or road and within 200 feet of
the lot in question, is less than the minimum setback prescribed by this
chapter, the minimum setback line shall be the average setback line of all
buildings within 200 feet of the proposed building. However, in no case shall
the setback line be less than 35 feet from the center line of any abutting
road or street.
§ 135-257. Projections into yards. [Amended 7-13-2004 by Ord. No.
395]
Minimum lot area and lot width regulations in any zone shall not apply
to repeater, booster, transformer or switching stations or dial offices.
A.
In any district wherein a single-family dwelling is permitted, such
dwelling may be permitted on any lot or parcel which is of official
record by deed or a subdivision duly recorded in the plat records of
Carroll County as of the effective date of this chapter, provided that:
The owner does not own sufficient land adjoining to enable
conformance with yard or area requirements.
(1)
(2) No side yard shall be less than 10% of the width of said lot.
B.
If attached to or directly adjoining the main building, a carport or a onestory
open porch, with a roof, may extend into the required front, side
or rear yard not more than 25% of the minimum required yard depth.
A.
If attached to or directly adjoining the main building, a one-story open
deck without a roof may extend into the required rear yard not more
than 50% of the minimum required yard depth.
B.
Projections, such as bay windows, chimneys, entrances, vestibules,
balconies, eaves and leaders, may extend into any required yard not
more than four feet, provided that such projections (except eaves) are
not over 10 feet in length.
C.
Fences and walls shall be exempt from building line and yard
requirements unless they are obstructions to vision.
D.
§ 135-254 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-257
134:383
§ 135-258. Height limitations.
§ 135-259. Variances.
The Board may authorize upon appeal, in accordance with § 135-265,
variances from height, lot area, yard regulations, parking space
requirements, sign regulations and distance requirements specified in
§ 135-20. The Board may grant such variance only in cases where the strict
compliance with the terms of this chapter would result in practical difficulty
and unreasonable hardship and only if in strict harmony with the spirit and
No deck, porch, carport, or other projection shall be allowed in any
easement area.
E.
The allowable projection into any yard shall be calculated by measuring
the minimum distance from the applicable property boundary to the
point of maximum projection into the yard. No additional allowance
shall be granted for cantilevered decks, stairs or other appurtenances
to any projection.
F.
Building height limitations shall not apply to water tanks, barns,
windmills, silos or other accessory farm structures; or to belfries,
steeples or spires; electric or communication poles or towers, electric
generating plants, electric transforming or switching equipment or
radio, television or radar towers; chimneys or smoke stacks; flagpoles,
fire or observation towers, cupolas, domes, monuments, penthouses or
roof structures for housing stairways; or tanks, ventilating fans, airconditioning
equipment or similar equipment required to operate and
maintain the building. No penthouse or roof structure shall have a total
area greater than 25% of the roof area, nor shall such structure be used
for any purpose than a use incidental to the main use of the building.
A.
In any R district, the height of a principal structure may be extended
to 3 1/2 stories, but not over 50 feet, if each side yard is increased in
width 1/2 foot for each additional 1 foot of height above the normal
maximum limit. In any B district, the height of a principal structure
may be extended to 4 stories, but not over 55 feet, if each side yard is
increased in width 1/2 foot for each additional 1 foot of height above
the normal maximum limit. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 254;
2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 523]
B.
On any lot where the average finished slope adjoining the building
exceeds a grade of 7%, one story, in addition to the number permitted
in the zone in which such lot is situated, shall be permitted on the
downhill side of any building erected, but the building height limit shall
not otherwise be increased above that specified for the zone.
C.
In any zone where public or quasi-public buildings are permitted, such
buildings may be erected to a height of 120 feet, but the minimum front,
rear and side yards shall be increased one foot for each foot of height
above the limit established for the zone in which the building is erected.
D.
§ 135-257 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-259
134:384
intent of such regulations and only in a manner so as to grant relief without
substantial injury to the public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 135-259 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-259
134:385

ARTICLE XXXI
Administration
§ 135-260. Zoning Administrator. [Amended 12-21-1992 by Ord. No.
229; 3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 410]
There is hereby established the office of Zoning Administrator. The
office shall be filled by the Town Manager or other person appointed
by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hampstead after receipt
of recommendations by the Commission. Any person appointed to the
office shall be qualified by education, experience or training to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any persons
so appointed shall maintain no interest in any matter which may be
construed by the Mayor and Council to be in conflict with the duties
and decisions of the office of Zoning Administrator.
A.
Power and duties. The Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Interpret the provisions of this chapter.
Enforce the provisions of this chapter and issue all necessary
notices or orders to insure compliance with said provisions.
(2)
Make any inspections required by this chapter or necessary to
enforce this chapter and engage the assistance of any person or
agency deemed necessary to make such inspection. This includes
the authority to make application for an administrative warrant
with the consent of the Mayor.
(3)
Make findings related to this chapter except for those expressly
reserved to the Planning and Zoning Commission or Board of
Zoning Appeals.
(4)
Identify and process violations of this chapter including the
issuance of municipal citations.
(5)
Maintain all official records of applications, certificates, fees,
inspections, notices, orders and citations.
(6)
Receive, file and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals all
applications for variances or other matters on which the Board is
required to review or approve under the provisions of this chapter.
(7)
Receive, file and forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission
all applications for subdivision, site plans or other matters which
the Commission is required to review or approve under the
provisions of this chapter.
(8)
Provide information to the public on matters relating to this
chapter.
(9)
B.
§ 135-260 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-261
134:387
§ 135-261. Issuance of permits and licenses.
All departments, officials and public employees of the Town of Hampstead
which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses
shall issue no permit or license for any use, building or purpose if the same
would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit or license
issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
§ 135-262. Zoning certificates. [Amended 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 296]
It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or to permit the use of any
building, structure or land or part thereof, hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or enlarged, wholly or partly, or for an owner
to build, change or convert any building or structure until a zoning
certificate shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator. A zoning
certificate shall be revocable, subject to continued compliance with all
requirements and conditions.
A.
All applications for zoning certificates shall be accompanied by plans
drawn approximately to scale, showing the dimensions and shape of the
lot to be built upon; the size and location of existing buildings, if any;
and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration.
Where no buildings are involved, the location of the present use and/
or proposed use to be made of the lot shall be shown. The application
and/or plans shall include such other information as reasonably may be
required by the Zoning Administrator to determine conformance with
and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. The plans shall be
retained in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
B.
The Zoning Administrator shall approve the issuance of a zoning
certificate only if the application complies with the requirements of this
chapter, and provided that such zoning certificate shall be conditioned,
where necessary, on the approval of the County Health Officer, state
and/or county roads agency, Planning and Zoning Commission or any
other agency concerned, and provided that the application is
accompanied by the required fee. The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of all zoning certificates, and copies shall be
furnished upon request to any person upon payment of the cost
therefor.
C.
If a zoning certificate is issued, such approval and issuance thereof
does not sanction variance from the terms of this chapter.
D.
Prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate authorizing the construction
of a building, all public works agreements required for the site must be
executed by the Town and the owner of the property.
E.
A zoning certificate shall become void one year after the date of
issuance if the construction or use for which the certificate was issued
has not been started.
F.
§ 135-261 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-263
134:388
§ 135-263. Notification of violation; order to discontinue.
If the Zoning Administrator shall find any of the provisions of this chapter
being violated, he shall notify, in writing by certified mail, the owner or
the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order
the discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal
of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural
changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; and shall,
unless compliance is met within a reasonable time, take any other action
authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of
its provisions.
§ 135-263 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-263
134:389

ARTICLE XXXII
Board of Appeals
§ 135-264. Creation; membership; terms; removal; vacancies;
compensation. [Amended 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 270; 10-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 277]
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Hampstead is hereby created and
designated as the "Board of Zoning Appeals." The number of members of
such Board shall be three, with one or more alternates. All members of
the Board and alternates shall reside within the corporate limits of the
Town of Hampstead. Their terms of office, succession, removal and filling
of vacancies, powers and duties shall be as provided in Article 66B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. The members and alternates shall serve with
such compensation as the Mayor and Council deem appropriate.
§ 135-265. Powers.
§ 135-266. Organization; meetings; records.
The Board shall be organized and its rules shall be amended, if necessary,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the Board
shall be held at the call of the Chairman, and at such other times as
The Board shall have the following powers:
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in regard to the enforcement of this chapter
or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
(1)
To hear and decide conditional uses to the chapter, upon which
such Board is required to pass.
(2)
To authorize, upon appeal in special cases, such variance from the
regulations and requirements listed in § 135-259 as will not be
contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions,
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unwarranted hardship and injustice and which will most nearly
accomplish the purpose and intent of the regulations of this
chapter. [Amended 10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 282]
(3)
A.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of law and this chapter and amendments
thereto, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made.
B.
The Board is also empowered to adopt and promulgate such rules and
regulations as it shall deem necessary in the conduct of its hearings and
the issuance of its decisions or testimony pertaining to its hearings.
C.
§ 135-264 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-266
134:391
the Board may determine. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting
Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
For assistance in reaching decisions relative to appeals, conditional uses
or variances, the Board may request testimony at its hearings for purposes
of securing technical aid or factual evidence from the Commission or any
county agency. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The
Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and shall keep records of all its
official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Board and shall
be a public record.
§ 135-267. Appeals. [Amended 6-27-1995 by Ord. No. 268]
An appeal to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, by any Town
of Hampstead taxpayer or by any officer, department, board, Commission
or bureau of the Town affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator
or any decision of the Commission. Such appeal shall be taken within
30 days after the decision by filing with the Zoning Administrator and
with the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The
Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
§ 135-268. Actions preparatory to hearing.
Upon the filing of an application before the Board, the following action shall
be taken preparatory to holding a hearing thereon:
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing of the application or
appeal.
A.
Notice of the hearing shall be advertised in two consecutive issues of a
newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Hampstead. The
first insertion shall appear in such newspaper at least 20 days prior to
such hearings.
B.
Property upon which the application or appeal is concerned shall be
posted conspicuously by a zoning notice no less in size than 22 inches
by 28 inches at least 14 days before the date of the hearing.
C.
Notification by certified mail shall be made to the appellant or
petitioner and to the owners of those properties and the addresses
certified on the notice of appeal by the appellant or petitioner as being
contiguous to the property with which the hearing is concerned.
D.
The Board, upon application in writing by any interested party filed
with the Zoning Administrator no less than 10 days prior to the date of
scheduled hearing, shall visit the specific property involved prior to the
hearing. The Board, in its discretion, may otherwise visit the specific
property prior to or after the hearing.
E.
§ 135-266 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-269
134:392
§ 135-269. Hearing.
The Board, following such action above, shall hold such hearing. At the
hearing, any party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or
attorney.
§ 135-270. Postponement of hearing.
§ 135-271. Continuance of hearing.
The Board may continue a hearing at another time and/or date once such
hearing has been started; however, the Board shall announce the date and
hour of continuance of such hearing while in session.
§ 135-272. Decisions; appeals. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No.
254; 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 298]
The Board shall render a decision within a reasonable time. Any person
or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the Board of
Appeals, or by a zoning action by the local legislative body or any taxpayer
or any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town of Hampstead may
appeal to the Circuit Court for Carroll County as provided for by state law.
The Court may affirm, reverse, vacate or modify the decision complained of
in the appeal to the extent and as provided for by state law.
§ 135-273. Reconsideration. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 254]
The Board may, pursuant to a written request filed within 30 days after
the date of the mailing of notice of any final decision, reconsider such
decision with respect to such grounds as may be stated in such request, and
if reconsideration is granted, the Board may receive additional testimony
to the extent it thinks proper or appropriate. The granting of any such
request is entirely discretionary with the Board, but shall not be granted
unless the Board finds that there is good cause to do so. The request
Requests for postponement of a scheduled hearing shall be filed in
writing with the Zoning Administrator not less than 10 days prior to the
date of hearing and shall be accompanied by a sum of money sufficient
to pay the cost of advertising the postponement and the rescheduled
hearing. The granting of such requests shall be at the discretion of the
Chairman of the Board.
A.
Requests for postponement filed later than 10 days prior to the date
of a scheduled hearing shall, in addition to the other requirements set
forth in Subsection A above, be supported by an affidavit of the party
making the request or of some other creditable person. The granting of
such request shall be at the discretion of the Board in cases of extreme
hardship or upon good cause shown.
B.
The Board may, upon its own initiative, postpone a scheduled hearing
at any time.
C.
§ 135-269 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-273
134:393
for reconsideration shall contain a certification that a copy of the request
has been served by regular mail, postage prepaid, upon each party who
appeared at the original hearing or the spokesman or attorney for such
party. Upon request of any Board member, an opportunity will be given
to the other parties to be heard or file a response to the request for
reconsideration. The Board may act upon such request with or without
hearing. No such request will be granted if an appeal to the Circuit Court is
pending from the original decision
§ 135-274. Limitations, guides and standards.
Where in these regulations certain powers are conferred upon the
Board or the approval of the Board is required before a permit may be
issued or the Board is called upon to decide certain issues, such Board
shall study the specific property involved, as well as the neighborhood,
and consider all testimony and data submitted and shall hear any
person desiring to speak for or against the issuance of the permit.
A.
However, the application for a permit shall not be approved where the
Board finds the proposed building, addition, extension of building or
use, sign, use or change of use would adversely affect the public health,
safety, security, morals or general welfare or would result in dangerous
traffic condition or would jeopardize the lives or property of people
living in the neighborhood.
B.
In deciding such matters, the Board shall give consideration among
other things, to the following:
The number of people residing or working in the immediate area
concerned.
(1)
(2) The orderly growth of a community.
(3) Traffic conditions and facilities.
The effect of such use upon the peaceful enjoyment of people in
their homes.
(4)
(5) The conservation of property values.
The effect of odors, dust, gas, smoke, fumes, vibrations, glare and
noise upon the use of surrounding property values.
(6)
(7) The most appropriate use of land and structure.
(8) Decisions of the courts.
(9) The purpose of these regulations as set forth herein.
The type and kind of structures in the vicinity where public
gatherings may be held, such as schools, churches and the like.
(10)
C.
§ 135-273 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-275
134:394
§ 135-275. Disapproval of application.
If the application is disapproved by the Board, thereafter, the Board shall
take no further action on another application for substantially the same
proposal on the same premises until after two years from the date of such
disapproval. If an appeal to the Board is perfected and the public hearing
date is set and duly advertised and properly posted and thereafter the
applicant withdraws the appeal, he shall be precluded from filing another
application for substantially the same proposal on the same premises for
one year.
§ 135-276. Fees. [Amended 6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 369]
A filing fee shall accompany each application for an appeal to the Board as
may be determined by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hampstead.
§ 135-277. (Reserved)
§ 135-278. (Reserved)
§ 135-279. (Reserved)
§ 135-275 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-279
134:395

ARTICLE XXXIII
Enforcement
§ 135-280. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 254; 11-11-2003 by Ord. No. 378]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a municipal infraction and, upon conviction, subject to a fine
not to exceed $500. Each and every day during which such illegal location,
erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance
or use or other violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 135-281. Other remedies.
In addition to other remedies, the Town Council, the Zoning Administrator
or any adjacent or neighboring property owner may institute injunction,
mandamus, abatement or other appropriate action or proceedings to
compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 135-280 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-281
134:397

ARTICLE XXXIV
Amendments
§ 135-282. Petition; hearing. [Amended 6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 369]
These regulations, restrictions and provisions and the boundaries of the
districts may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed by the Mayor and Council. Any person or officer,
department, board, Commission or bureau of the Town may petition for
such change or amendment; however, no such change or amendment shall
become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
§ 135-283. Referral to Planning Commission.
The Mayor and Council shall refer all proposed changes and amendments
to these regulations or proposed changes in a zoning district to the
Commission for report and recommendations.
§ 135-284. Factors to be considered by Mayor and Council.
Before acting upon proposed changes and amendments to these regulations
or changes in the zoning district boundary lines, the Mayor and Council
shall consider the following:
§ 135-285. Duties of Planning Commission.
The Commission shall study zoning, its development, application and
relation to public and private development and its relation to other phases
of the Master Plan for the development and may, from time to time, submit
amendments to these regulations or changes in the district boundaries
to the Mayor and Council. However, no such amendment or change shall
become effective until approved by the Mayor and Council, as required by
this article.46
A. The purpose of these regulations, as outlined in Article I.
B. The report and recommendations of the Commission.
Whether there have been any substantial changes in or near the area
covered by a proposed change in the district boundary lines.
C.
Any new phases of the Master Plan for the Town of Hampstead
developed since the adoption of these regulations.
D.
Whether it is clearly evident that there was an error or mistake in the
zoning of the subject property.
E.
Whether there has been a convincing demonstration that the proposed
rezoning would have been fully as appropriate and logical for the
subject property as was the zone in which it was placed.
F.
§ 135-282 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § 135-286
134:399
§ 135-286. (Reserved)
§ 135-287. Reconsideration of defeated proposals.
If a petition for a change in a zoning district boundary is disapproved by
the Mayor and Council thereafter, the Mayor and Council shall take no
further action on another petition for the same or substantially the same
proposal on the same premises until after 12 months from the date of the
last disapproval.
§ 135-288. Scale drawing to accompany applications for map
changes.
Every application for a change in zoning of district boundaries shall be
accompanied by a scale drawing, showing the existing and proposed
boundaries and such other information as may be needed to properly locate
and plat the amendment on the Official Zoning Map.
§ 135-289. Filing fee. [Amended 11-14-1995 by Ord. No. 283]
A nonrefundable filing fee of $125, plus $10 for each additional acre above
10 acres, shall accompany any application for change of zoning. Costs of
building and/or hearing room rental, court reporter and any transcription
as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator in hearing and/or in
considering the application or petition must be paid by the petitioner, and
as part of the application, the petitioner will be required to sign a contract
agreeing to pay these costs.
46.Editor's Note: Former § 135-172, Vote required for adoption, which previously followed
this section, was repealed 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 254.
§ 135-286 HAMPSTEAD CODE § 135-289
134:400
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
366 3-11-2003 Sidewalk obstructions
amendment
Ch. 116, Art. III
367 3-11-2003 Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 482
369 6-10-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
372 6-10-2003 Taxation amendment Ch. 122
Res. No.
2003-02
6-10-2003 Charter amendment §§ C5-7, C11-2
376 10-14-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
378 11-11-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
379 11-11-2003 Nuisances amendment Ch. 95
380 11-11-2003 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 47
381 12-9-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
383 1-13-2004 Snow emergencies
amendment
Ch. 127
395 7-13-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
396 7-13-2004 Sidewalk construction
amendment
Ch. 116, Art. III
397 7-13-2004 Water amendment Ch. 132
398 9-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
400 9-14-2004 Go-Karts amendment Ch. 76
402 12-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
403 12-14-2004 Subdivision amendment Ch. 119
407 12-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
Res. No.
2005-02
3-8-2005 Charter amendment § C7-19
408 3-8-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
409 3-8-2005 Zoning amendment Ch 135
§ 135-289 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § DL-1
134:401
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
410 3-8-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
411 4-14-2005 Utilities in public ways Ch. 116, Art. V
412 3-8-2005 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 116, Art. II
413 4-12-2005 Exemption from County
legislation amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III
414 4-12-2005 Zoning amendment;
repeal of stormwater
and grading and
drainage chapters
Chs. 113 and 114,
Editor's Note only;
Ch. 135
416 6-7-2005 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment
Ch. 73
419 10-11-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
421 10-11-2005 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment
Ch. 73
422 4-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
428 12-12-2006 Administrative
procedures for
enforcement of Town
Code
Ch. 30
429 12-12-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
430 2-13-2007 Exemption from county
legislation amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III
431 9-11-2007 Site plans; zoning
amendment
Chs. 120; 135
434 7-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
435 7-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
436 7-10-2007 Water amendment Ch. 132
437 11-13-2007 Disorderly houses Ch. 95, Art. II
438 11-13-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
439 11-13-2007 Rental housing
amendment
Ch. 80
440 2-12-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
441 2-12-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
442 2-12-2008 Open space; zoning
amendment
Chs. 121; 135
444 4-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
§ DL-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § DL-1
134:402
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
445 4-8-2008 Water amendment Ch. 132
448 7-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
449 7-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
451 10-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
452 10-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
453 10-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
454 10-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
455 10-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
456 10-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
457 10-14-2008 Littering amendment Ch. 88
458 5-14-2009 Water amendment Ch. 132
459 5-14-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
464 7-14-2009 Public gatherings Ch. 103
465 7-14-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
466 7-14-2009 Water amendment Ch. 132
468 8-11-2009 Water amendment Ch. 132
469 7-14-2009 Water amendment Ch. 132
471 10-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
474 11-10-2009 Streets and sidewalks:
construction and
obstructions amendment
Ch. 116, Art. III
475 4-13-2010 Streets and sidewalks:
connection to municipal
streets
Ch. 116, Art. VI
476 4-13-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
479 9-21-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
482 11-9-2010 Code of Ethics Ch. 13
486 3-8-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
487 2-8-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
488 5-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
491 7-12-2011 Trees amendment Ch. 124
492 8-9-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
493 11-8-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
Res. No.
2012-01
6-12-2012 Development impact
fees amendment
Ch. 134
§ DL-1 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § DL-1
134:403
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2012-02
6-12-2012 Water amendment Ch. 132
498 12-11-2012 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 119
499 3-12-2013 General obligation
bonds
NCM
Res. No.
2013-01
4-9-2013 General obligation bond NCM
Res. No.
2013-02
5-15-2013 Water amendment Ch. 132
Res. No.
2013-03
5-15-2013 Local Government
Health Cooperative
participation
NCM
500 6-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
501 6-11-2013 Tax rate 2013-2014 See Ch. 122, Art. I
502 6-11-2013 Budget 2013-2014 NCM
503 2-11-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
504 4-8-2014 Prohibited substances Ch. 70
Res. No.
2014-01
4-8-2014 Adoption of 2013 Carroll
County Hazard
Mitigation Plan
NCM
Res. No.
2014-02
5-13-2014 Water amendment Ch. 132
505 6-3-2014 Tax rate 2014-2015 See Ch. 122, Art. I
506 6-3-2014 Budget 2014-2015 NCM
507 10-14-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
Res. No.
2015-01
1-13-2015 General obligation bond NCM
508 6-9-2015 Tax rate 2015-2016 See Ch. 122, Art. I
509 6-9-2015 Budget 2015-2016 NCM
510 6-9-2015 Admissions and
amusements tax
amendment
Ch. 122, Art. II
Res. No.
2015-02
6-9-2015 Water amendment Ch. 132
511 7-14-2015 Exemption from county
legislation amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III
§ DL-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § DL-1
134:404
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
512 7-8-2015 Exemption from county
legislation amendment;
floodplain management
Ch. 1, Art. III; Ch. 49
Res. No.
2015-03
9-8-2015 Delegation of floodplain
management
enforcement to Carroll
County
NCM
Res. No.
2015-04
10-13-2015 Designation of Town as
a sustainable community
NCM
513 11-10-2015 General obligation
bonds
NCM
Res. No.
2015-05
11-10-2015 General obligation
bonds
NCM
514 12-8-2015 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 119
Res. No.
2015-06
12-8-2015 Supporting Town's
participation in the
Sustainable Maryland
Municipal Certification
Program
NCM
Res. No.
2015-07
12-8-2015 General obligation
bonds
NCM
Res. No.
2016-01
3-8-2016 Urging Governor and
General Assembly to
reinstate state-shared
revenue
NCM
515 6-14-2016 Tax rate 2016-2017 See Ch. 122, Art. I
516 6-14-2016 Budget 2016-2017 NCM
Res. No.
2016-02
6-14-2016 Water amendment Ch. 132
517 3-15-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
518 4-11-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
519 6-13-2017 Tax rate 2017-2018 See Ch. 122, Art. I
520 6-13-2017 Budget 2017-2018 NCM
Res. No.
2017-01
6-13-2017 Water amendment Ch. 132
Res. No.
PZC-2017-01
8-23-2017 Community
Comprehensive Plan
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES § DL-1
134:405
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2017-02
10-10-2017 Community
Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
NCM
521 2-13-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
522 1-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
523 2-13-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
Res. No.
2018-01
3-13-2018 General Obligation Bond NCM
524 4-10-2018 General Obligation Bond NCM
525 5-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
526 6-5-2018 Tax Levy NCM
527 6-5-2018 Budget NCM
528 6-5-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
Res. No.
2018-02
6-5-2018 Water Amendment Ch. 132
529 7-10-2018 Water Amendment Ch. 132
§ DL-1 HAMPSTEAD CODE § DL-1
134:406

Town of Hampstead
Accessory Uses, Buildings and Structures (Residential Districts)
Accessory building: A subordinate building located on the same lot as the principal building, and the use of which is customarily associated with and incidental to the use of the principal building. An accessory building shall not dominate a principal building in area, extent or purpose. An accessory building that is attached to and is an integrated part of (by location, materials and architectural design) a principal building shall be governed by the regulations of this chapter for principal buildings.
Accessory structure: A subordinate structure located on the same lot as the principal use, and the use of which is customarily associated with and incidental to the principal use.
Accessory use: A use incidental to and customarily associated with, the principal use of the lot.
1. Location - All accessory buildings and structures shall be located behind the front building line of the principal building. No detached accessory building or structure shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any principal building or to any other accessory building or structure.
2. Easements - No accessory building or structure except for utility panels or boxes or moveable and temporary buildings or structures like small storage sheds shall be erected in any easement area.
3. Height - The height of all accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the height limits of the zoning district in which they are located. Accessory building and structures may not exceed the height of any principal building.
4. Area - For residential development in residential districts, the maximum total area of all accessory buildings or structures on any lot shall not exceed fifty (50) percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or one thousand (1000) square feet, whichever is greater. The maximum total area of all accessory buildings or structures shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the rear yard.
5. Prohibitions - No accessory building may be used for human habitation. Except for a pool house, no accessory building or structure in a residential single family district shall contain full bathroom facilities. Full bathroom facilities shall mean provision of a sink, toilet, and bathtub or shower.
Town of Hampstead
Zoning Regulations - Accessory Uses in Residential Districts 8/31/15
6. Accessory uses
A. Garage, attached - An attached garage shall meet the setbacks for a principal building in any zoning district. An attached garage may not be placed in a septic replacement area. A building permit is required.
B. Garage, detached - A detached garage shall be located in the rear yard no closer than ten (10) feet from the side lot line and no closer than five (5) feet from the rear lot line. Where a garage is facing a road or street, the setback for garage doors facing the road or street must be at least twenty (20) feet to provide a parking space. A detached garage may not be placed in a septic replacement area. A building permit is required.
C. Carport - An attached carport shall be treated as a deck consistent with Chapter 135-257 of the Hampstead Town Code, to wit, a carport may extend twenty-five (25) percent into a side or rear yard setback. If a carport extends into any required setback, such carport must remain open on three sides. A detached carport shall be treated as a detached garage. A building permit is required.
D. Fences - Fences are only allowed to be constructed within the property lines – a property owner may not extend their fence beyond their surveyed property lines. A building permit is NOT required.
1. Privacy Fence - Privacy fences must be located behind the front building line and may not exceed six (6) feet in height. The Town recommends the fence be placed away from the property line so maintenance can be performed from both sides of the fence. Privacy fences must be constructed of wood or a wood-like material or a poly-vinyl material. The Planning & Zoning Commission must approve chain link or wire fences.
a. Primary front yard (corner lots) - The Planning and Zoning Commission may designate one front yard of any corner lot the primary front yard. Privacy fences are prohibited in any primary front yard. Decorative fences may be placed in any primary front yard in accordance with Section D.2. of these regulations.
b. Secondary front yard (corner lots) - Where the Planning and Zoning Commission has designated a primary front yard, all remaining front yards shall be considered secondary front yards. A privacy fence may be placed in a secondary front yard under the following conditions:
i. The privacy fence placed shall be placed a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the interior edge of any sidewalk or twenty feet (20’) from the interior edge of
Town of Hampstead
Zoning Regulations - Accessory Uses in Residential Districts 8/31/15
any curbline, whichever distance is greater. The area between the privacy fence and the sidewalk or curb shall be considered a "buffer yard." The Planning and Zoning Commission may require a larger buffer yard when deemed necessary.
ii. The property owner shall be required to present a landscaping plan for the buffer yard to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining all approved plantings. If the property owner removes a privacy fence from a secondary front yard, he or she may apply to the Commission for permission to remove the plantings.
2. Decorative Fence - Decorative fences may be located in any yard or setback area and may not exceed three (3) feet in height except for a 50 percent open fence which may be four (4) in height. (Modified January 11, 2004) Decorative fences shall be constructed of stone, wood, poly-vinyl, or iron.
E. Storage Shed (less than 100 square feet) - A storage shed less than 100 square feet in size may be located in a side or rear yard. The shed shall be at least three (3) feet from a side lot line and three (3) feet from a rear lot line. A building permit is NOT required for a storage shed less than 100 square feet.
F. Storage Shed (100 square feet or more) - A storage shed of 100 square feet or more shall be located only in the rear yard. The shed shall be at least ten (l0) feet from a side lot line and ten (l0) feet from a rear lot line. A shed may not be placed in a septic replacement area. A building permit is required for a storage shed of 100 square feet or more.
G. Swimming Pool - A private swimming pool may be located only in the rear yard. The pool, the decking, pool filter and pump, and storage buildings must be at least ten (10) feet from any side or rear property line. In the case of a corner lot or multiple frontage lot, the pool cannot be located in the street yard setback. A private swimming pool may not be placed in a septic replacement area. These regulations do not apply to temporary (e.g. inflatable) swimming pools that are removed seasonally. A building permit is required for a non-temporary swimming pool.
H. Greenhouse or gazebo - A freestanding greenhouse or gazebo may be located only in the rear yard. The structure shall be at least ten (10) feet from a side lot line and five (5) feet from a rear lot line. A building permit is required.
I. Ball Courts - Ball courts are not permitted on lots of less than one (1) acre. The court shall be at least ten (10) feet from a side lot line and five (5) feet from a rear lot line. Any fence around the court may be over six (6) feet in height, provided it is not within any required minimum yard setback for the principal building in a residential district. A building permit is NOT required.
Town of Hampstead
Zoning Regulations - Accessory Uses in Residential Districts 8/31/15
J. Solar energy systems - Solar energy systems are allowed as an accessory use in all zoning districts. Passive or building-integrated solar systems are exempt from the requirements of this section and shall be regulated like any other building element or appurtenance. The minimum lot size for a ground-mounted solar energy system is 10,000 square feet. In residential districts, ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be limited to the rear yard. Ground-mounted solar energy systems and all appurtenant equipment shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from any lot line and may not be placed in any easement area. Roof-mounted solar collectors shall be flush-mounted on pitched roofs. Solar collectors may be bracket-mounted on flat roofs. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the rear yard. All solar energy systems shall use colors that blend with the color of the roof of other structure. Reflection angles from collector surfaces shall be oriented away from neighboring windows. Where necessary, screening may be required to reduce glare. All electrical feeder lines shall be installed underground within the interior of the parcel. A building permit is required.
Exceptions - Any exception to these regulations shall only be granted by the Hampstead Board of Zoning Appeals under the determination standard of a zoning variance. The property owner shall bear all costs of a hearing to grant such an exception.
Note: No deck, porch, carport, or other projection shall be allowed in any easement area.
K. Decks – If attached to or directly adjoining the main building, a one-story open deck without a roof may extend into the required rear yard not more than 50% of the minimum required yard depth (e.g., if a rear yard is 40 feet from the main building to the rear property line, a deck may extend out into the yard a maximum of 20 feet). A building permit is required.
Zoning Regulations - Accessory Uses in Residential Districts 8/31/15