Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions regarding penalties — See
§§ C2-14D, C3-15, C8-2, C8-3, C8-5A, C8-7,
C8-9, C8-10 and C11-5.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Indian Head, of a
general and permanent nature, adopted by the Town Council of the Town
of Indian Head, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1
through 148, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the Town of Indian Head," hereinafter known and referred to as
the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance of the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after March 24, 1991.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Town of
Indian Head by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town, and such certified
copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the Town to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of Indian Head" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Town of Indian Head, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required a copy of this adopting ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk or inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of
this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Town Council,
who may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of
Indian Head to be misrepresented thereby. Any violation of this section shall
be punishable as a misdemeanor, the penalty for which shall be a fine not to
exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
§ 1-6 § 1-11
1:4
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to August 1, 1990.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
E.
Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
F.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Town's indebtedness.
G.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-15. Repealer.
All sections or parts of sections of the Code of Municipal Ordinances or
parts of ordinances and resolutions or parts of resolutions in conflict
herewith be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 1-15.1. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect on the 24th day of March
1991.
Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries
or compensation of officers and employees, establishing workdays and
working hours of certain employees and providing for holidays and
vacations for employees and keeping of employment records.
K.
Any legislation of the Town of Indian Head pertaining to personnel
matters and policies.
L.
Any legislation of the Town of Indian Head pertaining to signs, zoning
or subdivision of land.
M.
Any ordinance or legislation of the Town of Indian Head dealing with
the Town Financial Plan and Budget.
N.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Town Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
A.
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
B.
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-14B, the following sections were added or amended:
§§ 1-32A, 1-33, 3-3, 3-6, 3-15, 3-17A and B(2), 3-18, 3-22, 3-24A, 3-25B, 3-27, 3-28, 3-29,
8-1, 8-2, 8-4, 8-6, 12-17, 15-1, 55-2, 65-7A(2), 65-8, 70-1, 70-2, 70-3, 70-4, 70-5, 70-6,
70-7A and B, 70-9, 70-10, 70-11, 70-13A and B(4)(d), 70-14A, 70-16, 70-17, 70-18, 70-19B
and D, 70-20, 70-23, 70-25D, 70-28, 70-29A, 70-31A, 70-34B and C, 70-36B, 70-37A, D and
E, 70-39, 70-40, 70-41, 70-43A, 74-1, 74-3, 74-4, 74-9, 74-20A, 74-24, 74-30, 78-2C, 81-2,
96-2, 96-5, 99-6, 119-2, 119-5, 119-6A, 119-9, 126-1, 132-4B, 132-5, 140-8, 140-14 and
140-17. The following chapters or articles were amended: Art. IV of Ch. 1, Art. V of Ch. 3,
Art. I of Ch. 43, Ch. 116, Ch. 135 and Art IV of Ch. 140. The following sections or articles
were deleted: §§ 1-103, Subsection 4; 1-107; 1-108; 2-205; 6-705; 6-706; 4-1001 and
4-1002 and Art 6 of Ch. IX of the 1978 Code, and § 5 of Ord. No. 6-1-88. A complete
description of these changes is on file in the Town Hall.
§ 1-13 § 1-15.2
1:6
§ 1-15.2. Deposit of copies with state agencies.
Pursuant to § 18 of Art. 23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland, a copy
of the Code of the Town of Indian Head containing the Charter shall be
deposited with the required state agencies.
§ 1-15.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15.2
1:7

ARTICLE II
Charter Codification
[Adopted 3-4-1991 by Res. No. 2-1-91]
§ 1-16. Reorganization, revision and readoption of Town Charter.
In conjunction with the codification of the Town's legislation, the Charter
of the Town of Indian Head is hereby reorganized, revised and readopted
to read as set forth in the volume entitled the "Code of the Town of Indian
Head, Maryland," particularly the 1990 edition thereof, a copy of said
Charter, as so reorganized and revised, being attached hereto and made a
part hereof.
§ 1-17. Interpretation of provisions.
The provisions of the Charter adopted hereby, insofar as they are
substantively the same as the Charter as it was in force immediately prior
to the enactment of the Charter by this resolution, are intended as a
continuation of such Charter and not as a new enactment, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior Charter provisions, whether they are original provisions or
amendatory provisions. All such provisions are hereby continued in full
force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Town
Council of the Town of Indian Head, and it is the intention of said Council
that each such provision contained within the Charter is hereby reaffirmed
as it appears in the revised Charter adopted pursuant to § 1-16 above.
§ 1-18. Incorporation of provisions into Town Code.
The provisions of this resolution are hereby made Article II of Chapter 1
of the Code of the Town of Indian Head, such resolution to be entitled
"Article II, Charter Codification," and the sections of this resolution shall be
numbered §§ 1-16 through 1-30, inclusive.
§ 1-19. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this resolution
or of any provision included in the Town Charter, now or through
supplementation, shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article or part thereof directly involved in
the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. It is
hereby declared to be the intent of the Town Council that this resolution
and the Charter would have been adopted if such invalid clause, sentence,
paragraph, section, article or part had not been included therein.
§ 1-20. When effective.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:9
§ 1-21. Repealer.
All resolutions or parts of resolutions in conflict herewith be and the same
are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 1-22. Effective date.
This resolution shall be in full force and effect on the 26th day of March
1991.
§ 1-23. (Reserved)
§ 1-24. (Reserved)
§ 1-25. (Reserved)
§ 1-26. (Reserved)
The amendment proposed in this resolution shall become and be
considered a part of the Charter of the Town of Indian Head according
to the terms of the amendment, in all respects to be effective and
observed as such, upon the 50th day after the adoption of this
resolution, unless on or before the 40th day after such adoption there
shall be presented a proper petition for referendum as permitted by
law.
A.
The Mayor of the Town of Indian Head be and he is hereby specifically
directed to post a complete and exact copy of this resolution at the
Town Hall or other main municipal building or public place in Indian
Head for a period of 40 days following its adoption and to cause a fair
summary of the proposed amendment to be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town not less than four times, at weekly
intervals, within a period of at least 40 days after said adoption.
B.
As soon as the Charter amendment hereby proposed shall become
effective either as herein provided or following a referendum, the
Mayor of the Town of Indian Head shall send separately, by registered
mail, to the Secretary of State of Maryland, the Department of
Legislative Reference, the Hall of Records Commission and the State
Library the following information concerning the Charter amendment:
(1) The complete text, as approved, of the amendment.
The date of the referendum election, if any, held with respect
hereto.
(2)
The number of votes cast for and against the question of this
amendment, whether by the Council or in a referendum.
(3)
(4) The effective date of this Charter amendment.
C.
§ 1-20 § 1-27
1:10
§ 1-27. (Reserved)
§ 1-28. (Reserved)
§ 1-29. (Reserved)
§ 1-30. (Reserved)
§ 1-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-30
1:11

ARTICLE III
Rules Applicable to Entire Code
[Adopted as Ch. 1 of the 1978 Code]
§ 1-31. Rules of construction.
In the construction of the ordinances of the Town of Indian Head,
"Town" shall mean the Town of Indian Head.
A.
The following rules shall be observed unless such construction would
be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the ordinance in question:
General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and
understood according to the common and approved usage of the
language; but technical words and phrases and such others as
may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law
shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and
appropriate meaning.
(1)
Gender; singular and plural. Every word in any ordinance
importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to
females as well as males; and every word importing the singular
number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or
things as well as to one person or thing; and every word importing
the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one person
or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(2)
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms,
corporations, partnerships, companies or organizations or
voluntary associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly
inapplicable.
(3)
Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the
future, when applicable.
(4)
Shall have been. The words "shall have been" include past and
future cases.
(5)
(6) Shall. The word "shall" indicates a mandatory directive.
Heretofore and hereafter. Whenever the word "heretofore" occurs
in any ordinance, it shall be construed to mean any time previous
to the day when such ordinance shall take effect; and whenever
the word "hereafter" occurs, it shall be construed to mean the time
after the ordinance containing such word shall take effect.
(7)
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to
three or more Town officers or other persons shall be construed as
giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons,
unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the
authority.
(8)
B.
§ 1-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-31
1:13
§ 1-32. Standard format for ordinances.
The following format shall be utilized in the preparation of ordinances for
the Town:
Acts by agents. When an ordinance requires an act to be done
which may, by law, as well be done by an agent as by the principal,
such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when
done by an authorized agent.
(9)
Reasonable time. In all cases where any ordinance shall require
any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to
be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean
such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of
such duty or compliance with such notice.
(10)
Time: how computed. The time within which an act is to be done as
provided in any ordinance or in any order issued pursuant to any
ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last, except that if the last is Sunday,
it shall be excluded; and when any such time is expressed in hours,
the whole of Sunday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall
be excluded.
(11)
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days; but
publication in a newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated
to be for a stated number of weeks shall be construed to mean
one insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each
day of the week or for more than one day in each week; and all
publications heretofore made in accordance with the terms of this
subsection are hereby validated.
(12)
The rules of construction set forth in this article shall not be applied
to any ordinance which shall contain any express provision excluding
such construction or when the subject matter of such ordinance may be
repugnant thereto.
C.
The ordinance number shall be composed of month, sequential
ordinance number and year. Amendments to existing ordinances will
receive new numbers. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91]
A.
B. The title.
The introductory paragraph shall establish the rationale why the
ordinance is being created.2
C.
D. Articles and sections shall be used to describe the reason and rationale.
The rules of construction specified in § 1-31B shall be observed in the
construction of these ordinances.
E.
2. Editor's Note: Former Subdivision 4, dealing with the assignment of chapter numbers,
which immediately followed this subsections, was repealed 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91.
§ 1-31 § 1-32
1:14
§ 1-33. Conflicting ordinances. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
2-1-91]
If the provisions of different chapters or articles of the Code of General
Ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each
chapter or article shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of
the subject matter of such chapter or article.
§ 1-34. When ordinances shall take effect.
All ordinances passed by the Town Council, except when otherwise
specifically provided, shall take effect and be in force from and after their
publication on the 20th day after the second reading.
§ 1-35. Effect of repeal of ordinance.
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall
be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former
ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided.3
The chapter will become a part of the Code of Ordinances upon the
adoption of the ordinance.
F.
3. Editor's Note: Former Secs. 1-107, Penalty, and 1-108, Continuing violation, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91.
§ 1-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-35
1:15

ARTICLE IV
General Penalty
[Adopted as Ch. XVII of the 1978 Code; amended in its entirety
3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91]
§ 1-36. Misdemeanors.
§ 1-37. Municipal infractions.
Unless otherwise provided for in § 1-37 or in any other section of
this Code, any person, corporation, firm, partnership or association
violating any chapter or article or section or part thereof of the
ordinances of the Town of Indian Head shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 and imprisonment in
the county jail of Charles County for not more than six months or until
such time as the fine and costs are paid.
A.
Each day's violation of any chapter, article, section or part thereof shall
constitute a separate offense, and penalties may be exacted for each
day's violation.
B.
Designation of municipal infractions.
A "municipal infraction" is any violation of any provision of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head, hereinafter referred to as "this
Code," which violation has been specifically declared by the Town
Council of Indian Head to be a municipal infraction.
(1)
For purposes of this Code, a municipal infraction is a civil offense,
and a finding of guilt thereof is not a criminal conviction for any
purpose, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily
imposed by a criminal conviction.
(2)
A.
Fines. [Amended 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 2-1-04]
The Town Council may, by ordinance, declare which violations shall
constitute municipal infractions and may set specific fines which
may be imposed for such infractions.
(1)
The fines set by the Town Council for municipal infractions shall be
specific amounts not to exceed $1,000 for each initial violation and
$1,000 for each day thereafter that the violation continues.
(2)
If the Town Council does not establish a specific fine for a
particular infraction, the fine for that infraction shall be $125 for
each initial violation and $125 for each day thereafter that the
violation continues.
(3)
Unless otherwise provided, each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.
(4)
B.
C. Issuance of citation.
§ 1-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-37
1:17
Authorized code enforcement officials may deliver a citation to any
person alleged to be committing or to have committed a municipal
infraction. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the Town and
shall bear the certification of the issuing official attesting to the
truth of the matter set forth in the citation.
(1)
The citation shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the person charged.
(b) The nature of the municipal infraction.
(c) The code or ordinance provision being violated.
The location and time that the municipal infraction occurred or
was observed.
(d)
(e) The amount of the fine assessed for the municipal infraction.
The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid to
the Town.
(f)
The right of the recipient of the citation to elect to stand trial
for the municipal infraction.
(g)
The effect of failing to pay the assessed fine or to demand a
trial within the prescribed time.
(h)
(2)
Payment of fine. Payment of the fine imposed by a citation for a
municipal infraction shall be paid to the Town Treasurer, Town Hall,
Indian Head, Maryland, within 20 calendar days from receipt of the
citation, unless there is an election to stand trial no later than 15 days
from the receipt of the citation.
D.
Election to stand trial.
A person receiving a citation for a municipal infraction may elect
to stand trial for the offense by notifying the Town of said person's
intention to stand trial for the municipal infraction. The notice shall
be given, in writing, at least five days prior to the date of payment,
as set forth in the citation.
(1)
Upon receipt of a timely notice of intention to stand trial, the Town
shall forward to the District Court having venue a copy of the notice
from the person who received the citation, indicating the intention
to stand trial. Upon receipt of the citation, the District Court shall
schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date.
(2)
E.
Failure to pay fine or elect to stand trial.
If a person receiving a citation for a municipal infraction fails to
pay the fine imposed for the infraction by the date of payment set
forth on the citation and fails to timely file a notice of intention
to stand trial for the offense, a formal notice shall be sent to the
(1)
F.
§ 1-37 § 1-37
1:18
offender's last known address, demanding payment. In the event
that the citation has not been satisfied within 15 days of the date of
this notice, the offender shall be obligated to pay a sum equivalent
to twice the amount of the original penalty amount. In no case shall
the amount exceed the maximum established in Subsection B(2).
If, after 35 days from the issuance of the notice, the citation has
not been satisfied, the Town may request adjudication of the case
through the District Court. The District Court shall thereupon
promptly schedule the case for trial and summons the defendant
(the offender) to appear.
(2)
Court proceedings.
Court proceedings for a municipal infraction shall be governed
by the provisions of Article 23A, § 3, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, as amended, relating to municipal infractions, said
provisions being hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth herein.
(1)
Any person found by the District Court to have committed a
municipal infraction shall be required to pay the fine imposed by
the citation, including any additional fine imposed by Subsection
F hereof. Such person shall also be liable for the cost of the court
proceedings.
(2)
All fines, penalties or forfeitures collected by the District Court for
municipal infractions shall be remitted to the Town.
(3)
G.
Enforcement officer. Unless expressly stated to the contrary in an
ordinance carrying a municipal infraction penalty, the Indian Head
Town Manager and the Charles County Sheriff's Department shall be
responsible for the enforcement of municipal infractions.
H.
Conflict with Article 23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland. In any
case where a provision of this article conflicts with a mandatory
provision of Article 23A, § 3, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as
amended, the provisions of Article 23A shall prevail and shall be
incorporated herein as if expressly set forth.
I.
Enumeration of Code provisions to which this section is applicable.
(1) Chapter 74, Health and Sanitation.
Chapter 78, Property Maintenance and Housing Standards.
[Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-5-06]
(2)
(3) Chapter 132, Vehicles, Abandoned.
Chapter 43, Building Construction, Article IV, Electrical Code.
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-1-06]
(4)
J.
§ 1-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-37
1:19
Chapter 43, Building Construction, Article VI, Mechanical Code.
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-2-06]
(5)
Chapter 43, Building Construction, Article I, Building Code.
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-3-06]
(6)
Chapter 43, Building Construction, Article III, One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code. [Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-4-06]
(7)
Chapter 43, Building Construction, Article V, Plumbing Code.
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-6-06]
(8)
Chapter 43, Building Construction, Article IX, Fuel Gas Code.
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-7-06]
(9)
Chapter 43, Building Construction, Article VIII, Energy
Conservation Code. [Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-8-06]
(10)
Chapter 43, Building Construction, Article VII, Existing Building
Code. [Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-9-06]
(11)
Chapter 43, Building Construction, Article X, Fire Code. [Added
11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-10-06]
(12)
§ 1-37 § 1-37
1:20
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative provisions in Charter — See
Arts. II, III, IV, V and VI and § C11-1.
Committees — See Ch. 8.
Elections — See Ch. 12.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 15.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 27.
§ 1-37 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 1-37
3:21

ARTICLE I
Council Organization and Procedure
§ 3-1. Regular and special meetings.
§ 3-2. Agenda.
All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, documents
or other matters to be submitted to the Council shall, at least 48 business
hours prior to each Council meeting, be delivered to the Town Manager,
whereupon the Town Manager shall immediately arrange a list of such
matters according to the order of business and furnish each member of the
Council with a copy of the same prior to the Council meeting and as far in
advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit.
§ 3-3. Presiding officer.4
The newly elected Council shall meet on the first Monday following its
election for the purpose of organization, after which the Council shall
meet regularly at such time as may be prescribed by its rules, but not
less frequently than once each month.
A.
All open meetings shall be held in a public place within the town, save
those times when extraordinary citizen attendance requires a larger
meeting facility, which, with the consent of the majority of the Council,
may be located outside the town. Any such change in location shall
require reasonable advance public notice.
B.
Special meetings shall be called at the request of the Mayor or a
majority of the Council members. The Mayor shall call special meetings
of the Council whenever, in his opinion, the public business may require
or at the express request of any member of the council.
C.
All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, and the rules
of the Council shall provide that residents of the town shall have a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting in regard to any
municipal question. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to
prevent any such body from holding an executive session from which
the public is excluded, but no ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation
shall be finally adopted at such an executive session.
D.
The presiding officer of the Council shall be the Mayor of the Council.
After each election and following his designation as Mayor in
accordance with the procedures of the Indian Head Town Charter, the
Mayor shall assume the Chair of the presiding officer. The presiding
officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special
meetings of the Council. He shall state every question coming before
the Council, announce the decision of the Council on all subjects and
decide all questions of order; subject, however, to an appeal to the
A.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-1 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-3
3:23
§ 3-4. Roll call.
Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the Clerk-Treasurer or
his deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present
shall be entered in the minutes.
§ 3-5. Quorum.
A majority of all the members elected to the Council shall constitute a
quorum at any regular or special meeting of the Council.
§ 3-6. Order of business.5
Council, in which event a majority vote of the Council shall govern and
conclusively determine such questions of order. He shall vote in the
case of a tie, his name being called last.
The Mayor shall take the Chair precisely at the hour appointed for the
meeting and shall immediately call the Council to order. In the absence
of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall call the Council to order. Upon
the arrival of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall immediately relinquish
the Chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the
Council.
B.
All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. Promptly at
the hour set on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the
Council, the Clerk-Treasurer, the Town Manager and the Mayor shall
take their regular stations in the Council Chambers, and the business
of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the
following order:
(1) Roll call.
(2) Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
(3) Petitions, remonstrances and communications.
(4) Introduction and adoption of resolutions and ordinances.
(5) Report of officers, boards and committees.
(6) Unfinished business.
(7) New business.
(8) Miscellaneous.
(9) Adjournment.
A.
Executive sessions may be held for those matters permitted under state
law.
B.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-3 § 3-7
3:24
§ 3-7. Posting minutes.
Unless a reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is requested by a
member of the Council, such minutes may be approved without reading if
the Clerk-Treasurer has previously posted a copy thereof in a public place.
§ 3-8. Rules of debate.
§ 3-9. Addressing Council.
Presiding officer. The Mayor or such other member of the Council as
may be presiding may move, second and debate from the Chair, subject
only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all
members and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges
of a Councilman by reason of his acting as presiding officer.
A.
Getting the floor; improper references to be avoided. Every member
desiring to speak shall address the Chair and, upon recognition by the
presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate,
avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.
B.
Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted
when speaking, unless it is to call him to order or as herein otherwise
provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he shall cease
speaking until the question of order is determined and, if in order, he
shall be permitted to proceed.
C.
Privilege of closing debate. The Councilman moving the adoption of an
ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.
D.
Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the
Council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may
be made either immediately during the same session or at a recessed
or adjourned session thereof. Such motion must be made by one of
the prevailing side but may be seconded by any member and may be
made at any time and have precedence over all other motions or while
a member has the floor; it shall be debatable. Nothing herein shall
be construed to prevent any member of the Council from making or
remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the
Council.
E.
Remarks of Councilman; when entered in minutes. A Councilman may
request, through the presiding officer, the privilege of having an
abstract of his statement on any subject under consideration by the
Council entered in the minutes. If the Council consents thereto, such
statement shall be entered in the minutes.
F.
Synopsis of debate; when entered in minutes. The Clerk-Treasurer may
be directed by the presiding officer, with consent of the Council, to
enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question
coming regularly before the Council.
G.
§ 3-7 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-9
3:25
§ 3-10. Decorum.
Any person desiring to address the Council shall first secure the
permission of the presiding officer to do so; provided, however, that
under the following headings of business, unless the presiding officer
rules otherwise, any qualified person may address the Council without
securing such prior permission.
Written communications. Interested parties or their authorized
representatives may address the Council by written
communications in regard to matters then under discussion.
(1)
Oral communications. Taxpayers or residents of the town and their
authorized legal representatives may address the Council by oral
communications on any matter concerning the town business or
any matter over which the Council has control; provided, however,
that preference shall be given to those persons who may have
notified the Clerk-Treasurer in advance of their desire to speak, in
order that the same may appear on the agenda of the Council.
(2)
Reading of protests, etc. Interested persons or their authorized
representatives may address the Council by reading of protests or
communications relating to zoning, sewer and street proceedings,
hearings on protests, appeals and petitions or similar matters in
regard to matters then under consideration.
(3)
A.
After a motion is made by the Council, no person shall address the
Council without first securing the permission of the presiding officer so
to do.
B.
Each person addressing the Council shall give his name and address
in an audible tone of voice for the records and, unless further time
is granted by the Council, shall limit his address to 10 minutes. All
remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body and not to any
member thereof. No person, other than the Council and the person
having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either
directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission of
the presiding officer. No question shall be asked a Councilman except
through the presiding officer.
C.
By Council members. While the Council is in session, the members
must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by
conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the
peace of the Council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse
to obey the orders of the Council or its presiding officer, except as
otherwise herein provided.
A.
By persons. Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous
remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council
shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further
B.
§ 3-9 § 3-10
3:26
§ 3-11. Persons authorized to be at Council table.
No person, except town officers or their representatives, shall be permitted
to be seated at the Council table, unless granted permission to do so by the
presiding officer.
§ 3-12. Special committees.
All special committees shall be appointed by the Mayor and the Council.
§ 3-13. Filing of protests.
Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his dissent from or
protest against any action of the Council entered in the minutes.
§ 3-14. Ordinances, resolutions, motions and contracts.
audience before the Council, unless permission to continue is granted
by a majority vote of the Council.
Enforcement of decorum. The Chief of Police, or such member or
members of the Police Department as he may designate, shall be
Sergeant at Arms of the Council meetings. He, or they, shall carry
out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the
purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meeting.
Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the
Sergeant at Arms to place any person who violates the order and
decorum of the meeting under arrest and cause him to be prosecuted
under the provisions of this Code, the complaint to be signed by the
presiding officer.
C.
Introducing for passage or approval.
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring
action by the Council must be introduced and sponsored by a
member of the Council, except that the Town Manager may present
ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the
Council, and any Councilman may assume sponsorship thereof by
moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be
adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered.
(1)
All ordinances shall have two separate readings, but the second
reading shall never be had on the same day, except in the case of
emergency.
(2)
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall
be clearly expressed in its title. No ordinance or section thereof
shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains
the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed. When
practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to
existing ordinances or sections thereof.
(3)
A.
§ 3-10 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-14
3:27
§ 3-15. Filing documents with Clerk-Treasurer.6
All reports and resolutions and contracts defined in § 3-2 shall be filed with
the Clerk-Treasurer and entered in the minutes.
§ 3-16. Adjournment.
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided by a
majority of the Council.
No ordinance shall be passed at the meeting at which it is introduced.
At any regular or special meeting of the Council held not less than
six nor more than 60 days after the meeting at which an ordinance
was introduced, it shall be passed or passed as amended or rejected
or its consideration referred to some specified future date. In cases
of emergency, the above requirements may be suspended by the
affirmative votes of a majority of members of the Council. Every
ordinance, unless it is passed as an emergency ordinance, shall become
effective at the expiration of 20 calendar days following approval by the
Council. A fair summary of each ordinance shall be published within
two weeks of its introduction in a newspaper or newspapers having
general circulation in the municipality. An emergency ordinance shall
become effective on the date specified in the ordinance.
B.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-14 § 3-16
3:28
ARTICLE II
General Organization
§ 3-17. Vesting of executive and legislative powers.
The legislative and executive powers of the Town of Indian Head shall be
vested in the Council, such term to include the Mayor and two Councilmen
and the Town Manager, respectively.
Powers of the Council enumerated.7
General powers. The Council shall have the power to pass all
such ordinances not contrary to the Constitution and laws of the
State of Maryland, the Town Charter or this Code, as it may deem
necessary for the good government of the town; for the protection
and preservation of the town's property, rights and privileges; for
the preservation of peace and good order; for securing persons
and property from violence, danger or destruction; and for the
protection and promotion of the health, safety, comfort,
convenience, welfare and happiness of the residents of and visitors
in the town.
(1)
Specific powers. The Council shall have, in addition, the power to
pass ordinances not contrary to the laws and Constitution of this
state, for the specific purposes outlined in Article 23B, § 22, of the
Annotated Code of Maryland and § C2-12 of the Town Charter.
(2)
A.
Powers and duties of Town Manager.
Generally. The Town Manager shall see that the ordinances of the
town are faithfully executed and shall be the chief executive officer
and the head of the administrative branch of the town government.
(1)
Appointments and removal of employees and heads of offices,
departments and agencies. The Town Manager, after consultation
with the Council, shall appoint the heads of all offices, departments
and agencies of the town government as established by this Code
or by ordinance. All office, department and agency heads shall
serve at the pleasure of the Town Manager. All subordinate officers
and employees of the offices, departments and agencies of the town
government shall be appointed and removed by the Town Manager
in accordance with rules and regulations in any merit system which
may be adopted by the Council.8
(2)
Reports and recommendations to Council. The Town Manager shall
make reports to the Council on the condition of municipal affairs
and make such recommendations as he deems proper for the public
good and the welfare of the town.
(3)
B.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-17 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-17
3:29
§ 3-18. Subdivision of government.9
Supervision of financial administration of government. The Town
Manager shall prepare or have prepared annually a budget and
submit it to the Council. He shall supervise the administration
of the budget as adopted by the Council. He shall supervise the
disbursement of all moneys and have control over all expenditures
to assure that budget appropriations are not exceeded.
(4)
Other powers and duties. The Town Manager shall have such other
powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the
Town Charter or as may be required of him by the Council, not
inconsistent with the Town Charter.
(5)
The general government operations of the town shall be subdivided
for administrative purposes in the following manner, each subdivision
being designated a department and placed under the direct supervision
of a department head by the Town Manager.
A.
The several departments shall be as follows:
The Department of Records and Finance. The head of the
Department of Records and Finance shall be the Clerk-Treasurer,
and said Department shall be responsible for the following
operations and such other operations as may hereinafter be
assigned by the Town Council and/or the Town Manager:
(a) All of the several financial affairs and operations of the town.
Assistance with the preparation of the annual operating and
capital budgets.
(b)
Assistance with the preparation of the annual financial (audit)
report.
(c)
Preparation of budget comparison as the Town Council or Town
Manager requires.
(d)
(e) All purchases of goods and services.
(f) Maintenance of all town records.
(1)
The Department of Code Enforcement. The head of the Department
of Code Enforcement shall be the Code Enforcement Officer, and
said Department shall be responsible for the following operations
and such other operations as may hereinafter be assigned by the
Town Manager, after consultation with the Town Council:
Enforcement of all codes, rules and regulations pertaining to
health, sanitation, building, housing, subdivision of land,
grading and sediment control and plumbing.
(a)
(2)
B.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-17 § 3-18
3:30
(b) The issuance of all building permits.
Performance of all inspections that the Town Manager may
require.
(c)
(d) Inspection of all in-house capital projects.
(e) Supervision and inspection of all contracted capital projects.
The Department of Public Works. The head of the Department of
Public Works shall be the Public Works Superintendent, and said
Department shall be responsible for the following operations and
such other operations as may hereinafter be assigned by the Town
Manager, after consultation with the Town Council:
(a) Street maintenance.
Care and maintenance of all public buildings and grounds, save
the maintenance of water and sewer equipment.
(b)
Operation of the central maintenance garage and town storage
building and supervision of storage and disbursement of all
equipment and supplies situated therein.
(c)
(d) Maintenance of all Public Works equipment.
(e) Supervision of all in-house capital projects.
Assistance to Engineer-Inspector with supervision and
inspections of noncontracted capital projects requiring use of
rental equipment.
(f)
Supervision of in-house storm drainage construction and
maintenance.
(g)
Supervision of improvements to all public parks and
playgrounds.
(h)
(3)
The Department of Water and Wastewater. The head of the
Department of Water and Wastewater shall be the Water and
Wastewater Superintendent, and said Department shall be
responsible for the following operations and such other operations
as may hereinafter be assigned by the Town Manager, after
consultation with the Town Council:
Operations and maintenance of water treatment plants and
sewage treatment plants.
(a)
(b) Maintenance and care of all equipment thereof.
Maintenance and repair of water and sewer distribution
system.
(c)
(d) Supervision and control of town laboratory.
(4)
§ 3-18 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-19
3:31
§ 3-19. Applicability of Article.
The provisions of this Article shall not be construed in such a manner as
would render them in conflict with the provisions of the Town Charter.
§ 3-20. Prerogative of Council.
The Town Council reserves the right to add or abolish departments within
the plan of organization as may be necessary to carry forth the intent and
purpose of this Article.10
10.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 2-205, Office of the Town Attorney, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91; see Ch.
1, General Provision, Art. I.
§ 3-19 § 3-20
3:32
ARTICLE III
Purchasing and Contracts
§ 3-21. Rules and regulations. [Added 2-6-1995 by Ord. No.
1-1-9511]
Policy. It shall be the policy of the town to assure that purchases and
contracts for services are made at the best possible cost consistent with
the requirements of the town.
A.
Local vendors. Purchases and contracts for services from vendors
whose principal place of business is located in the Town of Indian Head
are considered in the best interest of the town, provided that cost,
quality, specifications and delivery time are not sacrificed. If purchases
and contracts for services cannot be secured from vendors whose
principal place of business is located in the Town of Indian Head, it
then shall be considered in the town's best interest to purchase from or
contract with a vendor whose principal place of business is located in
Charles County, provided that cost, quality, specifications and delivery
time are not sacrificed. If purchases and contracts cannot be secured
from vendors whose principal place of business is located in the Town
of Indian Head or Charles County, the town may purchase from or
contract with any vendor without regard to the location of the principal
place of business of the vendor.
B.
Cooperative purchases. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section,
the town may undertake programs involving joint or cooperative
purchases with other governmental jurisdictions, including the State of
Maryland and Charles County, and enter into joint pooling agreements
with public entities for the purpose of purchasing casualty, property,
liability or health insurance or self-insuring casualty, property, liability
or health insurance risks.
C.
Town employees. In the discretion of the Council, the town may use
its employees for the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of
public improvements.
D.
Emergencies. If the Council determines that an emergency exists in
the town because of a natural disaster, the breakdown of machinery
or equipment which threatens or terminates essential service to the
public or any other situation which reasonably creates an emergency,
the Town Manager may purchase supplies, materials, equipment and
contractual services, without the necessity of compliance with the
requirements of this section, for the purpose of dealing with the
emergency.
E.
Sole source. If the Council reasonably determines that there is only
one source available which can furnish particular supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services, the Council may award a contract
F.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 3-21, Definitions.
§ 3-21 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-21
3:33
for the provision of such supplies, materials, equipment or contractual
services on the basis of negotiation without the necessity of compliance
with this section.
Town Manager. It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to administer
the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services
required by the town in accordance with the provisions of this section.
The Town Manager shall assure compliance with the policies and
requirements of this section before purchasing supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services for the town. The following specific
requirements shall apply:
Informal quotes. Where the estimated cost of particular supplies,
materials, equipment or contractual services, including
professional services other than legal services, will not exceed
$7,500, the Town Manager may proceed to purchase said particular
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services on the basis
of informal quotes secured by the Town Manager.
(1)
Written proposals. Where the estimated cost of particular supplies,
materials, equipment or contractual services is between $7,500
and $15,000, the Town Manager will solicit requests for written
proposals and submit said written proposals to the Council for
consideration along with the Town Manager's written
recommendation concerning the written proposals. The Council,
after considering the written proposals and the Town Manager's
recommendation, may reject the written proposals or approve the
award of a contract if at least two written proposals are received.
If at least two written proposals are not received or the Council
rejects the written proposals, the Council may require that the
matter be submitted for competitive bids or proceed to award a
contract on the basis of negotiation.
(2)
Competitive bids. Where the estimated cost of the particular
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services exceeds
$15,000, the Town Manager will secure competitive bids and
submit the bids to the Council for consideration, along with the
Town Manager's written recommendation concerning the bids. The
Council, after considering the bids and the Town Manager's written
recommendation, may reject the bids or approve the award of a
contract if at least one bid is received. If at least one bid is not
received or the Council rejects the bids, the Council may proceed
to award a contract on the basis of negotiation.
(3)
G.
Procedure. When the Town Manager purchases supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services on the basis of informal quotes, the
Town Manager shall:
Solicit informal quotes from a sufficient number of vendors who
have previously supplied similar supplies, materials, equipment or
contractual services to the town so as to assure competitive pricing
(1)
H.
§ 3-21 § 3-21
3:34
and make a written record of the vendors from whom informal
quotes are solicited.
(2) Make a written record of all informal quotes which are received.
Submit a written report to the Council within 10 days of making
a purchase on the basis of informal quotes. The Town Manager's
written report shall include all relevant details of the purchase on
the basis of informal quotes.
(3)
Procedure. When requests for written proposals are required pursuant
to Subsection G(2) hereof, the Town Manager shall:
Prepare a notice which details the supplies, materials, equipment
or contractual services for which the request for written proposals
is required and specifies the date and time by which the proposal
must be submitted.
(1)
(2) Prepare a proposal form and instructions to proposers.
Advertise the notice one time in a newspaper of general circulation
which is published in Charles County.
(3)
Submit, by mail or other reasonable method, copies of the notice,
proposal form and instructions to vendors who have previously
supplied similar supplies, materials, equipment or contractual
services to the town and to other vendors who request copies of the
documents.
(4)
Prepare a written recommendation to the Council concerning the
proposals which are received.
(5)
I.
Procedure. When competitive bids are required pursuant to Subsection
G(3) hereof, the Town Manager shall:
Prepare a notice which requests sealed bids for the provision of the
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services involved and
specifies the date and time by which bids are to be submitted and
the place where the bids are to be submitted.
(1)
Prepare or otherwise secure a set of detailed plans and
specifications for the project for which bids are being requested.
(2)
Prepare a bid proposal form and instructions to bidders. The
instructions to bidders shall specify that a bid may not be
withdrawn after it is opened and that bids are irrevocable for a
period of 90 days after being opened.
(3)
Advertise the notice two times in a newspaper of general
circulation which is published in Charles County.
(4)
Submit, by mail or other reasonable method, copies of the notice,
plans and specifications, bid proposal form and instructions to
bidders to vendors who have previously supplied similar supplies,
(5)
J.
§ 3-21 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-21
3:35
materials, equipment or contractual services to the town and to
others who request copies of the documents. A reasonable fee,
commensurate with the cost of the plans and specifications, may
be charged to bidders who are furnished with copies of the
documents.
Be present at the prescribed time and place to open and record all
bids which are submitted. Interested persons may attend the bid
opening session and shall be entitled to receive a copy of the record
of the bids which are received.
(6)
Prepare a written report and recommendation to the Council
concerning the bids which are received.
(7)
The Council's decision on the award of a contract or the rejection
of the bids shall be transmitted to all bidders within a reasonable
time thereafter. Any required bid bonds shall be returned to
unsuccessful bidders.
(8)
Bid security. Where competitive bids are solicited, the Council may
require bid security, in the form of a certified check in a specified
amount or bond issued by a company licensed to do business as a surety
in Maryland. Bid security shall be for the purpose of assuring that a bid
shall be irrevocable for a period of 90 days and that a successful bidder
shall execute the required contract within the specified time.
K.
Bonds. In all cases where a contract is awarded for the provision of
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, the Council may
require that the contractor (vendor) furnish an acceptable performance
bond and/or labor and materials payment bond. A performance bond
and labor and materials payment bond shall be required for all
construction contracts in excess of $50,000.
L.
Legal services. The Council, in its discretion, shall have the authority
to enter into appropriate agreements for the provision of legal services
to the town without the necessity of otherwise complying with the
requirements of this section.
M.
Professional services.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection G hereof, contracts
for the provision of professional services to the town, other than
legal services, including but not limited to engineering,
architectural, accounting, financial, computer and auditing, the
cost of which the town reasonably determines will exceed $7,500,
shall be made on the basis of requests for written proposals. When
the Council desires to contract for professional services, other than
legal services, the Town Manager shall:
Prepare a notice which details the professional services for
which the request for written proposals is required and
(a)
(1)
N.
§ 3-21 § 3-21
3:36
§ 3-22. (Reserved)12
specifies the date and time by which the proposal must be
submitted.
Prepare a proposal form and instructions to proposers. The
instructions to proposers shall require that the proposal
include a statement of qualifications and performance data
and furnish evidence that the proposer is licensed and/or
authorized to do business in the State of Maryland.
(b)
Advertise the notice one time in a newspaper of general
circulation which is published in Charles County.
(c)
Submit, by mail or other reasonable method, copies of the
notice, proposal form and instructions to vendors who have
previously supplied similar professional services to the town
and to other vendors who request copies of the documents.
(d)
Prepare and submit to the Council a written evaluation and
recommendation concerning the proposals which are received.
The evaluation and recommendation shall consider the
following factors:
Proposer's experience as it relates to the particular
services for which the proposal is requested.
[1]
Proposer's personnel and in-house capability with specific
reference to ability to perform the tasks associated with
the requested services.
[2]
References, past record of performance on completed
projects and financial accountability.
[a] Cost considerations.
[3]
(e)
The Council, after reviewing the written proposals and the
evaluation and recommendation of the Town Manager, may reject
the proposals or award a contract and direct the Town Manager to
enter into an appropriate agreement with the successful proposer.
(2)
The Town Manager shall give written notification to all proposers
of the Council's decision.
(3)
12.Editor's Note: Former § 3-22, Administration of purchases, as amended, was repealed
2-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1-1-95.
§ 3-21 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-22
3:37

ARTICLE IV
Planning Commission
§ 3-23. Creation.
There is hereby created a Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission for
the Town of Indian Head, Maryland, to be known as the "Indian Head
Planning Commission," hereinafter referred to as the "Planning
Commission."
§ 3-24. Membership; appointment.
§ 3-25. Terms of office; compensation.
§ 3-26. Vacancies in office.
A vacancy shall be filled by appointment, as specified in § 3-24B of this
Article, for the unexpired term only.
§ 3-27. Organization.15
The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be
residents of the town, and a member of the Town Council to serve in an
ex officio capacity with no vote.13
A.
Upon its initial establishment, members shall be appointed by the Town
Council. Thereafter, members shall be nominated by the Chairman of
the Planning Commission and appointed by the Town Council.
B.
The ex officio member shall serve for one year with eligibility for
reappointment.
A.
One of the seven appointed members shall serve for a period of one
year, one shall serve for a period of two years, one shall serve for a
period of three years, two shall serve for a period of four years and
two shall serve for a period of five years. Thereafter, each appointed
member shall serve for a period of two years or until his successor has
taken office.14
B.
C. Each appointed member is eligible for reappointment.
Members of the Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation.
D.
E. Membership shall be comprised of citizens from all sections of town.
Immediately following their appointment, the members of the Planning
Commission shall elect a Chairman and such other officers as they may
A.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-23 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-27
3:39
§ 3-28. Powers and duties.16
The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties as now or
hereafter provided for in the Annotated Code of Maryland or in the Charter
and Code of Ordinances of the Town of Indian Head.
§ 3-29. Expenditures.17
If said Planning Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the Town Council
and appropriation by the Council of funds therefor.
deem necessary from among themselves. Terms of these officers shall
be for a period of one year, with eligibility for reelection.
The Planning Commission shall adopt its own rules and regulations
for conducting business in accordance with the requirements of the
Annotated Code of Maryland and the Charter and Code of Ordinances
of the Town of Indian Head.
B.
The Town Attorney shall serve as the attorney for the Planning
Commission. However, the Planning Commission may receive legal
advice from other sources, as may be deemed necessary or advisable.
C.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-27 § 3-29
3:40
ARTICLE V
Parks and Recreation Commission
[Amended 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 9-1-198518]
§ 3-30. Establishment.
The Indian Head Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby established.
§ 3-31. Membership; terms; alternate and advisory members;
removal; officers.
§ 3-32. Meetings; minutes.
§ 3-33. Powers and duties.
The functions and responsibilities of the Commission are as follows:
The membership shall be composed of five regular members and five
alternates to be appointed by the Town Council.
A.
The term of appointment for regular and alternate members shall be
two years.
B.
Alternate members may attend the regular monthly meeting of the
Commission and enter into the discussion but shall have no vote. In
the absence of a regular member, the alternate shall assume all the
powers of regular membership for the particular meeting in which he is
substituting for the regular member.
C.
Voting members of the Commission must reside within the corporate
limits of the Town of Indian Head.
D.
Advisory members may be appointed at the discretion of the Town
Council from outside the municipal corporation but shall have no vote.
E.
Members shall be removed should they miss three successive meetings
without cause, and a replacement shall be named by the Town Council.
F.
The Commission shall have a president appointed by the Town Council.
At the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall select a
Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer.
G.
The Commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the
President.
A.
The Secretary shall record the proceedings of all meetings of the
Commission and send copies of the same to the Town Council and the
Town Manager. Minutes or summation thereof shall be orally presented
at each regular Town Meeting by a member of the Parks and Recreation
Commission.
B.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-30 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-33
3:41
§ 3-34. Expenditures.
A. Coordinate all recreation activities in and for the Town of Indian Head.
B. Assist in administering the various recreation programs.
C. Plan, coordinate and direct all town special events, e.g., July 4, etc.
Act as a liaison on multicommunity activities, such as the Spring
Festival.
D.
Sponsor surveys of parks and recreation facilities, programs and
services and needs within the neighborhood and present the findings
and conclusions to the Town Council and the Charles County
Department of Parks and Recreation.
E.
Interpret public recreation programs to the people of the Indian Head
community.
F.
Disseminate information concerning the value of adequate park and
recreation programs, utilize facilities of newspapers, radio, speakers,
bureaus for clubs and special meetings and conduct forums on park and
recreational needs.
G.
Rally public support for park and recreation pay-as-you-go issues,
capital improvements, tax structures and financial needs of the town
and the county.
H.
Encourage and solicit private gifts for funds for parks and recreation
facilities within the Town of Indian Head.
I.
Work for the coordination of efforts of all agencies whose objectives
afford recreation opportunities in providing coverage and moreefficient
parks and recreation services for the town and the county.
J.
Solicit and coordinate volunteer committees for various special
projects.
K.
Provide a channel for assorting new ideas, crystalizing public sentiment
and channeling recommendations to the proper authorities.
L.
On or before the 28th day of February of each year, the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall present recommendations for its Parks
and Recreation Commission budget and recommendations for capital
improvements to existing recreation facilities. These recommendations
shall be considered for incorporation into the Manager's proposed
budget and presented separately to the Town Council.
A.
Capital improvements and maintenance to existing parks shall be
administered by the Town Manager and expenditures thereof made
through the general fund, as maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer.
B.
§ 3-33 § 3-34
3:42
Chapter 6
BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 145.
§ 6-1. Establishment.
There is created a Board of Appeals for the Town of Indian Head to hear
and decide matters in addition to those within the jurisdiction of the Board
of Appeals provided for in the Town of Indian Head Zoning Ordinance.
The Board created by this section shall have the same membership as the
Board appointed pursuant to Section 306 of the Town of Indian Head Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 6-2. Jurisdiction and authority.
The Board of Appeals shall have such jurisdiction and authority as may be
granted to it from time to time by the Town Council by ordinance.
§ 6-3. Filing of appeals.
Unless otherwise specified in an ordinance of the Town Council granting
specific jurisdiction and authority to the Board:
§ 6-4. Rules of procedure.
The Board of Appeals may adopt rules as it deems necessary to govern its
operations and the conduct of its proceedings. These rules may be the same
rules as the Board may adopt pursuant to the Town of Indian Head Zoning
Ordinance.
An appeal from any final order or decision of a Town administrative
official may be taken to the Board of Appeals by a person aggrieved by
that decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Manager
not later than 10 days from the date of the final order or decision being
appealed.
A.
An appeal stays the effect of the final order or decision appealed from,
unless the administrative official certifies in writing to the Board that,
for reasons stated in the certification, a stay would cause imminent
peril to life or property. In that case, the order or decision is not stayed
except by order of the Board of Appeals or a court, issued on application
of the party seeking the stay, for due cause and after notice to, and
opportunity to be heard by, the administrative official.
B.
§ 3-34 BOARD OF APPEALS § 6-5
6:43
§ 6-5. Consideration of appeals.
All appeals shall be considered by the Board of Appeals on the record of
proceedings before the administrative official whose final order or decision
has been appealed. Promptly after the filing of the appeal, the
administrative official shall transmit the complete record of the matter to
the Board.
§ 6-6. Finality of decisions.
All decisions and findings of the Board of Appeals are final administrative
decisions and are subject to judicial review as may be authorized by law.
§ 6-7. Public notices.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the Board of Appeals shall provide
public notice of its hearings by publication in one newspaper of general
circulation in the Town not less than 15 days prior to the date fixed for the
hearing.
§ 6-8. Appeals.
§ 6-9. Application fee.
Except where another amount is specified by ordinance of the Town Council
or other law, any appeal from an administrative decision to the Board
of Appeals shall be subject to and accompanied by an application fee of
$150. One-half of any application fee paid pursuant to this section shall
be refunded if, at the conclusion of the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals and any subsequent judicial appellate proceedings related to the
proceedings before the Board, the relief sought by the appellant before the
Board is granted, and provided that the appellant has made application to
the Town's Finance Director within 60 days following the filing of the final
decision.
The Board of Appeals, in conformity with law, may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or
determination appealed from and make such order, requirements,
decision or determination as ought to be made.
A.
Any person or persons, including any officer, official, department, board
or bureau of the Town of Indian Head, jointly or severally aggrieved by
any decision of the Board of Appeals rendered pursuant to this chapter
may seek judicial review of the decision of the Board to the Circuit
Court for Charles County.
B.
§ 6-5 § 6-9
6:44
Chapter 8
COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Farmers' market — See Ch. 55.
§ 6-9 COMMITTEES § 6-9
8:45

ARTICLE I
Beautification Committee
[Adopted 1-6-1986 by Res. No. 1-1-86]
§ 8-1. Establishment; composition. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
2-1-91]
A Beautification Committee shall be established consisting of members of
the community, either residents, property owners or business owners, as
determined by the Town Council.
§ 8-2. Powers and duties. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91]
The Beautification Committee shall be charged with developing
recommendations for the improvement of the general appearance and
identity of the community, including but not limited to the Route 210
corridor. In fulfilling this duty, the Committee shall coordinate with the
Planning Commission, the Parks and Recreation Commission and any other
appropriate Commission in developing its recommendations.
§ 8-1 COMMITTEES § 8-2
8:47

ARTICLE II
Farmers' Market Committee
[Adopted 3-2-1987 by Res. No. 3-3-87]
§ 8-3. Establishment; purpose.
A Farmers' Market Committee shall be established for the purpose of
recommending to the Town Council rules, regulations and procedures of
operation to further the efforts initiated last year to establish a Farmers'
Market.
§ 8-4. Membership. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91]
The Committee shall consist of a representative of the Extension Service,
the Market Master, vendors participating in the market and others as may
be appointed by the Town Council. The Mayor shall serve as an ex officio
member. The total membership shall be determined by the Town Council.
§ 8-3 COMMITTEES § 8-4
8:49

ARTICLE III
Community Activities Committee
[Adopted 8-3-1987 by Res. No. 8-3-87]
§ 8-5. Establishment.
A Community Activities Committee shall be established.
§ 8-6. Membership. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91]
The Community Activities Committee shall include representation from
the Parks and Recreation Commission and the Beautification Committee
and may include members residing outside the corporate limits. The total
membership shall be determined by the Town Council.
§ 8-7. Duties.
The Community Activities Committee shall assist with organization and
staging of special community events.
§ 8-5 COMMITTEES § 8-7
8:51

ARTICLE IV
Economic Development Commission
[Adopted 10-3-1994 by Ord. No. 9-1-94]
§ 8-8. Establishment; composition. [Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord. No.
8-1-9819]
§ 8-9. Responsibilities; activities.
The scope of the Indian Head Economic Development Commission shall
be generally within the framework of the following responsibilities and
activities:
There be and is hereby established an Indian Head Economic
Development Commission to be composed of up to 10 members to be
appointed by the Town Council for two-year terms unless otherwise
designated. The membership of the Commission shall include the
following:
A representative from the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Indian
Head Division, with the concurrence of the Commander, NSWC,
Indian Head Division, in order to promote and encourage
participation and communication between the town and NSWC.
(1)
A representative from the Town Planning Commission for the
duration of tenure in office.
(2)
Four representatives from the business community located within
the incorporated limits of the Town of Indian Head.
(3)
Four representatives from the citizen community residing within
the incorporated limits of the Town of Indian Head, but up to two
members at the discretion of the Town Council that may reside
outside of the incorporated limits of the town if they are deemed to
be vital to the interests of the town and its economic vitality.
(4)
A.
A member of the Town Council will be assigned as liaison with the
Commission.
B.
A member of the town staff will be appointed by the Town Council as
staff to the Commission.
C.
Determination of all existing and potential advantages that Indian Head
offers to the resident, employee, business and/or professional person,
merchant, commercial and/or industrial organization, including such
things as concentration of population, rates of growth, availability of
utilities, educational, recreational and cultural facilities, etc., as well as
intangibles such as community spirit, attitudes, etc.
A.
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the title "Economic Development
Committee" be changed to "Economic Development Commission."
§ 8-8 COMMITTEES § 8-9
8:53
Formulation of plans for the dissemination of information concerning
the advantages of Indian Head (as assessed under Subsection A above),
by booklet, brochure, prospectus and similar means of publicity, to
prospective builders, developers, merchants, industries and others who
would be well advised to consider Indian Head in their future plans.
B.
After adoption by the Town Council, encourage and implement those
programs and policies, both public and private, designed to focus
attention on Indian Head as a progressive and vital community which
offers important and distinct opportunities to the citizen and
businessman alike to participate in a viable and active community.
C.
Offering of recommendations and advice to the Town Council, the
business community and such other appropriate bodies or groups with
respect to steps that can be taken to facilitate orderly growth, attract
new development, encourage interest in, generally promote and give
publicity to Indian Head's outstanding features; and to suggest
whatever improvements, in both the public and private sectors, that
appear to be necessary to distinguish and advance Indian Head's
prominence in the field of economic development.
D.
§ 8-9 § 8-9
8:54
Chapter 10
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE
§ 10-1. Procedure and policy for providing drug-free workplace.
The Town of Indian Head certifies that it will provide a drug-free workplace
by:
Publishing a statement notifying employees that the unlawful
manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of a controlled
substance is prohibited in the town's workplace and specifying the
actions that will be taken against employees for violation of such
prohibitions.
A.
Establishing a drug-free awareness program to inform employees
about:
(1) The dangers of drug abuse in the workplace.
(2) The town's policy of maintaining a drug-free workplace.
Any available drug counseling, rehabilitation and employee
assistance programs.
(3)
The penalties that may be imposed upon employees for drug abuse
violations occurring in the workplace.
(4)
B.
Making it a requirement that each employee to be engaged in the
performance of the grant20 be given a copy of the statement required in
Subsection A which has been signed by the employee.
C.
Notifying the employee in the statement required in Subsection A above
that, as a condition of employment under the grant, the employee will:
(1) Abide by the terms of the statement.
Notify the town of any criminal drug statute conviction for a
violation occurring in the workplace no later than five days after
such conviction.
(2)
D.
Notifying the granting agency within 10 days after receiving notice
under Subsection D(2) from an employee or otherwise receiving actual
notice of such conviction.
E.
Taking one of the following actions, within 30 days of receiving notice
under Subsection D(2) with respect to any employee who is so
convicted:
F.
20.Editor's Note: The word "grant," as explained in the preamble to the resolution appearing
in this chapter, refers to grant and loan funds received from federal and state agencies.
The acceptance of such funds requires the town to adopt the provisions of the Drug-Free
Workplace Act of 1988.
§ 8-9 DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE § 10-1
10:55
Chapter 12
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Election provisions in Charter — See Art. III. Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Taking appropriate personnel actions against such an employee, up
to and including termination.
(1)
Requiring such employee to participate satisfactorily in a drug
assistance or rehabilitation program approved for such purposes
by a federal, state or local health, law enforcement or other
appropriate agency.
(2)
Making a good faith effort to continue to maintain a drug-free
workplace through implementation of Subsections A, B, C, D, E and F.
G.
§ 10-1 § 10-1
12:56
ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors of Elections
§ 12-1. Creation; organization.
As provided in § C3-3 of the Charter of the Town of Indian Head, there is
hereby created a Board known as the "Board of Supervisors of Elections."
The qualifications, appointment, removal, term and duties of office of the
members are established in § C3-3A, B and C of the Charter.
§ 12-2. Substitute members.
The Town Council shall appoint two substitute members to the Board of
Supervisors of Elections. The terms of office for the substitute members
will be the same as for the Board of Supervisors of Elections.
A.
Before entering upon the duties of the office, substitute members of the
Board shall each take and subscribe to the oath quoted below, which
oath shall be taken before and duly recorded by the Clerk of the Town
Council within 20 days after their appointment.
Oath: "I, __________, do swear that I will support the Constitution of the
United States and that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the
State of Maryland and support the Constitution and laws thereof and to
the Town Charter of Indian Head and that I will, to the best of my skill
and judgment, diligently and faithfully, without partiality or prejudice,
execute the office of Board of Supervisors of Elections according to the
Constitution and the laws of the state."
B.
§ 12-1 ELECTIONS § 12-2
12:57

ARTICLE II
Registration Regulations
§ 12-3. Places of registration.
Registration shall be held on any day during normal business hours of the
town, except 30 days preceding any town election, at the Town Hall. In
addition to registration at the Town Hall, any person who has his domicile
within the town may register to vote in town elections by registering to
vote in Charles County elections, in keeping with the registration policies
of the Charles County Board of Supervisors of Elections, provided that such
registration must reflect that the registrant has a residential address within
the incorporated limits of the town on voting registration records with
Charles County more than 30 days prior to the date of the town election.
§ 12-4. Registering officers.
The Town Council shall designate the Clerk-Treasurer and the Deputy Clerk
as being charged with registering voters for the Town of Indian Head in
behalf of the Board of Supervisors of Elections.
§ 12-5. Notice of election.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall give at least two weeks' notice of
every election day by an advertisement published in at least one newspaper
of general circulation in the town and by posting a notice thereof in some
public place or places in the town.
§ 12-6. Records.
The record of registration of voters eligible to vote in town elections
due to their registration in Charles County shall be kept in accordance
with the policies and procedures of the Charles County Board of
Supervisors of Elections.
A.
The registration of voters directly with the town shall be conducted on
cards. When such cards have been duly filled out and both the original
and duplicate registration forms have been signed by the applicant for
registration and the registrars, the original and duplicate form shall be
filed in different filing cases or binders.
B.
The original forms filed in alphabetical order for the Indian Head
precinct by the Charles County Board of Supervisors of Elections shall
be the primary Indian Head register. The supplemental registrations
by the town for those eligible but not registered with the county shall
be arranged in alphabetical order and shall be considered part of the
Indian Head registry.
C.
At the option of the Charles County and Town of Indian Head Boards
of Supervisors of Elections, the register for use in the polling place
on election days may consist of an alphabetical compilation or list of
D.
§ 12-3 ELECTIONS § 12-6
12:59
§ 12-7. Completion of registration form.
The applicant shall be required to answer in the presence of the registrars
all questions required on the registration form.
§ 12-8. Verification.
At the end of each registration session, the original and duplicate
registration forms shall be compared, verified and confirmed. If any person
is found to have registered more than once, the additional registration
forms shall be canceled.
§ 12-9. Development of new forms.
Whenever, in the opinion of any Board of Supervisors of Elections, forms can
no longer be used, the information contained thereon shall be transcribed
on new forms under the supervision and direction of the Board. The Board
shall retain all old registration books or forms which have been transcribed
onto new forms under this section for a period of at least 10 years before
the books or old forms may be destroyed.
§ 12-10. Removing names from register.
registered voters electronically reproduced through data processing,
containing the same voter registration information as is contained on
the original registration forms signed by the voters.
The registration records shall be open to public inspection under
reasonable regulations at all times on election days and also when the
Board of Supervisors of Elections is open for the registration of voters,
except upon special order of the Board. The registration records shall
not be removed from the Board of Supervisors of Elections except on
the order of the court.
E.
The registration records of the county shall be compared with that of
the town. Any duplications will be stricken from the town supplemental
register and retained on the county register.
F.
Removal of names from the Indian Head register shall be governed by
Article 33 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
A.
No one who is not registered as a qualified voter of the Town of Indian
Head shall be entitled to vote or to receive a ballot; but no vote shall
be rejected because of an error in the spelling of a voter's name or
because of a wrongful omission because of an error in the number of
his residence on the register, provided that a majority of the Board of
Supervisors of Elections is satisfied that the person offering to vote is
the identical person who is registered and that he intended to register
his true name and address.
B.
§ 12-6 § 12-10
12:60
ARTICLE III
Conduct of Elections
§ 12-11. Determination of polling places.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall determine the location of all
places for voting at least 30 days prior to any election, unless otherwise
required by an emergency.
§ 12-12. Voting methods.
Methods by which votes may be cast shall be as follows:
§ 12-13. Voter information.
§ 12-14. Opening polls.
The polls shall be officially opened at 8:00 a.m. and officially closed at 8:00
p.m., except that all qualified voters who are then waiting in line to vote
shall be permitted to do so by the Board of Supervisors of Elections.
§ 12-15. Inspection of voting machines.
Upon opening of the polls, the Board of Supervisors of Elections shall open
and allow inspection of the voting machine.
A. Voting machines.
B. Ballots.
C. A combination of voting machines and ballots.
The name of every candidate who has filed or has been nominated in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the Town of Indian
Head should appear on the ballots, absentee ballots or voting machines.
A.
Not less than 20 days before any election, the form and arrangement of
the absentee ballots to be used in the election, showing the names of
candidates, shall be prepared by the Board of Supervisors of Elections
and made available for inspection by any candidate whose name shall
appear thereon. If any mistake is discovered, it shall be the duty of the
Board to correct the same without delay.
B.
A correct list of the names of the candidates for the designated office
shall be furnished, on demand, by the Board to the candidates or their
authorized agents.
C.
Sample ballots, clearly designated in bold type as such, may be
distributed for voter information.
D.
Names of candidates or issues shall be placed in the voting machine on
or before Election Day.
E.
§ 12-11 ELECTIONS § 12-16
12:61
§ 12-16. Recording of voters.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall:
§ 12-17. Vote counting.21
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall begin counting the votes
immediately after the polls have closed in accordance with provisions of
§ C3-12 of the Charter of the Town of Indian Head.
§ 12-18. Runoff elections.
In the event of a tie vote that does not clearly define the candidates
receiving the highest number of votes in any general or special election as
required in the Charter to fill the vacancies appearing on the ballot, then a
special runoff election shall be held within 60 days of the general or special
election. Such special runoff election shall be between the candidates
holding the tie vote. Said special election shall be governed by the present
existing rules and regulations governing general elections, more specifically
set forth in Article III of the Town Charter and the provisions of this Code.
§ 12-19. Petition for inquiry.
At any time within 30 days after any election held under the laws of
the State of Maryland, any defeated candidate at that election or any 10
duly qualified voters at such election may present to the Circuit Court
of Charles County a petition, setting forth, under oath, that prohibited
practices, contrary to the provisions of a specified section or sections of this
chapter, were committed by the successful candidate or candidates or in the
person of his or their agent or city in which said petition was filed, having
the successful candidate or candidates as defendants and praying that the
fact alleged may be inquired into.
A. Enter the name of the voter in a poll book;
B. Note those voting on the precinct binder; or
Use voting authority cards pursuant to Article 33 of the Annotated Code
of the State of Maryland.
C.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 12-16 § 12-19
12:62
ARTICLE IV
Absentee Voting
§ 12-20. Who may vote.
§ 12-21. Application for absentee ballot.
Any qualified voter who may be absent for any reason from the Town of
Indian Head on Election Day may vote.
A.
Any qualified voter who, as a condition of employment, may be required
to be absent a distance of greater than 35 miles from his place of
residence on Election Day may vote.
B.
Any qualified voter whose physical disability confines him and prevents
or will prevent him from being present and personally voting at the
polls on any Election Day shall also be entitled to vote as an absentee
voter under this Article.
C.
Any qualified voter falling into the above categories may apply for an
absentee ballot under this Article by making a written request to the
Board of Supervisors of Elections, Town of Indian Head, Maryland,
stating that the voter will be prevented from voting personally in the
election. The written request must be received and filed in the office of
the Supervisors of Elections at least seven days prior to the election.
A.
The application shall contain the voter's name and residence address,
including the street number. It must certify that the person is a qualified
voter at the residence given. It must certify that the voter expects, in
good faith, to be unable to vote in person for one of the reasons set forth
above.
B.
If the applicant is a qualified voter, as stated in his letter, the Board
of Supervisors shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, deliver to him
at the office of the Board or mail to him at an address designated by
him an absentee voter's ballot and an envelope therefor. Postage for
transmitting ballot material to the voter shall be paid by the Board of
Supervisors of Elections. Postage for return of the ballot shall be paid
by the voter.
C.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall keep a record of
applications for absentee voter's ballots, including the date the
absentee ballot was mailed or delivered to the absentee voter, the date
and time it was returned to the Board and the name and residence
of the applicant. This record shall be available for examination by any
resident of the town.
D.
Not more than one absentee ballot shall be mailed to any applicant,
unless the Board has reasonable grounds to believe that the absentee
ballot previously mailed has been lost, destroyed or spoiled.
E.
§ 12-20 ELECTIONS § 12-21
12:63
§ 12-22. Emergency absentee ballot.
After approval of an application for an absentee ballot and the mailing
to the applicant of an absentee ballot, then, unless an electronically
reproduced register is used, the voter's record card in the binder
shall be removed and placed in a separate binder marked "Registered
Absentee Voters" and retained in the office of the Board. A marker shall
be placed in the regular binder with the voter's name and recording the
fact that an absentee ballot has been mailed, which shall show the date
on which the ballot was sent. If an electronically reproduced register
is used, a distinctive line shall be drawn through the voter's name on
the list and marked "Absentee Voter." No such voter shall vote or be
allowed to vote in person at any polling place.
F.
During the six days preceding an election and on the day of the election
prior to the time the polls close, any person registered and otherwise
qualified to vote may apply at the Town Hall for an emergency absentee
ballot if the person:
(1) Is within the provisions of § 12-20C of this Article.
Is unable to be present at the polls as a result of illness or accident
occurring after the time for making application for an absentee
ballot;
(2)
Is unable to be present at the polls because of a death or serious
illness in the person's immediate family, about which the person
becomes aware after the time for making application for an
absentee ballot; or
(3)
Is required to be absent on the day of an election from the town for
any reason of which the person becomes aware after the time for
making application for an absentee ballot.
(4)
A.
The application shall be made under penalty of perjury but without
formal oath, setting forth the reason why the voter is unable to be
present at the polls on the day of the election.
B.
Upon receipt of the application, the Board, if satisfied that the person
cannot, in fact, be present at the polling place on the day of the election,
shall issue to the applicant, or his duly authorized agent, an absentee
ballot, which shall be marked by the voter, placed in a sealed envelope
and returned to the Board.
C.
If the applicant does not apply in person, the applicant shall designate
a registered voter as agent for the purpose of delivering the absentee
ballot to the voter, and the agent shall execute an affidavit under
penalty of perjury that the ballot was delivered to the voter who
submitted the application, was marked by the voter in the agent's
presence, was placed in a sealed envelope in the agent's presence and
returned, under seal, to the Board by the agent.
D.
§ 12-21 § 12-23
12:64
§ 12-23. Form of absentee ballot.
§ 12-24. Timely receipt of ballot.
A ballot shall be considered as received timely if it has been received by the
Board prior to the closing of the polls on Election Day.
§ 12-25. Instructions to voters.
The printed instructions to the absentee voter shall be available in the Town
Hall. They shall be furnished upon request.
In sufficient time prior to any election, the Board shall have printed an
adequate number of absentee ballots and the three kinds of envelopes
described in this section. The ballots shall contain the words "Absentee
Ballot" printed in large letters in a clear space at the top of each ballot.
Underneath these words shall be printed the following warning: "Mark
ballot by placing (X) in the proper blank after the candidate's name. Do
not erase or make identifying mark."
A.
Envelopes.
Envelope No. 1. One envelope shall be known as the "return
envelope" and shall be sufficiently larger than any of the other
hereinafter described envelopes so that it will enclose and contain
the other envelopes. Across the left-hand face of the return
envelope shall be printed or written these words "Return Envelope
for the Election of (date)." The blank space in these words shall be
filled in with the date of election, following which shall be added
the words "Supervisors of Elections of the Town of Indian Head,
Maryland."
(1)
Envelope No. 2. The ballot envelope shall be of sufficient size
to contain the town absentee ballot. The following oath shall be
printed on the face of the envelope: "I, __________, do hereby affirm
that I am a voter legally qualified to vote in the __________ election
to be held on __________, that I am legally registered in Indian Head,
as stated in my application for said ballot, that I will be unable to
vote in person on the day of such election because __________, that
the within ballot was by me marked secretly, folded and enclosed
and sealed in this ballot envelope, that I am not now disqualified
from voting under the laws of the Town Charter of Indian Head."
__________________________
Absentee voter must sign this oath.
(2)
Envelope No. 3. The third envelope shall be a covering envelope in
which all balloting material shall be sent to the absentee voter. On
this envelope shall be written or printed the return address of the
Board of Supervisors of Elections and, in boldface type, the words
"OFFICIAL BALLOT, Town of Indian Head, Maryland."
(3)
B.
§ 12-23 ELECTIONS § 12-25
12:65
Chapter 15
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conflicts of interest — See Charter § C6-5.
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Travel and expense policy — See Ch. 23.
§ 15-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all Town of Indian Head officials and
employees, with the exception of § 15-4, Financial disclosure, which applies
only to those officials and employees enumerated in § 15-4C.
§ 15-2. Ethics Commission.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall be designated as the Town of
Indian Head Elected Officials Ethics Commission for all matters regarding
these ethics provisions that pertain to any official and employee of the town.
The Commission shall be advised by the Town Attorney and shall have the
following responsibilities:
§ 15-3. Conflicts of interest.
The Town of Indian Head officials and employees who are subject to this
chapter shall not:
A. To devise, receive and maintain all forms generated by this chapter.
To provide published advisory opinions to persons subject to this
chapter as to the applicability of the provisions of this chapter to them.
B.
To process and make determinations as to complaints filed by any
person alleging violations of this chapter.
C.
To conduct a public information program regarding the purposes and
application of this chapter.
D.
Participate on behalf of the Town of Indian Head in any matter which
would, to their knowledge, have a direct financial impact, as
distinguished from the public generally, on them, their spouses or
dependent children or a business entity with which they are affiliated.
A.
Hold or acquire an interest of either $5,000 or 5% or greater in a
business entity that has or is negotiating a contract of $5,000 or more
with the Town of Indian Head or is regulated by their agency, except as
exempted by the Commission where the interest is disclosed pursuant
to § 15-4 of this chapter.
B.
§ 12-25 § 15-3
15:66
§ 15-4. Financial disclosure.
Be employed by a business entity that has or is negotiating a contract
of more than $5,000 with the Town of Indian Head or is regulated by
their agency except as exempted by the Commission pursuant to § 15-6
of this chapter.
C.
Hold any outside employment relationship that would directly impair
their impartiality or independence of judgment.
D.
Represent any party, for a contingent fee, before any Town of Indian
Head body.
E.
Within one year following termination of town service, act as a
compensated representative of another in connection with any specific
matter in which he participated substantially as a town official or
employee.
F.
Solicit any gift or accept any gift of greater than $25 in value from any
person that has or is negotiating a contract with the Town of Indian
Head or is regulated by their agency, except when these gifts would not
present a conflict of interest, as determined by the Commission.
G.
H. Use the prestige of their office for their own benefit or that of another.
Use confidential information acquired in their official Town of Indian
Head position for their own benefit or that of another.
I.
The Town of Indian Head officials and employees listed in Subsection
C of this section shall file annually, not later than January 31 of each
calendar year during which they hold office, a statement with the
Ethics Commission disclosing any gifts received during the preceding
calendar year from any person having a contract or any person
regulated by their agency. The statement shall identify the donor of the
gift and its approximate retail value at the time of receipt.
A.
Candidates for elective office listed in Subsection C of this section shall
file statements consistent with the requirements of Subsection A of this
section at the time that they file their certificate of candidacy.
B.
The following officials and employees are required to file:
(1) Mayor and members of Council.
(2) Town Manager.
(3) Finance Officer.
(4) Planning Commission members.
(5) Board of Zoning Appeals members.
C.
All Town of Indian Head elected officials and candidates for elected
office to positions subject to this section shall file a statement with
D.
§ 15-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 15-4
15:67
§ 15-5. Lobbying disclosure.
§ 15-6. Exemptions and modifications.
The Commission may grant exemptions and modifications in writing,
including any circumstances and applicable dates, to the provisions of
§§ 15-3 and 15-4 of this chapter if it determines that application or these
provisions would:
§ 15-7. Enforcement.
the Elected Officials Ethics Commission disclosing any interest or
employment, the holding of which would require disqualification from
participation pursuant to § 15-3A of this chapter, with sufficient time
before the action is taken to notify individuals of a potential conflict.
Disclosure statements filed pursuant to this section shall be maintained
by the Clerk of Council and shall be made available for public inspection
and copying.
E.
Any person who personally appears before any Town of Indian Head
official or employee with the intent to influence that person in
performance of his official duties and who, in connection with such
intent, expends or reasonably expects to expend in a given calendar
year in excess of $100 on food, entertainment or other gifts for such
officials, shall file a registration statement with the Commission not
later than January 15 of the calendar year or within five days after first
making these appearances.
A.
The registration statement shall include complete identification of the
registrant and of any other person on whose behalf the registrant acts.
It shall also identify the subject matter on which the registrant proposes
to make these appearances.
B.
Registrants under this section shall file a report within 30 days after the
end of any calendar year during which they were registered, disclosing
the value, date and nature of any food, entertainment or other gift
provided to a Town of Indian Head official or employee. When a gift or
series of gifts to a single official or employee exceeds $100 in value, the
official or employee shall also be identified.
C.
The registration and reports filed pursuant to this section shall be
maintained by the Clerk of Council as public records available for public
inspection and copying.
D.
A. Constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy.
Significantly reduce the availability of qualified persons for public
service.
B.
C. Not be required to preserve the purposes of this chapter.
§ 15-4 § 15-7
15:68
Chapter 23
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 25. Salaries — See Ch. 27.
The Commission may issue a cease and desist order against any person
found to be in violation of this chapter, and may seek enforcement in
the Circuit Court of Charles County. The Court may issue a cease and
desist order and may also impose a fine of up to the amount allowed by
law for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
A.
A Town of Indian Head official or employee found to have violated this
chapter may be subjected to disciplinary or other appropriate personnel
action, including suspension of Town of Indian Head salary or other
compensation.
B.
Conviction of a violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, subject
to a penalty as set forth in the Code of the Town of Indian Head.22
C.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV. General Penalty.
§ 15-7 ETHICS, CODE OF § 15-7
15:69

ARTICLE I
Travel and Expense Policy
[Adopted 4-6-1992 by Ord. No. 2-1-1992; amended in its entirety
11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 10-1-02]
§ 23-1. Travel.
§ 23-2. Meals; requests for travel advances.
§ 23-3. Lodging. [Amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 11-01-08]
The Town shall pay or reimburse an official or employee for the cost of
lodging at the conference hotel rate. The official or employee shall have
Mileage and miscellaneous expenses. If an individual is required to
travel more than 10 miles round-trip on any one trip in their own
personal vehicle, that individual may request reimbursement from the
Town at the rate adopted by the Internal Revenue Service. Mileage
reimbursement forms shall be filed with the Finance Officer and
approved by the Town Manager prior to being redeemed. Travel
approval is to be requested in advance through the Town Manager.
Parking, taxis and tools shall be reimbursed at cost upon receipts being
presented for reimbursement.
A.
Air fare. The Town shall pay or reimburse air fare based on coach
travel.
B.
The Town will reimburse meal expenses incurred by officials or
employees for Town business.
A.
An official or employee traveling for longer than a twenty-four-hour
duration shall have the option to apply the per-diem rates as he/she
is so inclined as adopted by the U.S. General Services Administration.
Travel less than 24 hours in duration shall require adherence to the
schedule. [Amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 11-01-08]
B.
Meals provided as part of advance registration for a conference shall
be paid by the Town with the appropriate meal being deducted from the
meal schedule.
C.
Should the Mayor or any member of Council or any Town employee
find it necessary to request a travel advance for approved travel, the
advance must be submitted to the Finance Officer. Requests by Town
employees will be subject to approval by the Town Manager. Under
no circumstances shall the advance exceed the amount that would
normally be reimbursed to the official or employee.
D.
Spouses attending the annual Maryland Municipal League summer
convention with an official of the Town of Indian Head shall be covered
by the provisions of this article. [Amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No.
11-01-08]
E.
§ 23-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 23-3
15:71
the option to choose a non-conference hotel but be reimbursed only at the
conference hotel rate with any balance due being paid for by the official or
employee or any balance remaining being returned to the Town. Receipts
for all lodging shall be submitted to the Finance Officer and approved by the
Town Manager upon completion of travel. All other lodging requirements,
excluding conferences, shall be reimbursed at the rates stipulated by the
U.S. General Services Administration with any balance due being paid for
by the official or employee or any balance remaining being returned to the
Town.
§ 23-4. Miscellaneous expenses.
Requests for reimbursement of expenses other than those enumerated in
this article may be considered on a case-by-case basis.
§ 23-3 § 23-4
15:72
Chapter 25
PERSONNEL
Chapter 27
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 43
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 65.
Housing standards — See Ch. 78.
Signs — See Ch. 110.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 122.
§ 23-4 PERSONNEL § 23-4
25:73

ARTICLE I
Building Code
[Amended 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 8-1-95; 11-6-2006 by Ord. No.
10-3-06; 11-3-2008 by Ord. No. 10-1-08]
§ 43-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 43-2, there is hereby adopted by the Town of
Indian Head for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing
the design, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, demolition,
removal, maintenance and use of buildings and structures in the Town,
a certain document entitled "The International Building Code 2006" as
published by the International Code Council. Not less than one copy of The
International Building Code 2006 shall be kept on file in Town Hall.
§ 43-2. Modification of standards.
The International Building Code 2006, as adopted by § 43-1, is modified as
set forth below:
In the second line of Section 101.1 on page 1, in the space labeled
"[NAME OF JURISDICTION]," insert the "Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section 101.4 on page 1 is revised to read as follows:
101.4 Referenced codes. The codes listed in Sections 101.4.1
through 101.4.7 and referenced elsewhere in this code, as modified by
the Town of Indian Head, shall be considered part of the requirements
of this code to the prescribed extent of such reference.
B.
Section 102.4 on page 1 is revised to read as follows:
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code and listed in Chapter 35 shall be considered
part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each
such reference, except to the extent that any of such standards have
been expressly modified in the Code of the Town of Indian Head. The
standards contained in the Maryland Accessibility Code adopted by
the Maryland Department of Housing and Community Development
also shall be deemed part of this code. In any situation where a
provision of this code conflicts with the provision of any such standard
or with the provision of any other law, ordinance, code or regulation,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail,
regardless which may have been enacted first, except that:
102.4.1 In the event of a conflict between a provision of this code (or
the standards listed in Chapter 35) and the Maryland Accessibility
Code, the Maryland Accessibility Code shall prevail.
C.
§ 43-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-2
27:75
102.4.2 In the event of a conflict between a provision of this code
(or the standards listed in Chapter 35) and the provisions of the
Annotated Code of Maryland contained in Article 38A, Sections
59 through 66; Article 89, Section 49B; Title 9A of the Business
Regulations article; and Title 12 of the Business Occupations and
Professions article, the provisions of the Annotated Code of
Maryland shall prevail.
Delete in its entirety Section 103, Department of Building Safety, on
page 2, and substitute the following:
SECTION 103
BUILDING OFFICIAL
103.1 General. This code shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Official. The Building Official shall be the Director of Public
Works of the Town or such other person as the Town's Town Manager
designates.
D.
In the first line of Section 104.2 on page 2, delete "issue" and substitute
"authorize the issuance of."
E.
F. Delete Section 104.8 on page 2 in its entirety.
In the last line of Section 105.3.1 on page 4, delete "issue" and
substitute "authorize the issuance of," and in that same line,
immediately after "practicable," insert "by the Town Treasurer."
G.
Section 108.2 on page 6 is revised to read as follows:
108.2 Fee schedule. The permit fees for all work which a permit is
required by this code shall be as prescribed by ordinance adopted by
the Town Council from time to time.
H.
Section 108.6 on page 7 is revised to read as follows:
108.6 Fee refunds. The Building Official shall authorize the refunding
of the full amount of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected.
The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.
I.
Section 112.1 on page 8 is deleted, and new Section 112.1 is
substituted, to read as follows:
J.
§ 43-2 § 43-2
27:76
112.1 General. The Board of Appeals provided for in Chapter 6 of
the Code of the Town of Indian Head may hear and decide appeals
of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official relating
to the application and interpretation of this code. The application
shall be filed within 20 days from the date of the order, decision
or determination being appealed. All appeals filed pursuant to this
section shall be governed by the provisions of such Chapter 6 and by
any rules of procedure adopted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to
Chapter 6.
K. Section 112.3 on page 8 is deleted in its entirety.
Section 113.3 on page 8 is revised to read as follows:
113.3 Prosecution. In addition to the penalties provided for in
Section 113.4 in case of any unlawful acts the Building Official, with
the approval of the Town Manager of the Town, may institute in the
name of the Town an appropriate civil action or proceedings against
the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering
that person:
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from further
execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure;
3. To require the removal of work in violation; or
4. To prevent the occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance
with the provisions of this code.
L.
Section 113.4 on page 8 is deleted, and new Section 113.4 is
substituted to read as follows:
113.4 Violations and penalties.
M.
§ 43-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-2
27:77
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code, failures to comply
with this code, or refusals or failures to comply with a notice
issued pursuant to Section 113.2 of this code are declared to be
misdemeanors. Any person who knowingly and willfully commits
any of these acts shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as
set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly § 1-36, of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as amended). Each day
that one of these acts continues is a separate offense.
2. Except as provided in Paragraph 1 above, violations of this code,
failures to comply with this code, or refusals or failures to comply
with a notice issued pursuant to Section 113.2 of this code, are
declared to be municipal infractions and shall be subject to the
penalties and procedures as approved in Chapter 1, Article IV, and
particularly § 1-37, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990,
as amended). These acts are strict liability offenses. Each day that
one of these acts continues is a separate offense. The fine shall
be $400 for each initial violation and $400 for each day thereafter
that the violation continues.
In the last line of Section 114.3 on page 9, delete "law" and substitute
"Section 113.4."
N.
The definition of "Building Official" as contained in Section 202 on page
12 is revised to read as follows:
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Director of the Department of Public
Works of the Town, or such other person as the Town's Town Manager
may designate.
O.
New Section 907.9.2.1 is added to Section 907.9.2 on page 189, to read
as follows:
907.9.2.1 Audible outside building. In addition to being audible
in the locations specified in this Section 907, the signaling system,
or a supplemental alarm signaling system, shall be audible on the
exterior of the building.
P.
Section 1018.2.2 on page 223 is revised to read as follows:
1018.2.2 Arrangement. Exterior exit doors shall lead directly to
the exit discharge or the public way, except that all required exit
access doors for uses in all use categories except use group R shall
open towards a yard, court or open space.
Q.
R. Section 1018.2 on page 223 is deleted in its entirety.
In the first through fourth lines of Section 3410.2 on page 545, in
the space labeled "[Date to be inserted by the jurisdiction. Note: It is
recommended that the date coincide with the effective date of building
codes within the jurisdiction]," insert "the date of adoption of this
code."
S.
§ 43-2 § 43-2
27:78
§ 43-2.1. Illumination standards.
New Section 3110 is added to Chapter 31, Special Construction, to
follow immediately after Section 3109 on page 534, to read as follows:
SECTION 3110
SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION PRECAUTIONS
3110.1 General. In any construction area of more than four single
dwelling units or any commercial unit, shopping center, office building,
multifamily dwelling, school, etc., fire protection and fire prevention
fixtures shall be required as provided in Sections 3110.2, 3110.3, and
3110.4.
3110.2 Serviceable road. Prior to the framing of the building, a
serviceable all-weather road shall be installed so that all normal access
that will be available when the building is open will be available to
fire prevention and suppression authorities while the building is under
construction.
3110.3 Adequate water supply. All underground waterlines shall be
installed prior to framing, and adequate fire hydrants and water supply
for fire fighting shall be provided.
3110.4 Telephone. Prior to framing, a telephone or some other means
of transmitting an alarm of fire shall be installed.
T.
The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning
Engineers (ASHRAE) Standard 90-75 for illumination standards for
commercial, industrial and multifamily dwellings is hereby adopted as
a part of the Town of Indian Head Building Code.
A.
Violations of this standard are subject to the provisions and penalties
set forth in Section 113.4 of the International Building Code 2006 as
adopted in §§ 43-1 and 43-2 of this Code.
B.
§ 43-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-2.1
27:79

ARTICLE II
Building Permits
§ 43-3. Permit required.
No exterior construction, destruction or alterations of any property or
building in the Town of Indian Head shall be made unless or until a building
permit shall have been first obtained from the town.
§ 43-4. Application.
§ 43-5. Procedure for issuance or denial.
The following procedure shall be followed by the town officials in regard to
issuing building permits:
Applications for permits shall be available in the Clerk's office. The
application shall be completed and filed, in duplicate, with the Clerk.
The application shall be of a format determined by the Town Manager,
and a copy of the current application shall be filed with this regulation.
The application shall be accompanied by a drawing or plat, in duplicate,
or as required by the Town Manager, showing, with dimensions, lot
lines, the building or buildings, the location of buildings on the lot
and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of these regulations, including, if necessary, a boundary
survey and a staking of the lot by a competent surveyor and complete
construction plans and specifications. The drawing shall contain
suitable notations indicating the proposed use of all land and buildings.
A careful record of the original copy of such applications and plans
shall be kept in the office of the Town Clerk, and a duplicate copy
shall be kept at the building at all times during construction. Plats will
not be returned. Building plans will be returned at the issuance of the
occupancy permit.
A.
One copy of the as-built plot plans shall be provided to the town at the
time of issuance of the occupancy permit.
B.
All applications for permit shall be accompanied by all applicable fees,
which shall be established, from time to time, by the Town Council. A
copy of the fee schedule shall be kept on file with this regulation.
C.
Every plan for the erection of a new building must, in addition, show
thereon that suitable provisions have been made for connection to the
municipal sewer system if service is available or for the construction
of an approved sanitary disposal system if the new construction cannot
be connect to the municipal sewerage system. Connections shall be
illustrated on the as-built plot plans. (See Subsection B above.)
D.
A permit shall be issued by the Town Clerk only after such permit
application has been approved by the Town Manager. In the event
that any application for a permit is disapproved, the applicant shall
A.
§ 43-3 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-5
27:81
be entitled to be notified, in writing, of the grounds on which the
application was rejected. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit
the number of times an applicant may make an application or submit
the same or revised building plans, which shall be considered as in
the manner above specified. An applicant who satisfactorily alters or
amends the plans and specifications as indicated in any Town Manager
rejection shall not have a new application rejected for any of the
same reasons as applied when the application was first submitted, if
such specifications do now comply with and conform to the Code of
Ordinances herein set forth. All building permits shall expire six months
after its issue, unless updated by the applicant within the six-month
period.
The town shall require a building permit for all new construction of
main structures, such as houses, commercial buildings and public
buildings.
B.
A site inspection and approval will be made by the Building Official
prior to excavation for the foundation. A request will be made for site
inspection when the corner markers are set. The request will be made
by the owner or his agent. The reason for site inspection is to ensure
conformity with setback regulations in the Zoning Ordinance.
C.
The contractor and the Building Inspector will oversee the
construction, which will take place during the period specified in the
application.
D.
Upon completion of the project, the Building Inspector and the Building
Official will be notified by the owner or his agent and a final inspection
requested.
E.
At completion of the final inspection of approval of the building
inspector, the Building Official will issue a certificate of occupancy
within 10 days.
F.
One copy of the as-built plot plans shall be submitted at the time an
occupancy permit is issued. (See § 43-4B.)
G.
§ 43-5 § 43-5
27:82
ARTICLE III
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-4-06; amended 11-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 10-9-08]
§ 43-6. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 43-7 of this Code, there is hereby adopted
by the Town of Indian Head, for the purpose of regulating the fabrication,
erection, construction, alteration and use of certain detached one- and twofamily
dwellings and townhouses in the Town, a certain document entitled
the "International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings,
2006," as published by the International Code Council. Not Less than one
copy of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, 2006, shall be kept on file in the Town Hall of the Town.
§ 43-7. Modification of standards.
The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings,
2006, as adopted by § 43-6, is modified as set forth below:
In the second and third lines of Section R101.1 on page 1, in the space
labeled "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]," insert "Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section R102.4 on page 1 is revised to read as follows:
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of
this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference, except to the
extent that any of such standards have been expressly modified in the
Code of the Town of Indian Head. Where differences occur between
the provisions of this code and the referenced codes and standards,
the provisions of the code shall apply.
B.
New Section R102.8 is added on page 1 to read as follows:
R102.8 Conflicting provisions. Except as otherwise provided in
Section R102.4, in any situation where a provision of this code conflicts
with the provision of any other law, ordinance, code or regulations,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protections of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail,
regardless which may have been enacted first.
C.
D. Section R103 on page 1 is deleted in its entirety.
E. Section R104.8 on page 2 is deleted in its entirety.
In the 10th line of Section R105.3.1 on page 4, delete "issue" and
substitute "authorize the issuance of," and in the last line of that
section, immediately after "practicable," insert "by the Treasurer of the
Town."
F.
§ 43-6 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-7
27:83
In the second line of Section R106.3.1 on page 5, delete "issues" and
substitute "authorizes the issuance of."
G.
In the first and second lines of Section R106.3.3 on page 5, delete "is
authorized to issue" and substitute "may authorize the issuance of."
H.
In the first line of Section R107.1 on page 5, delete "is authorized to
issue" and substitute "may authorize the issuance of."
I.
Section R108.2 on page 5 is revised to read as follows:
R108.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all work for which a permit is
required by this code shall be as prescribed by ordinance adopted by
the Town Council from time to time.
J.
Section R108.5 on page 6 is revised to read as follows:
R108.5 Fee refunds. The Building Official shall authorize the
refunding of the full amount of any fee that was erroneously paid
or collected. The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding
of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original
permittee not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.
K.
Section R112.1 on page 7 is deleted, and new Section R112.1 is
substituted, to read as follows:
R112.1 General. The Board of Appeals provided for in Chapter 6 of
the Code of the Town of Indian Head may hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official relating to
the application and interpretation of this code. The application shall be
filed within 20 days from the date of order, decision or determination
being appealed. All appeals filed pursuant to Section R112.1 shall be
governed by the provisions of such Chapter 6 and by any rules of
procedure adopted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to Chapter 6.
L.
M. Section R112.3 on page 8 is deleted in its entirety.
Section R113.3 on page 8 is deleted in its entirety, and new Section
R113.3 is substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
R113.3 Prosecution of violation. In addition to the penalties
provided for in Section R113.4, in case of failure to comply with a
notice of violation within the time specified in the notice, or in case of
any other unlawful acts under this code, the Building Official, with the
approval of the Town Manager of the Town, may institute the name of
the Town an appropriate civil action or proceeding against the person
responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person:
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from further
execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure;
N.
§ 43-7 § 43-7
27:84
3. To require the removal of work in violation; or
4. To prevent, or to require the termination or removal of, the
occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with the
provisions of this code or any order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
Section R113.4 on page 8 is deleted, and new Section R113.4 is
substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
R113.4 Violations and penalties.
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code or of any order
or directive of the Building Official, or the erection, installation,
alteration or repair of a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the Building
Official, or a permit or certificate issued under this code, are
declared to be misdemeanors. Any person who knowingly and
willfully commits any of these acts shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, and
particularly § 1-36, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990,
as amended). Each day that one of these acts continues is a
separate offense.
2. Except as provided in Paragraph 1 above, violations of this code,
or of an order or directive of the Building Official, or the erection,
installation, alteration or repair of a building or structure in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of
the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under this
code, are declared to be municipal infractions, and shall be subject
to the penalties and procedures as provided in Chapter 1, Article
IV, and particularly § 1-37, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head
(1990, as amended). These acts are strict liability offenses. Each
day that one of these acts continues is a separate offense. The
fine shall be $400 for each initial violation and $400 for each day
thereafter that the violation continues.
O.
In the last line of Section 114.2 on page 8, delete "law" and substitute
"Section R113.4.1."
P.
The definition of "Building Official" as contained in Section R202 on
page 10 is revised to read as follows:
Building Official. The Director of the Department of Public Works of
the Town, or such other person as the Town's chief executive officer
may designate.
Q.
R. On page 65 insert a new Section R325 to read as follows:
§ 43-7 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-7
27:85
SECTION R325
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
R325.1 Installation required. Interior automatic fire sprinkler
systems shall be installed, and thereafter maintained, in a good state
of operation and repair, in all new one- and two-family dwellings for
which building permits are applied for on and after December 1, 2006.
A one- or two-family dwelling that exists or is under construction
on December 1, 2006, and that is demolished and thereafter
reconstructed, or that is renovated to such extent as involves the
installation of a new plumbing system in at least 50% of the habitable
area of the dwelling, shall be deemed a new dwelling for the purpose
of compliance with the requirements of this section.
1. A mobile home, a manufactured home and a modular home are
subject to the interior automatic fire sprinkler system
requirements of this section.
R325.2 Exceptions. The interior automatic fire sprinkler system
requirements of this section do not apply to any detached accessory
structure such as, but not limited to, a carport, a garage, a structure
that does not contain any facilities or rooms designed or used for
cooking, sleeping or toileting, a greenhouse and a shed.
R325.3 Installation standards. Interior automatic sprinkler systems
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the most recent
version of Standard 13D, "Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and
Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes," as promulgated by
the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and as modified and
adopted by the Maryland State Fire Prevention Code, as amended from
time to time.
§ 43-7 § 43-7
27:86
ARTICLE IV
Electrical Code
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-1-06; amended 11-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 10-2-08]
§ 43-8. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 43-9, there is hereby adopted by the Town
of Indian Head for the purpose of regulating and controlling the Design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
electrical systems in the Town of Indian Head the International Electrical
Code — Administrative Provisions, 2006, as published by the International
Code Council. Not less than one copy of the International Electrical
Code — Administrative Provisions, 2006, shall be kept on file in the Town
Hall.
§ 43-9. Modification of standards.
The International Electrical Code — Administrative Provisions, 2006, as
adopted by § 43-8, is modified as set forth below.
In the second line of Section 101.1 on page 1, in the space labeled
"[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" insert "the Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section 102.6 on page 1 is revised to read as follows:
102.6 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code shall be those listed in Chapter 13 and shall
be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference, except to the extent that any of such
standards have been expressly modified in the Code of the Town of
Indian Head. Where differences occur between the provisions of this
code and the referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this
code shall apply.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate
the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the
conditions of the listing and manufacturer's instructions shall
apply.
B.
New Section 102.9 is added to page 2 to read as follows:
102.9 Conflicting provisions. Except as otherwise provided in
Section 102.6, in any situation where a provision of this code conflicts
with the provision of any other law, ordinance, code or regulation,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail,
regardless which may have been enacted first.
C.
The definition of "Code Official" as contained in section 202 on page 3
is revised to read as follows:
D.
§ 43-8 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-9
27:87
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of the Department of Public Works
of the Town or such other person as the Town's Town Manager may
designate.
E. Section 301 on page 5 is deleted in its entirety.
F. Section 302.2 on page 5 is deleted in its entirety.
In the third line of Section 302.3 on page 5, delete "issue" and
substitute "authorize the issuance of."
G.
H. Section 302.9 on page 5 is deleted in its entirety.
In the first line of Section 403.6 on page 8, delete "code official" and
substitute "Treasurer of the Town."
I.
Section 404.2 on page 8 is revised to read as follows:
404.2. Fee schedule. The permit fees for all work for which a permit
is required by this code shall be as prescribed by ordinance adopted
by the Town Council from time to time.
J.
Section 404.5 on page 8 is revised to read as follows:
404.5. Refund. The Code Official shall authorize the refunding of the
full amount of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected. The Code
Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon
written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180
days after the date of the fee payment.
K.
Section 1002.5 on page 19 is deleted in its entirety, and new Section
1002.5 is substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
1002.5. Prosecution of violation. In addition to the penalties
provided for in Section 1003.1, in case of failure to comply with a
notice of violation within the time specified in the notice, or in case
of any other unlawful acts under this code, the Code Official, with the
approval of the Chief Executive Officer of the Town, may institute in
the name of the Town an appropriate civil action or proceeding against
the person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering
that person:
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from further
execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure;
3. To require the removal of work in violation; or
4. To prevent, or to require the termination or removal of, the
occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with the
provisions of this code or any order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
L.
§ 43-9 § 43-9
27:88
Section 1003.1 on page 19 is deleted, and new Section 1003.1 is
substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
1003.1. Violations and penalties.
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code or of any order
or directive of the Code Official, or the erection, installation,
alteration or repair of any electrical system or installation in a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Code Official, or a permit or
certificate issued under this code, are declared to be
misdemeanors. Any person who knowingly and willfully commits
any of these acts shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as
set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly § 1-36, of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as amended). Each day
that one of these acts continues is a separate offense.
2. Except as provided in Subsection 1 above, violations of this code,
or of an order or directive of the Code Official, or the erection,
installation, alteration or repair of any electrical system or
installation in a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under this code, are declared to be
municipal infractions and shall be subject to the penalties and
procedures as approved in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly
§ 1-37, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as
amended). The fine for each violation shall be $400 for each
initial violation and $400 for each day thereafter that the violation
continues. Each day that one of these acts continues is a separate
offense.
M.
In the last line of Section 1004.3 on page 19, delete "law" and substitute
"Section 1003.1."
N.
Section 1101.1 on page 21 is deleted, and new Section 1101.1 is
substituted, to read as follows:
1101.1. Appeals to Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals
provided for in Chapter 6 of the Code of the Town of Indian Head may
hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the
Code Official relating to the application and interpretation of this code.
All appeals filed pursuant to Section 1103.1 shall be governed by the
provisions of such Chapter 6 and by any rules of procedure adopted by
the Board of Appeals pursuant to Chapter 6.
O.
P. Section 1102, "MEMBERSHIP," on page 21 is deleted in its entirety.
Q. Section 1103, "PROCEDURES," on page 21 is deleted.
§ 43-9 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-9
27:89

ARTICLE V
Plumbing Code
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-6-06; amended 11-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 10-7-08]
§ 43-10. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 43-11, there is hereby adopted by the Town of
Indian Head, for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing
the design, installation and construction of plumbing systems in the Town,
a certain document entitled the "International Plumbing Code, 2006, as
published by the International Code Council. Not less than one copy of the
International Plumbing Code, 2006, shall be kept on file in the Town Hall.
§ 43-11. Modification of standards.
The International Plumbing Code, 2006, as adopted by § 43-10, is modified
as set forth below:
In the second line of Section 101.1 on page 1, in the space labeled
"[NAME OF JURISDICTION]," insert "the Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section 102.8 on page 1 is revised to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code and listed in Chapter 13 shall be considered
part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each
such reference, except to the extent that any of such standards have
been expressly modified in the Code of the Town of Indian Head.
Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the
referenced standards or manufacturer's installation instructions, the
provisions of this code shall apply.
B.
New Section 102.10 is added to follow immediately after Section 102.9
on page 1, to read as follows:
102.10 Conflicting provisions. Except as provided in Section 102.8,
in any situation where a provision of this code conflicts with the
provision of any other law, ordinance, code or regulation, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail,
regardless which may have been enacted first.
C.
D. Section 103 on page 2 is deleted in its entirety.
E. Section 104.2 on page 2 is deleted in its entirety.
In the second line of Section 104.3 on page 2, delete "issue" and
substitute "authorize the issuance of."
F.
At the end of Section 106.5 on page 4, after "permit shall be issued to
the applicant" insert "by the Town."
G.
§ 43-10 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-11
27:91
In the second line of Section 106.5.1 on page 4, delete "issues" and
substitute "authorizes the issuance of."
H.
In the first line of the second paragraph of Section 106.5.1 on page 4,
delete "issue" and substitute "authorize the issuance of."
I.
In the first and second lines of Section 106.5.3 on page 4, delete "by the
Code Official."
J.
Section 106.6.2 on page 5 is revised to read as follows:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The permit fees for all plumbing work shall
be as indicated on a fee schedule adopted by ordinance of the Town
Council from time to time.
K.
Section 106.6.3 on pages 4 and 5 is revised to read as follows:
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The Code Official shall authorize the refunding
of the full amount of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected.
The Code Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.
L.
Section 108.3 on page 6 is revised to read as follows:
108.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the Code Official, with the approval of the
Town's Town Manager, may request the Town Attorney to institute
appropriate civil proceedings to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or
of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
M.
N. Section 108.4 on page 6 is revised to read as follows:
§ 43-11 § 43-11
27:92
108.4 Violations and penalties.
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code, or of any orders
issued pursuant to this code, or the erection, installation,
alteration or repair of plumbing work in violation of approved
construction documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a
permit or certification issued under the provisions of this code,
are declared to be misdemeanors. Any person who knowingly
and willfully commits any of these acts shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV,
and particularly § 1-36, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head
(1990, as amended). Each day that one of these acts continues is a
separate offense.
2. Except as provided in Paragraph 1 above, violations of this code
or of any orders issued pursuant to this code, or the erection,
installation, alteration or repair of plumbing work in violation of
approved construction documents or directive of the Code Official,
or of a permit or certification issued under the provisions of this
code, are declared to be municipal infractions and shall be subject
to the penalties and procedures as provided in Chapter 1, Article
IV, and particularly § 1-37, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head
(1990, as amended). The fine for each violation shall be $400 for
each initial violation and $400 for each day thereafter that the
violation continues. Each day that one of these acts continues is a
separate offense.
In the last sentence of Section 108.5 on page 6, delete "shall be liable to
a fine of not less than [amount] dollars or more than [amount] dollars"
and substitute "shall be subject to the penalties as provided in Section
108.4 of this code."
O.
Sections 109.2 through 109.7, inclusive, on page 7 are deleted, and new
Section 109.2 is substituted, to read as follows:
109.2 Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals referred to in Section
109.1 is the same Board of Appeals provided for in Chapter 6 of
the Code of the Town of Indian Head. All appeals filed pursuant to
Section 109.1 shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 6 and by
any rules of procedure adopted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to
Chapter 6.
P.
The definition of "Code Official" as contained in Section 202 on page 10
is revised to read as follows:
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of the Department of Public Works
of the Town, or such other person as the Town's Town Manager
designates.
Q.
The last sentence of section 305.6 on page 18 is revised to read as
follows: "Exterior water supply system piping shall be installed not less
than 30 inches below grade.
R.
§ 43-11 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-11
27:93
Section 305.6.1 on page 18 is revised to read as follows:
305.6.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect private sewage
disposal systems shall be a minimum of 24 inches below finished grade
at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a
minimum of 24 inches below grade.
S.
§ 43-11 § 43-11
27:94
ARTICLE VI
Mechanical Code
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-2-06; amended 11-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 10-6-08]
§ 43-12. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 43-13, there is hereby adopted by the Town of
Indian Head, for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing
the design, installation and construction of certain mechanical systems in
the Town, a certain document entitled the "International Mechanical Code,
2006," as published by the International Code Council. Not less than one
copy of the International Mechanical Code, 2006, shall be kept on file in the
Town Hall.
§ 43-13. Modification of standards.
The International Mechanical Code, 2006, as adopted by § 43-12, is
modified as set forth below:
In the second line of Section 101.1 on page 1, in the space labeled
"[name of jurisdiction]," insert "the Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section 102.8 on page 1 is revised to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code and listed in Chapter 15 shall be considered
part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each
such reference, except to the extent that any of such standards have
been expressly modified in the Code of the Town of Indian Head.
Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the
referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
B.
New Section 102.10 is added on page 1, to read as follows:
102.10 Conflicting provisions. Except as otherwise provided in
Section 102.8, in any situation where a provision of this code conflicts
with the provision of any other law, ordinance, code or regulation,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail,
regardless which may have been enacted first.
C.
D. Section 103 on page 2 is deleted in its entirety.
E. Section 104.2 on page 2 is deleted in entirety.
In the second line of Section 104.3 on page 2, delete "issue" and
substitute "authorize the issuance of."
F.
In the last line of Section 106.4 on page 3, immediately following "to
the applicant," insert "by the Town."
G.
§ 43-12 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-13
27:95
In the second line of the first paragraph of Section 106.4.1 on page 4,
delete "issues" and substitute "authorizes the issuance of."
H.
In the first line of the second paragraph of Section 106.4.1 on page 4,
delete "issue" and substitute "authorize the issuance of."
I.
In the first line of Section 106.4.3 on page 4, delete "by the Code
Official."
J.
Section 106.5.2 on page 4 is revised to read as follows:
106.5.2. Fee schedule. The permit fees for all mechanical work shall
be as prescribed by ordinance adopted by the Town Council from time
to time.
K.
Section 106.5.3 on page 4 is revised to read as follows:
106.5.3 Fee refunds. The Code Official shall authorize the refunding
of the full amount of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected.
The Code Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.
L.
Section 108.3 on page 5 is deleted in its entirety, and new Section 108.3
is substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
108.3 Prosecution. In addition to the penalties provided for in
Section 108.4, in case of failure to comply with a notice of violation
within the time specified in the notice, or in case of any other unlawful
acts under this code, the Code Official, with the approval of the Town
Manager of the Town, may institute in the name of the Town an
appropriate civil action or proceeding against the person responsible
for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person:
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from further
execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure;
3. To require the removal of work in violation; or
4. To prevent, or to require the termination or removal of, the
occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with the
provisions of this code or any order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
M.
Section 108.4 on page 5 is deleted, and new Section 108.4 is
substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
N.
§ 43-13 § 43-13
27:96
108.4 Violations and penalties.
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code or of any order
or directive of the Code Official, or the erection, installation,
alteration or repair of mechanical work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the Code Official,
or of a permit or certificate issued under this code, are declared
to be misdemeanors. Any person who knowingly and willfully
commits any of these acts shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly
§ 1-36, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as
amended). Each day that one of these acts continues is a separate
offense.
2. Except as provided in Paragraph 1 above, violations of this code
or of an order or directive of the Code Official, or the erection,
installation, alteration or repair of mechanical work in violation
of the approved construction documents or directive of the Code
Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under this code, are
declared to be municipal infractions and shall be subject to the
penalties and procedures as provided in Chapter 1, Article IV, and
particularly § 1-37, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990,
as amended). The fine for each violation shall be $400 for each
initial violation and $400 for each day thereafter that the violation
continues. Each day that one of these acts continues is a separate
offense.
In the last sentence of Section 108.5 on page 6, delete "shall be liable to
a fine of not less than [amount] dollars or more than [amount] dollars"
and substitute "shall be subject to the penalties as provided in Section
108.4 of this code."
O.
Section 109.2 through 109.7, inclusive, on pages 6 and 7 are deleted,
and new Section 109.2 is substituted, to read as follows:
109.2 Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals referred to in Section
109.1 is the same Board of Appeals provided for in Chapter 6 of
the Code of the Town of Indian Head. All appeals filed pursuant to
Section 109.1 shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 6 and by
any rules of procedure adopted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to
Chapter 6.
P.
The definition of "Code Official" as contained in Section 202 on page 10
is revised to read as follows:
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of the Department of Public Works
of the Town or such other person as the Town's Town Manager may
designate.
Q.
§ 43-13 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-13
27:97

ARTICLE VII
Existing Building Code
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-9-06; amended 11-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 10-7-08]
§ 43-14. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 43-15, there is hereby adopted by the Town
of Indian Head for the purpose of regulating and controlling the repair,
alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing
buildings in the Town of Indian Head the International Existing Building
Code, 2006, as published by the International Code Council. Not less than
one copy of the International Existing Building Code, 2006, shall be kept on
file in the Town Hall.
§ 43-15. Modification of standards.
The International Existing Building Code, 2006, as adopted by § 43-14, is
modified as set forth below:
In the second line of Section 101.1 on page 1, in the space labeled
"[NAME OF JURISDICTION]," insert "the Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section 102.4 on page 1 is revised to read as follows:
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code and those listed in Chapter 15 shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference, except to the extent that any of such
standards have been expressly modified in the Code of the Town of
Indian Head. Where differences occur between the provisions of this
code and the referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this
code shall apply.
B.
New Section 102.6 is added on page 2 to read as follows:
102.6 Conflicting provisions. Except as otherwise provided in
Section 102.4, in any situation where a provision of this code conflicts
with the provision of any other law, ordinance, code or regulation,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail,
regardless which may have been enacted first.
C.
D. Section 104.8 on page 2 is deleted in its entirety.
In the third line of Section 105.3 on page 4, delete "Department of
Building Safety" and substitute "Town."
E.
In the last line of Section 105.3.1 on page 4, delete "issue" and
substitute "authorize the issuance or."
F.
§ 43-14 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-15
27:99
In the second line of Section 106.3.1 on page 5, delete "Code Official"
and substitute "Town."
G.
In the first line of Section 106.3.3 on page 5, delete "Code Official" and
substitute "Town."
H.
In the first line of the Section 107.1 on page 6, delete "Code Official"
and substitute "Town."
I.
In the fourth line of Section 108.4 on page 6, delete "Code Official" and
substitute "Town."
J.
Section 108.6 on page 6 is revised to read as follows:
108.6 Refund. The Code Official shall authorize the refunding of the
full amount of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected. The Code
Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon
written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180
days after the date of the fee payment.
K.
In the first line of Section 109.2 on page 7, delete "issuing" and
substitute "authorizing the issuance of."
L.
In the third and fourth lines of Section 110.2 on page 7, delete
"Department of Building Safety" and substitute "Town," and in the
fourth line of that section, delete "issue" and substitute "authorize the
issuance of."
M.
Section 112.1 on page 8 is revised to read as follows:
112.1 Appeal. Any person aggrieved by an order, decision or
determination made by the Code Official relating to the application and
interpretation of this code may take an appeal to the Board of Appeals
by filing a notice of appeal with the Board within 10 days from the
order, decision or determination from which the appeal is taken.
N.
Section 112.3 on page 8 is deleted in its entirety, and new Section 112.2
is substituted, to read as follows:
112.2 Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals referred to in Section
112.1 is the same Board of Appeals provided for in Chapter 6 of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head. All appeals filed pursuant to Section
112.1 shall be governed by the provisions of such Chapter 6 and by
any rules of procedure adopted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to
Chapter 6.
O.
Section 113.3 on page 8 is deleted in its entirety, and new Section 113.3
is substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
P.
§ 43-15 § 43-15
27:100
113.3 Prosecution of violation. In addition to the penalties provided
for in Section 113.4, in case of failure to comply with a notice of
violation within the time specified in the notice, or in case of any other
unlawful acts under this code, the Code Official, with the approval
of the Town Manager of the Town, may institute in the name of the
Town an appropriate civil action or proceeding against the person
responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person:
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from further
execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure;
3. To require the removal of work in violation; or
4. To prevent, or to require the termination or removal of, the
occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with the
provisions of this code or any order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
Section 113.4 on page 8 is deleted, and new Section 113.4 is
substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
113.4 Violations and penalties.
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code or of any order or
directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued
under this code, are declared to be misdemeanors. Any person
who knowingly and willfully commits any of these acts shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
IV, and particularly § 1-36, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head
(1990, as amended). Each day that one of these acts continues is a
separate offense.
2. Except as provided in Paragraph 1 above, violations of this code,
or of an order or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under this code, are declared to be municipal
infractions, and shall be subject to the penalties and procedures
as provided in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly § 1-37, of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as amended). The fine for
each violation shall be $400 for each initial violation and $400 for
each day thereafter that the violation continues. Each day that one
of these acts continues is a separate offense.
Q.
Section 114.3 on page 9 is revised to read as follows:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served
with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to
the penalties prescribed by Section 113.4.
R.
§ 43-15 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-15
27:101

ARTICLE VIII
Energy Conservation Code
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-8-06; amended 11-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 10-3-08]
§ 43-16. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 43-17, there is hereby adopted by the Town of
Indian Head, for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing
the consumption of energy resources in buildings and structures in the
Town, a certain document entitled the "International Energy Conservation
Code, 2006," as published by the International Code Council. Not less than
one copy of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2006, shall be kept
on file in Town Hall.
§ 43-17. Modification of standards.
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2006, as adopted by § 43-16,
is modified as set forth below:
In the second line of Section 101.1 on page 1, in the space labeled
"[NAME OF JURISDICTION]," insert "the Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section 107.1 on page 3 is revised to read as follows:
107.1 Referenced standards. The standards and portions thereof,
referenced in this code and listed in Chapter 6, shall be considered
part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each
such reference, except to the extent that any of such standards have
been expressly modified in the Code of the Town of Indian Head.
Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the
referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
B.
New Section 107.3 is added on page 3, to read as follows:
107.3 Conflicting provisions. Except as otherwise provided in
Sections 107.1 and 107.2, in any situation where a provision of this
code conflicts with the provision of any other law, ordinance, code or
regulation, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall
prevail, regardless which may have been enacted first.
C.
New Sections 108.1 and 108.2 are added on page 3, to be under the
new Section 108, "Enforcement," and to read as follows:
D.
§ 43-16 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-17
27:103
SECTION 108
ENFORCEMENT
108.1 Violations and penalties.
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code or of any order
or directive of the Code Official, or the erection, installation,
alteration or repair of work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under this code, are declared to be
misdemeanors. Any person who knowingly and willfully commits
any of these acts shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as
set of forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly § 1-36, of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as amended). Each day
that one of these acts continues is a separate offense.
2. Except as provided in Paragraph 1 above, violations of this code,
or of an order or directive of the Code Official, or the erection,
installation, alteration or repair of mechanical work in violation
of the approved construction documents or directive of the Code
Official, or a permit or certificate issued under this code, are
declared to be municipal infractions and shall be subject to the
penalties and procedures as provided in Chapter 1, Article IV, and
particularly § 1-37, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990,
as amended). The fine for each violation shall be $400 for each
initial violation and $400 for each day thereafter that the violation
continues. Each day that one of the acts continues is a separate
offense.
108.2 Prosecution. In addition to the penalties provided for in
Section 108.1, in case of any unlawful acts under this code, the Code
Official, with the approval of the Town Manager of the Town, may
institute in the name of the Town an appropriate civil action or
proceeding against the person responsible for the violation for the
purpose of ordering that person:
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from further
execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure;
3. To require the removal of work in violation; or
4. To prevent, or to require the termination of removal of, the
occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with the
provisions of this code or any order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
The definition of "Code Official" as contained in Section 202 on page
5 is deleted, and the new definition of "Code Official" is substituted to
read as follows:
E.
§ 43-17 § 43-17
27:104
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of the Department of Public Works
of the Town or such other person as the Town's Town Manager may
designate.
§ 43-17 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-17
27:105

ARTICLE IX
Fuel Gas Code
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-7-06; amended 11-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 10-5-08]
§ 43-18. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 43-19, there is hereby adopted by the Town
of Indian Head for the purpose of regulating and controlling the design
and installation of fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances in the Town
of Indian Head the International Fuel Gas Code, 2006, as published by the
International Code Council. Not less than one copy of the International Fuel
Gas Code, 2006, shall be kept on file in the Town Hall.
§ 43-19. Modification of standards.
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2006, as adopted by § 43-18, is modified
as set forth below:
In the second line of Section 101.1 on page 1, in the space labeled
"[NAME OF JURISDICTION], insert "the Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section 102.8 on page 2 is revised to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced Codes and Standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code shall be those listed in Chapter 8 and shall
be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference, except to the extent that any of such
standards have been expressly modified in the Code of the Town of
Indian Head. Where differences occur between the provisions of this
code and the referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this
code shall apply.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate
the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the
conditions of the listing and manufacturers shall apply.
B.
New Section 102.10 is added to page 2 to read as follows:
102.10 Conflicting provisions. Except as otherwise provided in
Section 102.8, in any situation where a provision of this code conflicts
with the provisions of any other law, ordinance, code or regulation,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail,
regardless which may have been enacted first.
C.
D. Section 103 (IFGC) on page 2 is deleted in its entirety.
E. Section 104.2 on page 3 is deleted in its entirety.
In the second line of Section 104.3 on page 3, delete "issue" and
substitute "authorize the issuance of."
F.
§ 43-18 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-19
27:107
In the last line of Section 106.4 on page 4, immediately after "issued to
the applicant" insert "by the Treasurer of the Town."
G.
In the second line of Section 106.4.1 on page 4, delete "issues" and
substitute "authorizes the issuance of."
H.
In the first line of the second paragraph of Section 106.4.1 on page 4,
delete "issue" and substitute "authorize the issuance of."
I.
In the first and second lines of Section 106.4.3 on page 4, delete "by the
Code Official."
J.
Section 106.5.2 on page 5 is revised to read as follows:
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The permit fees for all work for which a permit
is required by this code shall be as prescribed by ordinance adopted
by the Town Council from time to time.
K.
Section 106.5.3 on page 5 is revised to read as follows:
106.5.3 Refund. The Code Official shall authorize the refunding of the
full amount of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected. The Code
Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon
written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180
days after the date of the fee payment.
L.
Section 108.3 on page 6 is deleted in its entirety, and new Section 108.3
is substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
108.3 Prosecution of violation. In addition to the penalties provided
for in Section § 108.4, in case of failure to comply with a notice of
violation within the time specified in the notice, or in case of any other
unlawful acts under this code, the Code Official, with the approval
of the Town Manager of the Town, may institute in the name of the
Town an appropriate civil action or proceeding against the person
responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person:
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from further
execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure;
3. To require the removal or work in violation; or
4. To prevent, or to require the termination or removal of, the
occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with the
provisions of this code or any order or directions made pursuant
thereto.
M.
Section 108.4 on page 6 is deleted, and new Section 108.4 is
substituted in lieu thereof, to read as follows:
N.
§ 43-19 § 43-19
27:108
108.4 Violations and penalties.
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code or of any order
or directive of the Code Official, or the erection, installation,
alteration or repair of any fuel gas system or gas-fired appliance
in a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under this code, are declared to be
misdemeanors. Any person who knowingly and willfully commits
any of these acts shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as
set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly § 1-36, of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as amended). Each day
that one of these acts continues is a separate offense.
2. Except as provided in Paragraph 1 above, violations of this code,
or of an order or directive of the Code Official, or the erection,
installation, alteration or repair of any fuel gas system or gas-fired
appliance in a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Code Official, or a
permit or certificate issued under this code, are declared to be
municipal infractions and shall be subject to the penalties and
procedures as provided in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly
§ 1-37, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as
amended). The fine for each violation shall be $400 for each
initial violation and $400 for each day thereafter that the violation
continues. Each day that one of the acts continues is a separate
offense.
The last sentence of Section 108.5 on page 7 is revised to read as
follows: "Any person who shall continue any work on the system after
raving been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
conditions, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by Section
108.4.
O.
Sections 109.2 through 109.7, inclusive, on page 7, are deleted in their
entireties, and new Section 109.2 is substituted, to read as follows:
109.2 Board of appeals. The Board of Appeals referred to in Section
109.1 is the same Board of Appeals provided for in Chapter 6 of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head. All appeals filed pursuant to Section
109.1 shall be governed by the provisions of such Chapter 6 and by
any rules of procedure adopted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to
Chapter 6.
P.
The definition of "Code Official" as contained in Section 202 (IFGC) on
page 10 is revised to read as follows:
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of the Department of Public Works
of the Town or such other person as the Town's Town Manager may
designate.
Q.
§ 43-19 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-19
27:109

ARTICLE X
Fire Code
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 10-10-06; amended 11-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 10-10-08]
§ 43-20. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 43-21, there is hereby adopted by the Town of
Indian Head for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing
the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising
from the storage, handling or use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy
of buildings and premises in the Town, a certain document entitled the
"International Fire Code, 2006," as published by the International Code
Council. Not less than one copy of the International Fire Code, 2006, shall
be kept on file in the Town Hall.
§ 43-21. Modification of standards.
The International Fire Code 2006, as adopted by § 43-20, is modified as set
forth below:
In the second line of Section 101.1 on page 1, in the space labeled
"[NAME OF JURISDICTION]," insert "the Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section 102.6 and 102.4 on page 1 are revised to read as follows:
102.6 Referenced standards. The standards referenced in this code
and listed in Chapter 45 shall be considered part of the requirements
of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference, except
to the extent that any of such standards have been expressly modified
in the Code of the Town of Indian Head. In any situation where a
provision of this code conflicts with the provision of any such standard
or with the provision of any other law, ordinance, code or regulation,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail,
regardless which may have been enacted first, except that if a
provision of this code conflicts with the Maryland Accessibility Code
as adopted by the Maryland Department of Housing and Community
Development, the Maryland Accessibility Code shall prevail.
102.4 Application of building code. The design and construction of
new structures to provide egress facilities, fire protection, and builtin
fire-protection equipment shall be controlled by the International
Building Code, 2006, and the International Residential Code for Oneand
Two-Family Dwellings, 2006, as adopted by Chapter 43 of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head. Repairs, alterations and additions
to existing structures shall comply with the International Existing
Building Code as adopted by the Town.
B.
§ 43-20 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-21
27:111
Delete in its entirety Section 103, Department of Fire Prevention, on
page 2, and substitute the following:
SECTION 103
CODE OFFICIAL
103.1 General. This code shall be administered and enforced by the
Code Official. The Code Official shall be the Director of Public Works
of the Town or such other persons as the Town's Town Manager may
designate.
C.
Section 105.1.1 on page 3 is revised to read as follows:
105.1.1 Permits required. Permits required by this code shall be
obtained from the Treasurer of the Town after payment of such fees
as may be prescribed by ordinance adopted by the Town Council from
time to time. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated
therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the
Code Official.
D.
The last sentence of Section 105.2.4 on page 4 is revised to read as
follows: "If the Code Official is satisfied that the proposed work or
operation conforms to the requirements of this code and all laws and
ordinances applicable thereto, the Code Official shall authorize the
issuance of a permit for such work."
E.
The first sentence of Section 105.3.4 on page 4 is revised to read as
follows: "Where use and occupancy permits are required and upon
request of a permit applicant, the Code Official may authorize the
issuance of a conditional permit to occupy the premises or portion
thereof before the entire work or operations on the premises is
completed, provided that such portion or portions will be occupied
safely prior to full completion or installation of equipment and
operations without endangering person, property or public welfare."
F.
The first sentence of Section 105.3.7 on page 5 is revised to read as
follows: "All permits required by this code shall be issued on approved
forms furnished for that purpose."
G.
Section 105.6 on page 5 is revised to read as follows:
105.6 Required operational permits. The Code Official may
authorize the issuance of operational permits for the operations set
forth in Sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.46.
H.
Section 105.7 on page 9 is revised to read as follows:
105.7 Required construction permits. The Code Official may
authorize the issuance of construction permits for work as set forth in
Sections 105.7.1 through 105.7.13.
I.
§ 43-21 § 43-21
27:112
Sections 108.1 and 108.3 on page 10 are deleted, and new Section
108.1 is substituted, to read as follows:
108.1 Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals provided for in
Chapter 6 of the Code of the Town of Indian Head may hear appeals
of orders, decisions or determinations made by this code. All appeals
filed pursuant to this Section 108 shall be governed by the provisions
of Chapter 6 of such code and by any rules of procedure adopted by
the Board of Appeals pursuant to Chapter 6.
J.
Section 109.2.3 on page 11 is revised to read as follows:
109.2.3 Failure to correct violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with within the time specified in the notice, the Code Official,
with the approval of the Town's Town Manager, may request the Town
Attorney to initiate appropriate civil proceedings to restrain, correct
or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of
this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
K.
Section 109.3 on page 12 is revised to read as follows:
109.3 Violations and penalties.
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code, and of any orders
issued pursuant to this code, are declared to be misdemeanors.
Any person who knowingly and willfully violates any provision of
this code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly § 1-36, of the Code of the
Town of Indian Head (1990).
2. Except as provided in Paragraph 1 above, violations of this code,
and of any orders issued pursuant to this code, are declared to
be municipal infractions and shall be subject to the penalties and
procedures as provided in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly
§ 1-37, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as
amended).
L.
The definition of "Fire Code Official" as contained in Section 202 on
page 15 is revised to read as follows:
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The Chief of the Indian Head Volunteer Fire
Department or State Fire Marshal, or such other person as the Town's
Town Manager may designate. The Fire Code Official also is referred
to in this code as the "Code Official."
M.
N. Add new Section 1029 on page 141 to read as follows:
§ 43-21 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-21
27:113
SECTION 1029
INFORMATION SIGNS
1029.1 General. A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in all
interior stairways more than three stories above grade, designating
the floor level above the floor of discharge. All elevator lobby call
stations on all floor levels shall be marked with approved signs in
accordance with the requirements for new buildings in the Town
Building Code. In addition to any such requirements in the Town
Building Code, all elevator lobby call stations on all floor levels shall
be marked with approved signs reading as follows: "Use stairways
in case of fire — do not use elevators." This latter requirement shall
apply to all existing and newly constructed buildings. Exception: The
emergency sign shall not be required for elevators that are part of an
accessible means of egress complying with the Town Building Code.
O. Chapters 27 through 44 are deleted in their entireties.
New Chapter 46, Miscellaneous Provisions, is added after Chapter 45,
to read as follows:
CHAPTER 46
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 4600
GENERAL
4600.1 Restricted Locations (Storage).
4600.1.1 Class 1 liquids. The storage of Class 1 liquids in
aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the
entire corporate limits of the Town of Indian Head, except that this
prohibition shall not apply to class 1 liquids in aboveground tanks
for the sole purpose of private storage of heating fuel for private
residences.
4600.1.2 Bulk plants. No new bulk plants shall be constructed
within the entire corporate limits of the Town of Indian Head,
except that this prohibition shall not apply to bulk plants in
industrial zoned districts which permit such bulk plants.
4600.2 Vehicle routing. Vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals
shall be routed to avoid congested traffic and densely populated areas.
Such vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals shall use Indian Head
Highway or such other routes as shall be established from time to time
by the Code Official.
4600.3 Location of containers. Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gas is hereby restricted within the entire corporate limits of the Town
of Indian Head to industrial zoned districts which permit such bulk
storage. This provision shall not apply to existing lawful storage.
4600.4 Fire lanes.
P.
§ 43-21 § 43-21
27:114
CHAPTER 46
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 4600
GENERAL
4600.1 Restricted Locations (Storage).
4600.4.1 Establishment of fire lanes. The Town's Town
Manager shall establish and cause to be marked fire lanes, from
time to time, as he deems necessary, upon recommendation by
the Code Official and the Chief of the Indian Head Volunteer Fire
Department.
4600.4.2 Obstruction of fire lanes. Any snow, debris,
construction material or other matter which is placed in such a
manner as to obstruct or interfere with the connection of a hose to
a fire hydrant shall be deemed placed in violation of this section.
Any vehicle, on private property or otherwise, which is parked in
such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the connection of a
hose to a fire hydrant shall be deemed parked in violation of this
section.
4600.4.3 Notice of violation. Whenever any entrance or exit,
sidewalk or fire hydrant is obstructed by snow, debris,
construction material, vehicles or other matter likely to interfere
with the ingress or the operation of fire apparatus or other
emergency vehicles in case of fire, the Code Official may order the
obstruction removed.
4600.4.4 Failure to correct violations. If the order to remove
the obstruction of the fire lanes is not complied with promptly, the
Code Official, with the approval of the Town's Town Manager, may
request the legal counsel of the Town to institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation. If the obstruction is a motor vehicle, and if the motor
vehicle presents an actual impediment to the ingress, egress, or
other operation of fire apparatus or other emergency vehicles, the
Code Official may order the vehicle towed away and stored at the
owner's expense.
§ 43-21 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-21
27:115
CHAPTER 46
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 4600
GENERAL
4600.1 Restricted Locations (Storage).
4600.5 Authority at fires and other emergencies. The person
in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the
protection of life and/or property is empowered to direct such
operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected
or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations
or to take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of
his duty. The person in charge at the scene may prohibit any person,
vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause
to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which
may impede or interfere with the fire suppression or other emergency
operations. The person in charge at the scene may remove or cause
to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All
persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and
shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so.
4600.6 Interference with emergency operations. It shall be
unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of
travel of any fire apparatus or other emergency vehicle in any way or
to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with,
obstruct or hamper any fire suppression or other emergency operation.
4600.7 Compliance with orders. A person shall not willfully fail
or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of fire or
law enforcement officials at the scene of a fire or other emergency
operation or interfere with the compliance attempts of another
individual.
4600.8 Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire emergency
equipment. A person shall not, without proper authorization from the
person in charge of fire emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself
to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any such fire emergency
vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren,
horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or manipulate
or tamper with or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers,
valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or
protective clothing on or a part of any fire emergency vehicle.
4600.9 Damage or injury to fire equipment personnel. It shall be
unlawful for any person to damage or deface or attempt to conspire to
damage or deface any fire emergency vehicle at any time or to injure or
attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire personnel while performing
official duties.
§ 43-21 § 43-21
27:116
CHAPTER 46
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 4600
GENERAL
4600.1 Restricted Locations (Storage).
4600.10 Sale of defective fire extinguishers. A person shall not
sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher
which is not approved by the State Fire Marshal or which is not
in proper working order or the contents of which do not meet the
requirements of the State Fire Marshal. The requirements of this
section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or
damaged equipment for junk when said units are permanently marked
with permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
4600.11 Hydrant use approval. A person shall not use or operate
any fire hydrant intended for use for fire suppression purposes unless
such person first secures a permit for such use from the Code Official.
This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person
employed by and authorized to make such use by the Town.
4600.12 Maintenance of fire suppression equipment. A person
shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire
hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under
any provision of this code except for the purpose of extinguishing
a fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary
repairs or when permitted by the Code Official. Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or
reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has
been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or
equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Code
Official.
4600.13. Street obstructions. A person or persons shall not erect,
construct, place, or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars,
pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on
any street within the boundaries of the Town, except as authorized by
Town Council. The word "street" as used in this section means any
roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but
not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public
streets and highways within the boundaries of the Town.
§ 43-21 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-21
27:117
Chapter 47
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 47-1. Grant of authority.
§ 47-2. Construction and maintenance.
The Town Council of the Town of Indian Head shall have the authority to
grant exclusive right and privilege for a specified period to a franchise
to erect buildings and to construct, maintain and operate towers, cable
and related equipment for the interception and distribution of
television, radio and other signals and to sell services related thereto to
the town and the inhabitants thereof.
A.
The granting of the franchise shall be done by agreement by the Town
of Indian Head in a form approved by the Town Attorney.
B.
The territorial area covered by the franchise consists of the present and
future territorial limits of the town.
C.
The "franchise holder," as referred to herein, is defined as the person,
company or legal entity to whom the CATV franchise is awarded.
D.
The franchise holder shall have the right to enter into appropriate
agreements with telephone and power companies and other suppliers
of public utilities and services for the purpose of attaching distribution
cables and associated equipment to poles or towers or through
underground conduits and trenches provided by such companies.
A.
All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the franchise holder within the town shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and
other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any
of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.
B.
In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved
area, the franchise holder shall, at its own cost and expense and in a
manner approved by the appropriate governmental authority, replace
and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area in
as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was
done.
C.
If, at any time during the period of the franchise, the town shall lawfully
elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way, the franchise holder, upon reasonable notice by the town,
shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other fixtures, at its own expense.
D.
§ 43-21 § 47-2
27:118
§ 47-3. Effect of other ordinances.
The franchise holder shall be subject to all ordinances in force or that may
be hereafter enacted.
§ 47-4. Indemnification.
§ 47-5. Providing service.
Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the franchise
holder shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the
usual travel on such public way.
E.
The franchise holder shall, on the request of any person holding a
building moving permit issued by the town, temporarily raise or lower
its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such
temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the
person requesting the same, and the franchise holder shall have the
authority to require such payment in advance.
F.
The franchise holder shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public ways and places of
the town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in
contact with the wires and cables of the franchise holder, except that,
at the option of the town, such trimming may be done by it or under its
supervision and direction, at the expense of the franchise holder. Any
trimming in a public right-of-way shall be subject to applicable state
and local regulations.
G.
In all sections of the town where the cables, wires or other like facilities
of public utilities are or are hereafter placed underground, the
franchise holder shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities
underground to the maximum extent that existing technology
reasonably permits the franchise holder to do so. In addition, the
franchise holder shall remove its overhead cables, wires or other like
facilities and replace them with underground facilities when other
utilities are required to do so within the Town of Indian Head.
H.
The franchise holder shall hold the town harmless from any and all
claims or damages as a result of this franchise, including damages
arising out of the construction, maintenance and operations of the
CATV system authorized herein.
A.
Before starting construction, the franchise holder shall insure the town
and the franchise holder with regard to all damages mentioned above.
The amounts of such insurance to be carried for liability due to property
damage shall be $1,000,000 as to any one occurrence; and against
liability due to injury to or death of person, $1,000,000 as to any one
occurrence. Said insurance is to be provided by a recognized insurance
company authorized to do business in Maryland.
B.
§ 47-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 47-5
27:119
The franchise holder shall, during the term of this franchise, operate
facilities capable of developing a regular service, as provided in a
franchise agreement. The television signals shall be of high-quality
color and monochrome, as transmitted, and will be consistent with
the present state of the art. The town may require that one channel
be reserved for television signals originated within the town. Locally
originated signals will be offered on this channel on a regular basis,
beginning no later than one year after the granting of a franchise
agreement. Special television and other services may also be provided
on other channels of the proposed CATV system to customers equipped
and authorized to use these additional services.
A.
The franchise holder shall maintain an office within the territorial limits
of the town. Said office shall have regular business hours, have a
listed telephone and be so operated that complaints and requests for
repairs or adjustments may be received at any reasonable time. The
franchise holder shall provide maintenance service sufficient to attend
to these complaints and requests within a reasonable period of time.
The franchise holder shall provide data upon request to the town at
quarterly intervals on the quality of signals and maintenance service
provided.
B.
The franchise holder shall furnish service to public, private and
parochial school locations within the town for educational purposes,
upon request by the town and upon agreement to the payment by the
school system of the actual cost of such installations for materials and
labor. Such service will thenceforth be provided by the franchise holder
at no monthly service charge to the town or to the school system. The
franchise holder shall furnish, upon request of the Town Council, one
connection each to the town Police, Fire and Rescue Departments and
to the Town Office, without charge for installation and without charge
for continuing monthly service.
C.
Before starting construction of the CATV system, the franchise holder
shall demonstrate to the town that the franchise holder is sufficiently
well financed to ensure the completion of the initial system and to
defray any operating losses that may be anticipated in the initial
operation of the system. Failure of the franchise holder to meet this
requirement shall constitute grounds for forfeiture of the franchise.
D.
In the case of any emergency or disaster, the franchise holder shall,
upon the request of the town, make every effort to make available its
facilities to the town or any governmental agency designated by the
town for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. The
franchise holder should provide a voice and a television signal on the
local-origination channel to permit emergency signals to be distributed
under the control of the town. The cost of such connection means is to
be paid by the franchise holder, and the cost of any camera, microphone
or other signal-generation equipment dedicated to emergency use is to
be paid by the town.
E.
§ 47-5 § 47-5
27:120
§ 47-6. Rates.
§ 47-7. Franchise term.
The franchise holder shall construct the initial CATV system so as to
offer services to all dwelling units within the territorial limits of Indian
Head within nine months after the date of granting the franchise.
However, the franchise holder shall offer service to all residents
connected to a CATV system at the time of the granting of a franchise
within six months from the date of the granting of a franchise. Failure of
the franchise holder to meet this requirement shall constitute grounds
for forfeiture of the franchise. Within one year of the date of the
franchise, the franchise holder shall complete construction of the
system so as to include all requirements described in this chapter.
The franchise holder may extend CATV service to any subscriber
outside the corporate limits of the town after the initial system is
constructed within the corporate limits of the town if the franchise
holder is current in its connection of subscribers within the area
covered by the initial system. "Current" shall mean no subscriber
waiting more than five days for initial connection.
(1)
After the initial nine-month system start-up period, any citizen
requesting CATV service, in writing, shall be provided with such
service within 10 working days. The franchise holder will be
assessed liquidated damages to the citizen requesting the service
of one-month free service for each day over 10 working days that
the service is not provided.
(2)
F.
The franchise holder shall charge reasonable fees and shall file a copy
of such schedule of fees with the town.
A.
A "connection" shall be construed to mean an entrance into any private
residence, apartment house, multifamily dwelling, place of business or
governmental building, entering the building in a manner similar to
the provision of electric or telephone services. In the event that the
distance from the right-of-way to the building exceeds 250 feet or if the
franchise holder should be requested to provide other than the usual
entrance, the franchise holder shall negotiate with the subscriber to
provide such service at a reasonable connection charge.
B.
Any franchise awarded shall be for a period not to exceed 20 years, with
the exception of the provision for renewal.
A.
Provisions for renewal may be provided for in the award of a franchise.
Such renewal may not exceed 10 years or the term of the original
franchise, whichever is greater.
B.
§ 47-5 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 47-8
27:121
§ 47-8. Franchise fee. [Amended 6-2-1997 by Ord. No. 5-3-97]
The franchise holder shall pay to the Town of Indian Head a franchise fee
in the amount of 5% of gross revenue from all CATV service and connection
charges paid by subscribers served from the town system, starting with
the date that the first subscribers are connected. Payment of said fee,
together with an accounting of the subscribers and services rendered each
subscriber, shall be provided for in the franchise agreement.
§ 47-9. Sale of receivers prohibited.
The franchise holder shall not engage, within the area served by the CATV
system to be constructed under the franchise, in the retail sale, service,
rental, leasing or repair of home television receivers and in the sale of parts
for such receivers.
§ 47-10. Transfer of rights and privileges.
The franchise rights and privileges herein described shall not be assignable,
except as herein provided, without the consent of the town.
§ 47-11. Head end locations.
The head end, earth station or other signal-reception equipment for the
interception of television and radio signals for the Town of Indian Head shall
be located within the corporate limits of the Town of Indian Head, unless
the franchise holder shall request and receive approval of the town to locate
the head end elsewhere.
§ 47-12. FCC regulations.
§ 47-13. Forfeiture.
If the franchise holder shall fail to perform any provision of this chapter
or the franchise agreement or to make any payments as provided in this
chapter within 90 days after having been given written notice by the town
to so perform or to make such payments, the town may give the franchise
holder written notice cancelling and terminating the franchise and contract.
The franchise holder shall provide the town with copies of all major
Federal Communications Commission statements concerning the
number and type of television channels that may be carried on a CATV
system and on any other rules and regulations of major significance to
the operation of a CATV system, within 30 days of publication, that may
be affected by the Federal Communications Commission subsequent to
the granting of this franchise.
A.
Any modifications of the regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission that affect the franchise or the operation of a cable
television system shall be incorporated into the franchise.
B.
§ 47-8 § 47-14
27:122
§ 47-14. Acceptance.
The franchise, when approved by the Town Council and made effective
in the manner prescribed by law, if accepted by the apparent successful
franchise awardee by signed acceptance within 30 days of the date upon
which the same may become effective as prescribed by law, shall have the
force and effect of a contract binding upon the franchise holder and the
town.
§ 47-15. Application fees. [Added 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2-2-08]
Chapter 48
CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television — See Ch. 47.
To be acceptable for filing, each application of a type listed in
Subsection B of this section shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
filing fee of $5,000, payable to the Town, to cover costs incidental to the
awarding or enforcement of the franchise, as appropriate.
A.
The fee specified in Subsection A of this section applies to the following
applications:
(1) Application for an initial franchise or for issuance of an RFP.
(2) Application for renewal of a franchise.
(3) Application for modification of a franchise agreement.
(4) Application for approval of a transfer.
B.
To the extent consistent with applicable law:
The Town may require, in addition to the application fee provided
for in Subsections A and B of this section, the franchisee, or, where
applicable, a transferor or transferee, to reimburse the Town for its
reasonable out-of-pocket expenses in considering the application,
including consultants' fees.
(1)
No payments made under this section shall be considered a
franchise fee, but shall be deemed to fall within one or more of the
exceptions in 47 U.S.C. § 542(G)(2).
(2)
C.
§ 47-14 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 47-15
48:123

ARTICLE I
Rate Regulations
§ 48-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, the terms set forth in this section have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC CABLE RATES — The monthly charges for a subscription to the basic
service tier and the associated equipment.
BASIC SERVICE TIER — A separately available service tier to which
subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as
a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all peg channels and
all domestic television signals other than superstations.
BENCHMARK — A per channel rate of charge for cable service and
associated equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable.
CABLE ACT OF 1992 — The Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992.
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons:
CHANNEL — A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel
number or similar designation.
COST OF SERVICE SHOWING — A filing in which the cable operator
attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient
to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic
service tier and to continue to attract capital.
CUSTOMER — Subscriber.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
INITIAL BASIC CABLE RATES — The rates that the cable operator is
charging for the basic service tier, including charges for associated
equipment, at the time the town notifies the cable operator of the town's
qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates.
MUST-CARRY SIGNAL — The signal of any local broadcast station (except
superstations) which is required to be carried on the basic service tier.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most retail and
service businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all
cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one
night per week and/or some weekend hours.
Who provide cable service over a cable system and who, directly or
through one or more affiliates, own a significant interest in such a cable
system; or
A.
Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
B.
§ 48-1 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 48-1
48:125
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions which
are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are
not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited
to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network
outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which
are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not
limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular
peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable
system.
PEG CHANNEL — The channel capacity designated for public, educational
or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that
channel capacity.
PRICE CAP — The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable
rates regulated by the town.
REASONABLE RATE STANDARD — A per channel rate that is at, or below,
the benchmark or price cap level.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels.
SUPERSTATION — Any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted
by satellite.
TOWN — The Town of Indian Head.
§ 48-2. Initial review of basic cable rates.
Notice. The Town Manager shall notify all cable operators in the town,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the town intends to
regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and
associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992.
A.
Cable operator response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the
town, a cable operator shall file with the town its current rates for
the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting
material concerning the reasonableness of its rates.
B.
Expedited determination and public hearing.
If the Town Council is able to determine expeditiously that the
cable operator's rates for the basic service tier and associated
equipment are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as
determined by the applicable, benchmark, the Town Council shall:
Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views; and
(a)
Act to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable
operator filed its basic cable rates with the town.
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 48-1 § 48-2
48:126
If the Town Council takes no action within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the town, the
proposed rates will continue in effect.
(2)
Extended review period.
If the Town Council is unable to determine whether the rates in
issue are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the
material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service
showing, the Town Council, within 30 days from the date the cable
operator filed its basic cable rates with the town and by adoption
of a formal resolution, shall invoke the following additional periods
of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
Ninety days if the Town Council needs more time to ensure that
a rate is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or
(a)
One hundred fifty days if the cable operator has submitted
a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate above the
applicable benchmark.
(b)
(1)
If the Town Council has not made a decision within the ninety- or
one-hundred-fifty-day period, the Town Council shall issue a brief
written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator
to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the
proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(2)
During the extended review period and before taking action on
the proposed rate, the Town Council shall hold at least one public
hearing at which interested persons may express their views and
record objections.
(3)
D.
Objections. An interested person who desires to make an objection
to the proposed initial basic rate shall make the objection during the
public hearing or may submit the objection in writing at any time before
the decision resolution is adopted. An objection shall not be made part
of the record unless the objector provides the objector's name and
address.
E.
Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic rate
schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate
standard, the Town Council shall review the rates using the benchmark
analysis in accordance with any regulations and forms promulgated by
the FCC. Based on the findings by the Town Council, the initial basic
cable rates shall be established as follows:
If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those
rates may become the initial basic cable rates and the cable
operator's rates will be capped at that level. [Amended 3-4-1996
by Ord. No. 2-1-1996]
(1)
F.
§ 48-2 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 48-2
48:127
If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rate
shall be the greater of the cable operator's per-channel rate on
September 30, 1992, reduced by 17%, or the applicable
benchmark, adjusted for inflation and any change in the number
of channels occurring between September 30, 1992, and the initial
date of regulation.
(2)
If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the
cable operator's per-channel rate was below the benchmark on
September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the
benchmark, adjusted for inflation.
(3)
Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce
the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator may submit a costof-
service showing in an attempt to justify an initial basic cable rate
above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The Town Council shall
review a cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for costof-
service review. The Town Council may approve initial basic cable
rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary
showing. However, if a cost-of-service determination results in rates
below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30,
1992, rates minus 17%, the rates resulting from the cost-of-service may
be the cable operator's new rates. [Amended 3-4-1996 by Ord. No.
2-1-1996]
G.
Decisions.
By formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable
operator's proposed rates, the Town Council shall adopt its decision
by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the
following:
If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard
or is justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the Town Council
shall approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable
operator; or
(a)
If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate
standard, and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not
justify the proposed rates, the Town Council shall establish
initial basic cable rates that are within the FCC's reasonable
rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service analysis.
(b)
(1)
Rollbacks and refunds. If the Town Council determines that the
initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate
standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing
justifies lower rates, the Town Council may order the rates reduced
in accordance with Subsection F or G of this section, as applicable.
In addition, the Town Council may order the cable operator to pay
to subscribers refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with
interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal
(2)
H.
§ 48-2 § 48-2
48:128
§ 48-3. Review of request for increase in basic cable rates.
Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments),
retroactive up to the prior twelve-month period. The method for
paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance
with FCC regulations as directed in the Town Council's decision
resolution. [Amended 3-4-1996 by Ord. No. 2-1-1996]
Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If rates
proposed by a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part,
or if objections to the proposed rates made by other parties, the
resolution must state the reasons for the decision, and the Town
Council must give public notice of its decision by publication once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the town.
(3)
Appeal. The Town Council's decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in
accordance with applicable federal regulations.
I.
Notice. A cable operator in the town who desires to increase the rates
for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request
with the town and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the
cable operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not
be given more often than quarterly and not until at least one year after
the determination of the initial basic cable rates. [Amended 3-4-1996
by Ord. No. 2-1-1996]
A.
Expedited determination and public hearing.
If the Town Council is able to determine expeditiously that the
cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is
within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the
applicable price cap, the Town Council shall:
Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views; and
(a)
Act to approve the rate increase within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its request with the town.
(b)
(1)
If the Town Council takes no action within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its request with the town, the proposed
rates shall then become effective.
(2)
B.
Extended review period.
If the Town Council is unable to determine whether the rate
increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the
material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service
showing, the Town Council, by adoption of a formal resolution, shall
invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to
make a final determination:
(1)
C.
§ 48-2 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 48-3
48:129
Ninety days if the Town Council needs more time to ensure
that the requested increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate
standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and
(a)
One hundred fifty days if the cable operator has submitted a
cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase above
the applicable price cap.
(b)
The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review
period.
(2)
If the Town Council has not made a decision within the ninety- or
one-hundred-fifty-day period, the Town Council shall issue a brief
written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator
to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the
proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(3)
During the extended review period and before taking action on the
requested rate increase, the Town Council shall hold at least one
public hearing at which interested persons may express their views
and record objections.
(4)
Objections. An interested person who desires to make an objection to
the proposed rate increase shall make the objection during the public
hearing or may submit the objection in writing at anytime before the
decision resolution is adopted. An objection shall not be made part
of the record unless the objector provides the objector's name and
address.
D.
Delayed determination. If the Town Council is unable to make a final
determination concerning a requested rate increase within the
extended review period specified in Subsection C of this section, the
cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to potential
subsequent refund liability if the Town Council later issues a decision
disapproving any portion of the increase. [Amended 3-4-1996 by Ord.
No. 2-1-1996]
E.
Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate
increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the Town
Council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance
with any regulations and forms promulgated by the FCC. Based on the
findings of the Town Council, the basic cable rates shall be established
as follows:
If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap
established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new
basic cable rates.
(1)
If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap
established by the FCC, the Town Council shall disapprove the
proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance
with the price cap.
(2)
F.
§ 48-3 § 48-3
48:130
§ 48-4. Cable operator information.
Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service
showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap,
the Town Council shall review the submission pursuant to the FCC
standards for cost-of-service review. The Town Council may approve
a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the
necessary showing. However, a cost-of-service determination resulting
in a rate below the price cap or below the cable operator's then current
rate will constitute the cable operator's new rate.
G.
Decision. The Town Council's decision concerning the requested rate
increase shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase
proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if
objections were made by other parties to the proposed rate increase,
the resolution must state the reasons for the decision.
H.
Refunds.
The Town Council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments
with interest if:
The Town Council was unable to make a decision within the
extended time period as described in Subsection C above; and
(a)
The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end
of the extended review period; and
(b)
The Town Council determines that the rate increase as
submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable
operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service
showing, and the Town Council disapproves any portion of the
rate increase.
(c)
(1)
The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in
accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the Town Council's
decision resolution.
(2)
I.
Appeal. The Town Council's decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in
accordance with applicable federal regulations.
J.
Town may require.
In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates
or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard,
the Town Council may require the cable operator to produce
information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary
information if needed to make a rate determination. In these cases,
a cable operator may request the information be kept confidential
in accordance with this section.
(1)
A.
§ 48-3 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 48-4
48:131
In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable
rate standard, the Town Council may request additional
information only in order to document that the cable operator's
rates are in accord with the standard.
(2)
Request for confidentiality.
A cable operator submitting information to the Town Council may
request in writing that the information not be made available for
public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and
cover all of the information and all copies of the information to
which it applies.
(1)
If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be
physically separated from any information to which the request
does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information
to which the request applies shall be identified.
(2)
Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for
withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which
those reasons are based.
(3)
Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this
subsection shall not be considered.
(4)
B.
Town Council action. Requests which comply with the requirements of
Subsection B of this section shall be acted upon by the Town Council.
The Town Council shall grant the request if the cable operator presents,
by a preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent
with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling
shall be placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld
from public inspection. If the request does not present a case for
nondisclosure and the Town Council denies the request, the Town
Council shall take one of the following actions:
If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any
direction from the town, the cable operator may request that the
town return the information without considering it. Only in the
unusual instance that the public interest so requires shall the
information be made available for public inspection.
(1)
If the information was required to be submitted by the Town
Council, the information may be made available for public
inspection.
(2)
C.
Appeal. If the Town Council denies the request for confidentiality, the
cable operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within
30 days of the Town Council's decision. Release of the information will
be stayed pending review if a request for review has been timely filed
with the FCC by the cable operator. [Amended 3-4-1996 by Ord. No.
2-1-1996]
D.
§ 48-4 § 48-5
48:132
§ 48-5. Automatic rate adjustments; notification and review.
§ 48-6. Refunds and fines.
Annual inflation adjustment. To the extent permitted by FCC
regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped base per-channel
rate for the basic service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index.
A.
Other external costs.
To the extent permitted by FCC regulations, the cable operator
also may increase its rate for the basic service tier automatically to
reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase
in cost of those factors exceeds the GNP-PI. These factors include
retransmission consent fees, programming costs, state and local
taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, costs
of franchise requirements and any other factors specified in FCC
regulations. The total cost of an increase in a franchise fee may be
automatically added to the base per-channel rate, without regard
to its relation to the GNP-PI.
(1)
For all categories of external costs other than retransmission
consent and franchise fees, the starting date for measuring
changes in external costs for which the basic service per-channel
rate may be adjusted will be the date on which the basic service
tier becomes subject to regulation or February 28, 1994, whichever
occurs first. The permitted per-channel charge may not be adjusted
for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees
incurred before October 6, 1994.
(2)
B.
Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the town at least
30 days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment
items. The town shall review the increase to determine whether the
item or items qualify as automatic adjustments. The cable operator
shall provide the town with all documents determined by the town to
be reasonably necessary or desirable in connection with its review. If
the town makes no objection within 30 days of receiving notice of the
increase, the increase may go into effect.
C.
Refunds. The Town Council may order the cable operator to refund
to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following
circumstances:
A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be
in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of
equipment; or
(1)
The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order
issued by the Town Council; or
(2)
Where such refund may be authorized by another provision of this
chapter.
(3)
A.
§ 48-5 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 48-6
48:133
Fines. The failure of a cable operator to comply with a rate decision
or refund order issued by the Town Council pursuant to this chapter is
declared to be an infraction. The fine for a violation is $500 for each
offense.
B.
§ 48-6 § 48-6
48:134
ARTICLE II
Customer Service Obligations
§ 48-7. Installations, outages and service calls. [Amended 3-4-1996
by Ord. No. 2-1-1996]
Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards shall be
met no less than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
§ 48-8. Required information and notifications to subscribers.
Standard installations shall be performed within seven business days
after an order has been placed where a drop exists and requires a
replacement. Standard installations are those that are located up to 125
feet from the existing distribution system.
A.
Excluding conditions beyond the control of the cable operator, the cable
operator shall begin working on service interruptions promptly, and in
no event later than 12 hours on Monday through Friday and 16 hours
on Saturday and Sunday, after the interruption becomes known to the
cable operator. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other
service problems the next business day after notification of the service
problem.
B.
The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls
and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. The
cable operator may schedule service calls and other installation
activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience
of the customer.
C.
A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer
after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
D.
If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment
with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the customer shall be contacted. The appointment shall
be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the
customer, even if outside of normal business hours.
E.
The cable operator shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to
all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
(1) Products and services offered by the cable operator.
Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services.
(2)
(3) Installation and service maintenance policies.
(4) Instructions on how to use the cable service.
A.
§ 48-7 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 48-8
48:135
§ 48-9. Customer billing; response to complaints.
§ 48-10. Customer refunds and credits.
§ 48-11. Picture quality.
Cable operators shall reproduce and send to all customers cable
programming on all channels which is clear, audible and without distortion.
Acceptable picture and sound quality shall be provided, free of fuzziness,
lines or any other annoying interference.
(5) Channel positions programming carried on the system.
Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the town's cable television regulatory office.
(6)
The cable operator shall notify customers of any changes in rates,
programming services or channel positions as soon as possible through
announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be
given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes
if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition,
the cable operator shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any
significant changes in the other information required by Subsection A
of this section.
B.
Bills from cable operators to subscribers shall be clear, concise and
understandable. Bills must be fully itemized. The itemizations shall
include, but not be limited to, basic and premium service charges and
equipment charges. Bills also shall clearly delineate all activity during
the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.
A.
In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to a written
complaint from a subscriber within 30 days from the operator's receipt
of the complaint.
B.
A cable operator shall issue refund checks to a customer promptly, but
no later than either:
The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request
or 45 days, whichever is earlier; or [Amended 3-4-1996 by Ord.
No. 2-1-1996]
(1)
The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if
service is terminated.
(2)
A.
A cable operator shall issue credits for service to a customer no later
than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that
a credit is warranted.
B.
§ 48-8 § 48-12
48:136
§ 48-12. Review of cable operator's books and records. [Amended
3-4-1996 by Ord. No. 2-1-1996]
The town, upon reasonable notice to a cable operator and for the purpose
of monitoring compliance with the requirements of this chapter, other
laws and ordinances applicable to the cable operator and enforceable by
the town and any franchise agreement between the town and the cable
operator, may review the cable operator's books and records at the cable
operator's business office during normal business hours and on a
nondisruptive basis. The records shall include any public records required
to be kept by the cable operator pursuant to the rules and regulations of
the FCC, maps, plans, service complaint logs and performance test results
and such financial information as is reasonably required to conduct an
audit of franchise fee payments and to determine pricing of limited basic
cable service in accordance with federal law. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in this section, the cable operator shall not be required to
disclose information which it reasonably deems, based upon practices in
the cable television industry, to be proprietary or confidential in nature, or
subscriber information to the extent that the cable operator is prohibited
from disclosing such information pursuant to Section 631 of the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984. To the extent required by federal
or state law, the town shall treat any information disclosed by the cable
operator as confidential and disclose it only to officials, employees,
representatives and agents of the town who have a need to see or be aware
of such information in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter, other
laws or ordinances enforceable by the town, or any franchise agreement
between the town and the cable operator.
§ 48-13. Obstructions and excavations.
All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the franchise holder within the town shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and
other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any
of said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. The location of
transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment shall be
subject to the following terms and conditions:
All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be kept and
maintained in good order and repair.
(1)
All construction and maintenance of the cable system shall be in
compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code, the National
Electric Code and such other ordinances and regulations of the
town affecting electrical installations as may now or hereafter be in
effect.
(2)
All installations shall be made in accordance with good engineering
practices and shall not interfere with the use of public places by
the public.
(3)
A.
§ 48-12 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 48-13
48:137
§ 48-14. Franchise office and telephone availability.
The location and maintenance of a cable system shall not endanger
the lives of persons, cause damage to property or interfere with
improvements by the town. The town may require a cable operator
to remove or relocate the operator's equipment, at the operator's
expense, to avoid such endangerment, damage or interference.
(4)
A cable operator shall guard and protect any opening or
construction in the streets or other public places by the placement
and maintenance of appropriate and adequate barriers, fencings
or boardings. During periods of dusk and darkness these barriers,
fencings and boardings shall be delineated by warning lights
approved by the town.
(5)
The franchise holder shall maintain an office within 25 miles from the
Town Hall for persons to pay bills, make requests for repair or service
and lodge complaints regarding the quality of the cable provider's
service. This office must be open at least Monday through Thursday
from 8:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m., Friday from 9:00 a.m. through 8:00
p.m., and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 4:00 p.m. If this office is
not located within the corporate limits of the Town of Indian Head, the
franchise holder also shall maintain an office within the corporate limits
of the town which shall be open at least 10 hours per week for such
purposes. Customer service center and bill payment locations shall be
conveniently located.
A.
The cable operator shall maintain a local, tollfree or collect call
telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours
a day, seven days a week. This access line shall be subject to the
following requirements:
Trained company representatives shall be available to respond to
customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
(1)
After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including an answering
machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be
responded to by a trained company representative on the next
business day.
(2)
Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30
seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be
transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These
standards shall be met no less than 90% of the time under normal
operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
(3)
The operator shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering
(4)
B.
§ 48-13 § 48-14
48:138
standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates
a clear failure to comply.
Under normal operating conditions, the customer shall receive a
busy signal less than 3% of the time.
(5)
§ 48-14 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 48-14
48:139

ARTICLE III
Obligation of Town and Town Manager
§ 48-15. Consideration of views.
In connection with such regulation, the town will ensure a reasonable
opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties.
§ 48-16. Certification forms.
The Town Manager is authorized to execute on behalf of the town and
file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now
or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate Regulations and Customer
Service Obligations in order to enable the town to regulate basic service
rates and charges and customer service obligations.
§ 48-15 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS § 48-16
48:141
Chapter 55
FARMERS' MARKET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Farmers' Market Committee — See Ch. 8, Art.
II.
§ 55-1. Establishment; Market Master.
A Farmers' Market shall be established in Indian Head, and a Market
Master shall be appointed to oversee its orderly operation.
§ 55-2. Rules and regulations.23
With the formation of a Farmers' Market, it shall be necessary for the Town
Manager and/or his designee to establish operating rules and bylaws that
would address such things as necessary for the proper operation of the
market.
§ 55-3. Appointment of Market Master; duties.
The Council shall appoint a Market Master to enforce the market bylaws, to
act as mediator in the settlement of disputes and to ensure that the market
operates in a generally businesslike fashion.
Chapter 58
FINANCIAL PLAN AND BUDGET
Chapter 61
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 43.
§ 61-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
There is hereby adopted by the Town of Indian Head for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion that certain code known as the "Fire Prevention Code"
recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 48-16 § 61-1
55:142
the 1970 edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code not
fewer than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the
Clerk of the Circuit Court, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this
chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within
the limits of the Town of Indian Head.
§ 61-2. Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 61-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter and the Fire Prevention Code adopted thereby, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The Attorney for the Town of Indian Head.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Indian Head Volunteer Fire Department only.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Indian Head.
§ 61-4. Modifications.
The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Indian Head Volunteer Fire Department, which is
hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision
of the Chief of the Indian Head Volunteer Fire Department.
A.
The Chief of the Indian Head Volunteer Fire Department shall be the
Chief in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. His appointment shall
continue during good behavior and satisfactory service, and he shall not
be removed from office except for cause.
B.
The Chief of the Indian Head Volunteer Fire Department may detail
such members of the Fire Department as inspectors, as shall from
time to time be necessary. The Chief of the Indian Head Volunteer Fire
Department shall recommend to the Town Manager the employment
of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall
be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the
position.
C.
A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually
and transmitted to the chief executive office of the municipality. It
shall contain all proceedings under this Code, with such statistics as
the Chief of the Indian Head Volunteer Fire Department may wish
to include therein. The Chief of the Indian Head Volunteer Fire
Department shall also recommend any amendments to the Code which,
in his judgment, shall be desirable.
D.
The Fire Prevention Code recommended by the American Insurance
Association, the 1970 edition thereof, as adopted herein, is hereby
amended with the following insertions, additions, deletions and
changes:
A.
§ 61-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 61-4
61:143
On page 42, Article 12, Section 12.5 on line 2 thereof, delete the
words "limits established by law as the limits of the district in
which such storage is to be prohibited" and insert the words "Town
of Indian Head" after the word "the" and before the word "except."
(1)
On page 86, Article 16, Section 16.22, on line 3 thereof, delete the
words "limits established by law, as the limits of the districts in
which such storage is to be prohibited." Insert the words "Town of
Indian Head" as line 3.
(2)
On page 124, Article 16, Section 16.61, on line 1 thereof, delete
the words "limits established by law as limits of the districts in
which such plants are prohibited." Insert the words "Town of Indian
Head" after the word "the" and before the period.
(3)
On page 167, Article 21, Section 21.6, on line 1 thereof, delete
the words "limits established by law restricting" and insert the
words "C-G and RMF Zoning Districts" after the words "within the"
and before the words "the bulk." Also, on line 3, delete the word
"commercial."
(4)
On page 98, Article 16, Section 16.23, add a new Subsection "f,"
entitled "Underground Storage of Class 1 Liquids Prohibited within
Residential Districts," to read as follows:
Underground Storage of Class 1 Liquids Prohibited within
Residential Districts: The storage of Class 1 liquids in
underground tanks shall be prohibited within the RMF, R-2 and
R-1 Zoning Districts.
(5)
(6) On page 48, Article 12, Section 12.7, delete Subsection 12.7.
On page 165, Article 20, Section 20.14, on line 3 thereof, delete
the words "on designated routes" and insert the words "and clear
any route with the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention" after the
word "articles" and before the word "within."
(7)
On page 209, Article 28, Section 28.16, on line 3 thereof, delete the
words "Chief of Police" and insert the words "Town Manager, and
shall be at least 12 feet in width" after the word "the" and before
the period.
(8)
On page 204, Article 28, Section 28.1 thereof, add a new
Subsection "e," entitled "Outdoor Burning Hours," to read as
follows:
Outdoor Burning Hours: No outdoor burning shall be permitted
within any district, except between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and
12:00 midnight, Monday thru Friday, and between the hours of
12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m. on Saturday. No burning shall be
permitted on Sunday.
(9)
§ 61-4 § 61-4
61:144
§ 61-5. Appeals.
Whenever the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that
the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning
of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant
may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
to the Town Council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
§ 61-6. New materials processes or occupancies which may require
permits.
The Town Manager and the Chief of the Indian Head Volunteer Fire
Department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes
or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now
enumerated in said code. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies
thereof to interested persons.
§ 61-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which
no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order
as affirmed or modified by the Town Council or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every
such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition
of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it
to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
On page 204, Article 28, Section 28.1 thereof, delete Subsection
28.1.
(10)
The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, with the approval of the
Town Council, shall have power to modify any of the provisions of
the Fire Prevention Code, upon application, in writing, by the owner
or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code,
provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Chief
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention thereon shall be entered upon the
records of the Department, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the
applicant and the Town Council.
B.
§ 61-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 61-7
61:145
such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 65
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 70
GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 116.
§ 61-7 § 61-7
65:146
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 70-1. Purpose.24
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the natural resources of the
town by establishing minimum requirements for stripping, excavating and
filling of land and for control of soil erosion and sediment and to establish
procedures by which these requirements are to be administered and
enforced. Provisions of this chapter are adopted under authority of and in
compliance with § 4-101 et seq. of the Environment Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the words and phrases listed below shall have the
following meanings:
ACCEPTABLE OUTFALL — The tidewater or that point as determined by the
Department of Code Enforcement where stormwater can be released to a
channel without causing scouring, erosion or resulting sedimentation to the
receiving channel or its floodplain. Where necessary, the outlet shall include
structural and vegetative measures to assure nonerosive velocities.25
ASTM — The American Society for Testing and Materials.
BEDROCK — The solid, undisturbed rock in place either at the ground
surface or beneath surficial soil deposits.
BENCH TERRACE — A relatively flat area [i.e., less than 2% grade]
constructed on sloping land to planned dimensions and grades. "Bench
terraces" are applied along the contour with the length and width controlled
by the natural terrain and the required erosion limitations.
CERTIFICATION — A signed, written statement that specific constructions,
inspections or tests (where required) have been performed and that such
comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
COMPACTION — Densification of a soil or rockfill by mechanical or other
acceptable procedures.
CUT — See definition of "excavation or cut."
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, corporation, firm or governmental
agency undertaking or proposing the construction of a building, a project
consisting of interrelated buildings or other construction and who is
primarily financially responsible for the proposed construction.
DIVERSION — A channel, ditch or ridge constructed across a slope so as to
intercept and divert surface runoff.
DRAINAGEWAY — See definition of "watercourse and/or drainageway."
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-1 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-2
70:147
EMBANKMENT — See definition of "embankment or fill."
EMBANKMENT OR FILL — A deposit of soil, rock or other materials placed
by man.
ENGINEER — See definition of "professional engineer."26
EROSION — The process by which the ground surface is worn away by the
action of wind or water.
EXCAVATION OR CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated, and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to excavating or filling.
FINISHED GRADE — The final grade or elevation of the ground surface
conforming to the proposed design.
FLOODPLAIN — That area which would be inundated by storm runoff or
floodwater equivalent to that which would occur with a flood of fifty-year
recurrent frequency, after total development of the watershed, said area
being defined by an elevation plus one foot, below which no development
may take place.
GRADING — Any stripping; excavating; filling, including hydraulic fill;
stockpiling; or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its
excavated or filled condition.
GRADING PERMIT — A permit issued to authorize work to be performed
under this chapter.
LOAD-BEARING FILL — Any facility, earthwork or fill placed in a controlled
manner to support structural foundations or vehicular traffic, the instability
of which would constitute a public hazard or nuisance.
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — The ground surface in its original state
before grading, stripping, excavation or filling.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this
chapter.
PERSON — Includes, in addition to any other meaning it may have under
this chapter, an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated
association, an agency or any other similar entity whatsoever.
PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT — A person who has been duly registered and
licensed to practice professional architecture and/or landscape architecture
under requirements of state law.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — An engineer duly registered by the State of
Maryland to practice professional engineering under the requirements of
Article 75 1/2 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-2 § 70-2
70:148
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR — A person who has been duly
registered and licensed under the requirements of Article 75 1/2 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
REGULATED GRADING — Any grading performed with the approval of and
in accordance with criteria established by this chapter.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other surficial materials transported by wind or
surface water as a product of erosion.
SITE — That portion of any lot or parcel of land or combination of
contiguous lots or parcels of land where grading is performed or permitted.
SLOPE — The inclined, exposed surface of a fill, excavation or natural
terrain.
SOIL — All earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock,
including but not limited to the decomposed zone of bedrock, which can be
readily excavated by mechanical equipment.
STEEP SLOPE — A slope over 15% grade, which is characterized by
increased runoff, erosion and sediment hazards.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover,
including tree removal, clearing, grubbing and storage or removal of
topsoil.
STRUCTURAL ROCK FILLS — Constructed predominately of rock materials
for the purpose of supporting structures.
WATERCOURSE and/or DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial
watercourse, including but not limited to streams, rivers, creeks, ditches,
channels, canals, conduits, culverts, drains, waterways, gullies, ravines
or washes, in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently, and including any area adjacent thereto
which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
§ 70-3. Compliance required.27
No person shall do any grading, stripping, excavating or filling of land
or create borrow pits, spoil areas, quarries, material processing facilities
or any other facility without first obtaining a grading permit from the
Department of Code Enforcement, except as provided for in this chapter.
§ 70-4. Effect on statute.28
Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed to be in conflict with
§ 4-101 et seq. of the Environment Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-2 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-5
70:149
§ 70-5. Exceptions.29
Subject to compliance with § 4-101 et seq. of the Environment Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland relating to sediment control plans approved by
the Charles County Soil Conservation District, a grading permit shall not be
required for the following:
An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, for retaining walls or for similar structures attendant to the
principal building authorized by a valid building permit. The resulting
fill shall:
Not be placed on a surface having a slope steeper than 20 feet
horizontal to one-foot vertical [5% grade].
(1)
Not impair existing surface drainage or constitute a potential
erosion hazard or a source of sedimentation to any adjacent land or
watercourse.
(2)
Have no final slopes steeper than one-foot vertical in three feet
horizontal.
(3)
Have all disturbed areas promptly seeded or sodded as soon as the
season permits.
(4)
A.
An excavation for which a building permit is not required, provided that
the excavation:
Is less than four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point as
measured from the natural ground surface.
(1)
Does not result in a total quantity of more than 100 cubic yards of
material on any lot, parcel or subdivision thereof.
(2)
Does not impair existing surface drainage, constitute a potential
erosion hazard or act as a source of sedimentation to any adjacent
land or watercourse.
(3)
Has no final slopes steeper than one-foot vertical in three feet
horizontal.
(4)
Has all disturbed areas promptly seeded or sodded as soon as the
season permits.
(5)
B.
A fill for which a building permit is not required, provided that the fill:
Is less than four feet in vertical height at its deepest point as
measured from the natural ground surface.
(1)
Is placed on a surface having a slope not steeper than five feet
horizontal to one-foot vertical.
(2)
C.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-5 § 70-5
70:150
Does not exceed a total of 100 cubic yards of material on any lot,
parcel or subdivision thereof.
(3)
Does not impair existing surface drainage, constitute a potential
erosion hazard or act as a source of sedimentation to any adjacent
land or watercourse.
(4)
Has no final slopes steeper than one-foot vertical in three feet
horizontal.
(5)
Has all disturbed areas promptly seeded or sodded as soon as the
season permits.
(6)
Accepted agricultural land management practices such as plowing and
nursery operations such as the removal and/or transplanting of
cultivated sod, shrubs and trees and tree cutting at or above existing
ground, leaving the stump, ground cover and root mat intact.
D.
The stockpiling, with slopes at a natural angle or repose of raw or
processed sand, stone and gravel at quarries, concrete, asphalt and
material processing plants and storage yards, provided that approved
sediment and erosion control measures have been employed to protect
against off-site damages.
E.
Refuse disposal areas or sanitary landfills operated and conducted in
accordance with the requirements, rules and ordinances adopted by
the Town of Indian Head and the State of Maryland. Exemption from
permit, however, does not exempt these projects from other aspects
of this chapter, including inspection, as covered in Article VI of this
chapter.
F.
Grading and trenching for utility installations within:
(1) Highway rights-of-way.
Utility easements immediately adjacent to road or street rights-ofway
or in the space on abutting lot(s) needed to accommodate the
respective house connections; provided, however, that all grading
or trenching involved does not disturb the natural contour and that
if during the course of utility operations any erosion and sediment
control measures previously in place are disturbed or destroyed,
the utility company shall restore or repair such measures to their
original condition.
(2)
G.
Individual private septic systems which do not disturb the natural
contour.
H.
Grading as a maintenance measure or for landscaping purposes on
existing developed lots or parcels, provided that:
The aggregate of area(s) affected or bared at any one time does not
exceed 3,000 square feet.
(1)
I.
§ 70-5 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-5
70:151
§ 70-6. Hazardous conditions.30
If the Department of Code Enforcement for the Town of Indian Head
determines that an excavation, embankment or fill created after the
effective date of this chapter endangers or adversely affects the safety or
stability of any public or private property, as determined from the guidelines
of this chapter, said Department shall promptly notify, in writing, the owner
or other person in control of the property upon which said condition exists.
If the correction is not commenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter within the period of time specified in said notice, the owner or
person in control shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 70-43 of this
chapter.
(2) The grade change does not alter the drainage pattern.
All bare earth is promptly seeded, sodded or otherwise effectively
protected from erosion actions.
(3)
The grading does not involve a quantity of material in excess of 100
cubic yards.
(4)
The construction of single-family residences and/or their accessory
buildings on lots of two acres or more.
J.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-5 § 70-6
70:152
ARTICLE II
Permits and Plans
§ 70-7. General permit requirements.
§ 70-8. Plan format.
31Prior to the issuance of a grading permit, an applicant shall have
submitted to the Department of Code Enforcement of the Town of
Indian Head, Maryland, the following:
An application and plan, including specifications and timing
schedules. There should be submitted six copies. The requirements
for the application and plan are set forth in the sections which
follow. Separate application shall be required for each grading
permit. Plans, specifications and timing shall be submitted with
each application for a grading permit. The permit, when issued,
shall allow the applicant to make the improvements according to
the application and plan submitted. Excepted modifications may be
made as covered in § 70-11 of this chapter.
(1)
The fee for administration and inspection paid to the Town of
Indian Head, as covered in § 70-12 of this chapter.
(2)
A.
Nothing in this chapter shall affect the responsibilities of the
Department of Water Resources under § 4-101 et seq. of the
Environment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.32
B.
C. Bonding will be required as set forth in Article III of this chapter.
Permits issued pursuant to this Article do not relieve the owner of
responsibility for securing required permits for work to be done which
is regulated by any other applicable code, act or county ordinance. This
Article shall not preclude the inclusion in such other permit of morestringent
regulations or requirements concerning the grading of land.
D.
The plan required by § 70-7A(1) hereof shall show the following:
(1) The proposed area of development.
(2) The proposed grading to be accomplished.
The necessary provision for drainage, erosion and sediment control
and vegetative establishment.
(3)
A.
The plan shall provide for erosion and sediment control measures
throughout all phases of development.
(1) Phase I: stripping and/or clearing.
B.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-7 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-8
70:153
§ 70-9. Minimum application data.33
The plans and specifications accompanying the grading permit application
shall contain the following, subject to the provisions that the Department
of Code Enforcement may waive the filing of particular information if, in its
judgment, such information would serve no useful purpose for the particular
project and not contravene the purposes of this chapter:
(2) Phase II: rough grading and construction.
(3) Phase III: final grading and vegetative establishment.
(4) Phase IV: maintenance.
A proposed time schedule of the hereinabove-mentioned phases shall
be submitted with the plan. See § 70-9C(2).
C.
A vicinity sketch in such detail that the property may be easily found by
the Building Inspector. North arrow and scale shall be indicated.
A.
A boundary line survey of the site for which the permit is sought and
on which the work is to be performed. On approved and recorded
subdivision lots, a copy of the recorded plat will be submitted.
B.
A plan of the site at a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet,
showing:
The name, address and telephone number of the owner, developer
and petitioner.
(1)
A timing schedule and sequence indicating the anticipated starting
and completion dates of the development sequence (see § 70-8B)
and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of
effective erosion and sediment control measures.
(2)
The estimated total cost of the intended construction, together with
the estimated cost of the grading and/or filling and the costs of
the required controls. Such estimated cost shall be reviewed and
verified by the Department of Code Enforcement.
(3)
The location of any building or structures, utilities, sewers, water
and storm drains on the site where the work is to be performed.
(4)
The location of any building or structure on land of adjacent
property owners which is within 100 feet of the site.
(5)
The elevations, dimensions, location, extent and slope of all
proposed grading (including building and driveway grades,
utilities, sewer, water and storm drains, all clearly indicated with
finished contours at the same intervals as required or used for
existing topography).
(6)
C.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-8 § 70-9
70:154
An estimate by a professional engineer or professional land
surveyor of the quantity of excavation and fill involved.
(7)
Adequate plans of all drainage provisions, erosion and sediment
control measures or other protective devices to be constructed in
connection with or as part of the proposed work, a map showing
the drainage area of land tributary to the site and estimated runoff
from the area served by any drains. Complete storm drainage
studies shall be submitted for the site, if not previously submitted,
as required by the Subdivision Regulations.34
(8)
A grading plan for borrow pits, quarries and material processing
facilities, based on the findings and evaluations of the soil
investigation report.
(9)
(10)An appropriate legend.
A one-hundred-foot adjacent peripheral strip and existing
topography at a contour interval as follows:
Where the site and peripheral strip contain grades which
average 3% or less, contours must have at least a one-foot
interval.
(a)
Where slopes on the site and its peripheral strip average over
3% through and including 15%, contours must have at least
two-foot intervals.
(b)
Where the grade on the site and its peripheral strip average
more than 15%, contours must have at least five-foot intervals.
(c)
(11)
Such supplemental reports, data and/or additional information
required to ensure the adequacy of the proposed plan. Such
reports, data and/or additional information may require that the
following be prepared by a professional engineer employed by or
under contract with the permittee:
The professional engineer's recommendation to guide the
design, construction and inspection of the proposed facility.
The following shall be considered by the professional engineer
in his recommendation:
Cleaning, grubbing, stripping, keying and undercutting for
the acceptance of fill.
[1]
Compaction requirements for all classes of fill. (See
§ 70-32.)
[2]
Allowable slope angle and bench requirements for cut and
fill slopes. (See § 70-34.)
[3]
(a)
(12)
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 70-9 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-9
70:155
§ 70-10. Plan referral.35
Prior to issuance of a grading permit, copies of the plan shall be referred
by the Department of Code Enforcement to the Charles County Soil
Conservation District for approval of the proposed erosion and sediment
control measures and to determine if a water resources permit may be
required. If requested, the Department of Water Resources may also review
the plans. Where necessary, the Soil Conservation District will also serve
as a technical authority on erosion and sediment control. The Soil
Conservation District will notify the Department of Code Enforcement of
its recommendations and/or approval so that the recommendations may
be reviewed and the permittee notified of the recommendations and/or
approval in a timely manner.
§ 70-11. Plan modifications.36
Major modifications of the approved grading plans shall be submitted to the
Department of Code Enforcement and reprocessed in the same manner as
the original plan and referred in accordance with § 70-10 of this chapter.
Field modifications of a major nature may be authorized by the Department
of Code Enforcement, provided that written authorization is given to the
person performing work pursuant to this chapter, with copies forwarded to
the Soil Conservation District.
Allowable soil pressure for foundations on natural ground
and/or fills. (See § 70-32.)
[4]
Erosion control during construction (temporary) and
during the life of the facility (permanent).
[5]
Groundwater control during construction (temporary) and
during the life of the facility (permanent).
[6]
Testing and inspection requirements to ensure
conformance with this chapter.
[7]
[8] Pavement design, if included in the project.
The location and handling of excess borrow and/or spoil
material and restoration of borrow pits and/or spoil areas.
[9]
A record of field observations, field test data, laboratory test
data and project characteristics upon which the professional
engineer's recommendations were based.
(b)
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-9 § 70-11
70:156
ARTICLE III
Fees and Surety
§ 70-12. Fees.
§ 70-13. Bonds.
The permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the Town of Indian Head.
Fees shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution by the Town
Council.
A.
The fee for a grading permit authorizing additional work, as set forth
in § 70-11 of this chapter, shall be the difference between the fee paid
for the original permit and the fee required for the entire grading and
sediment control project.
B.
A grading permit shall not be issued for grading involving the exposing
of more than 1,000 cubic yards or 30,000 square feet of ground surface,
unless the permittee shall first post with the Town Council a
performance bond, executed by the owner and a corporate surety with
authority to do business in this state as a surety. The bond shall be
in a form approved by the Town Council and in an amount not less
than the total estimated cost of the erosion and sediment control and
stabilization work authorized by the permit. Said estimated cost shall
be that which is approved by the Department of Code Enforcement
on consultation with the Soil Conservation District after reviewing the
cost estimates proposed by the applicant's professional engineers, land
surveyor or architect.37
A.
The bond shall include the following provisions:
The applicant shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter
and all other applicable laws and ordinances.
(1)
The applicant shall comply with all of the terms and conditions of
the grading permit.
(2)
Any extension of completion time under § 70-19 shall not release
the applicant or surety on the bond.
(3)
Upon default, the applicant and surety shall continue to be firmly
bound under a continuing obligation for payment of one of the
following at the election of the surety:
All costs and expenses necessary to complete the work in
accordance with the approval plans and specification or any
approved modification thereof;
(a)
All necessary costs and expenses or liabilities which may be
incurred to stabilize in accordance with a stabilization plan for
(b)
(4)
B.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-12 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-13
70:157
§ 70-14. Other surety.
erosion control presented by the surety to and approved by the
Town of Indian Head;
Payment of the full amount of the bond to the Town of Indian
Head to perform the work necessary. If the cost for restoration
of the site to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter
(with particular emphasis on stability, safety, drainage and
erosion control), exceeds the amount of the bond, the
permittee shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing
obligation for payment of all excess costs and expenses
incurred by the town; or
(c)
The bond shall remain in full force and effect until the
completion of the work to the specifications required. If all
work of the permit is not completed within the time specified
therein or as otherwise provided for in § 70-19 or violates any
other term or conditions, payment, in full, to the Town of Indian
Head may be ordered. The funds so received shall be used
by the town for defraying the cost of restoration of the site.
After default, the bonding company shall come in and get it
done (either finish project or stabilize it). Upon assurance of a
certificate of completion, the bond shall be released.38
(d)
In lieu of a performance collateral bond, the applicant may file with
the Department of Code Enforcement to be deposited with the Town
Treasurer, a cash deposit or certified check in the amount which would
be required by a performance bond, provided that every such deposit
shall be subject to the conditions of § 70-13 hereof. Upon satisfactory
completion of the work specified in the grading permit, any unused
portion of a cash deposit shall be refunded to the applicant.39
A.
In lieu of a performance collateral bond, a public utility franchized by
the General Assembly of Maryland to operate in Charles County may
submit a letter of guarantee in a form approved by the Town Council.
B.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-13 § 70-14
70:158
ARTICLE IV
Permit Limitations and Conditions
§ 70-15. General limitations.
The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do only
the work set forth in the application for the permit or in the site plans and
specifications submitted and approved as part of the application. All work
performed by the person to whom the permit issued or by his successor
shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Application
for permit shall include the implied right of entry for restoration of the site
upon default.
§ 70-16. Incomplete work.40
If at any time the Department of Code Enforcement finds that all work of the
permit is not completed within the time specified therein or as otherwise
provided for in § 70-19A, B and C or violates any other term or condition,
the cash deposit shall be forfeited or, if a bond has been posted, payment,
in full, to the Town of Indian Head will be ordered. The funds so received
will be used by the town for defraying the cost of contracting, including
engineering and administration, for the restoration of the site to meet the
minimum requirements of this Article, with particular emphasis on stability,
pollution, safety and erosion control. (See § 70-13, Bonds.)
§ 70-17. Floodplain hazards.41
If the land area for which the grading is proposed lies within the fiftyyear
floodplain of any stream or watercourse, the Department of Code
Enforcement shall deny a grading permit or grading within said area
regulated by the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Indian Head,
unless such grading is authorized or permitted by the Department of Water
Resources for the State of Maryland in accordance with its rules and
regulations.
§ 70-18. Conditions of approval.42
In granting any permit pursuant to this chapter, the Department of Code
Enforcement may impose such conditions as may be reasonably necessary
to prevent creation of a nuisance or unreasonable hazard to persons or to
public or private property. Such conditions may include but need not be
limited to the following:
Improvement of any existing grading to meet the standards required
under this chapter for new grading and for sediment control.
A.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-15 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-18
70:159
§ 70-19. Time limits.
§ 70-20. Liability.45
Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, nor
the compliance with the provisions hereto or with any condition imposed
by the Department of Code Enforcement hereunder shall relieve any person
from any responsibility for damage to persons or property, including public
utilities or services, otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon
the town for damages to persons or property.
§ 70-21. Responsibility of permittee.
Designation of easements for drainage facilities and for the
maintenance of slopes or erosion control facilities.
B.
Adequate control of dust by watering or other control methods
acceptable to the Department of Code Enforcement and in conformance
with applicable air pollution ordinances.
C.
The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of the work required
to be done pursuant to the grading, within the time limit specified in
the grading permit.
A.
Where the applicant is unable to complete the work within the specified
time, within 30 days of the expiration of the permit, he shall present,
in writing, to the Department of Code Enforcement a request for an
extension. Where, in the sole discretion of the Department of Code
Enforcement, such an extension is warranted, it may grant an
additional time.43
B.
If operations cease for a period of 90 consecutive days, permanent
erosion and sediment control measures must be employed as set forth
in Article V.
C.
All permits issued for sand, gravel or clay pits and rock quarries or any
other mining or material-processing operations involving excavation
and/or stockpiling of soil, rock or other materials shall lapse one year
after termination of active, productive (i.e., actually removing material,
whether sold at a profit or not and whether stockpiled or sold) and
continuous operations, as determined by the Department of Code
Enforcement. Said permits shall be reviewed annually by the
Department of Code Enforcement for compliance in accordance with
the approved grading plan. If active, productive and continuous
operations are not conducted on the site within 90 days of the issuance
of said permit, the Department of Code Enforcement shall require the
erosion and sediment control measures as set forth in Article V.44
D.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-18 § 70-21
70:160
§ 70-22. Removal of debris.
No debris is to be deposited in floodplains, watercourses, public streets,
highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfares, and the permittee shall
promptly remove all soil, miscellaneous debris or other materials spilled,
dumped or otherwise deposited in floodplains, watercourses, public streets,
highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfares during transit or
operation.
§ 70-23. Protective measures.46
The owner of any property on which grading or other work has been done
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter (or any other person, firm or
corporation in control of such property) shall maintain and/or promptly
repair or restore all graded surfaces, erosion control measures, vegetative
and/or other protective measures, if disturbed or destroyed during the
course of operations. Such repair and/or restoration shall be in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications as required by this chapter until
permanent measures are accepted by the Department of Code Enforcement.
During grading operations, the permittee shall be responsible for the
prevention of damage to any public utilities or services within the
limits of grading and along any routes of travel of equipment. The
Town of Indian Head, Maryland, shall not be responsible for damage to
properties for failure of any work done pursuant to this chapter.
A.
No person shall grade on land so close to the property line as to
endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or any other
public or private property without supporting and protecting such
property from settling, cracking or other damage which might result.
Grading can take place on adjacent property if grading rights are
secured from the property owner. Storm drains must terminate in an
acceptable outfall.
B.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-21 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-23
70:161

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 70-24. Basic erosion and sediment control measures.
All grading plans and specifications shall include the following terms and
conditions:
§ 70-25. Steep slope erosion and sediment control measures.
In order to prevent abnormal or excessive grading, the following additional
requirements shall pertain to those areas where steep slopes exist:
The development shall be fitted to the topography and soils so as to
create the least erosion potential.
A.
The natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever
possible.
B.
Only the smallest practical area shall be exposed for the shortest
practical period of time.
C.
Erosion control practices (such as interceptor ditches, berms, terraces,
contour ripping, soil erosion checks and sediment basins) shall be
installed to minimize soil and water losses.
D.
Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect critical
areas exposed during the time of development.
E.
During and after development, provisions shall be made to effectively
accommodate the increased runoff caused by changeable soil and
surface conditions and to not cause siltation of the receiving stream.
F.
Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed in the
development as soon as the season permits.
G.
All roads and streets shall be placed as close to the contour as possible
to minimize cutting and filling.
A.
The construction of all structures shall be preceded by the installation
of storm drainage system(s) and stabilization measures.
B.
In the case of a single lot development within such areas where no
central storm drainage system exists, runoff from driveways, roofs and
other improved surfaces shall be diverted and carried to an acceptable
outlet by one or a combination of the following methods: filtration beds,
subsurface dry wells, storm drainage systems and/or underground
conduit systems or other adequate or protected outlets.
C.
The extent of cutting and filling that will be permitted on any lot will
be based on the soil conditions at the site and as determined by the
Department of Code Enforcement, upon recommendation of the Soil
Conservation District or the Department of Water Resources for the
D.
§ 70-24 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-25
70:163
§ 70-26. Vegetative erosion and sediment control measures.
Vegetative erosion and sediment control measures shall include but not be
limited to the following:
State of Maryland. Construction on piling and/or supports shall be
permitted.47
Temporary vegetative stabilization. Areas where grading or cutting and
filling operations are carried out in several stages that expose soil
for prolonged periods of time [up to one year] to erosion shall be
temporarily stabilized by seeding. The necessary steps to be followed
to attain an adequate erosion control coverage with temporary seeding
shall be as follows:
(1) Necessary erosion control practices.
(2) Seedbed preparation.
(3) Lime and fertilizer as required.
(4) Seeding.
(5) Mulching and mulch anchoring, as required.
A.
Temporary mulch stabilization. The necessary steps to attain effective
erosion control with mulch for short periods of time [less than six
months] shall be as follows:
(1) Necessary erosion control practices.
(2) Mulching placed on a friable soil.
(3) Mulch anchoring, as required.
B.
Mulching final grade. The necessary steps to protect soil from erosion
after final grading where permanent seeding is delayed until the next
season shall be as follows:
Installation of erosion control practices as previously provided or
required.
(1)
(2) Application of required lime and fertilizer.
(3) Preparation of final seedbed.
(4) Mulching, as required.
(5) Mulch anchoring, as required.
Permanent seeding shall be established during the first season
following mulching.
(6)
C.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-25 § 70-26
70:164
§ 70-27. Structural erosion and sediment control measures.
Structural erosion and sediment control measures shall include but not be
limited to the following:
Permanent vegetative stabilization. Adapted grasses, legumes and
other plants are available for stabilizing exposed areas. The final choice
of species should be determined by considering such factors as
adaptability to climate, soils and terrain and degree of maintenance.
Steps necessary to establish permanent vegetative stabilization are as
follows:
(1) Install required erosion control practices.
(2) Apply required lime and fertilizer.
(3) Prepare adequate seedbed.
(4) Seed or sod.
(5) Apply mulch and anchor for seed and anchor for sod.
D.
Diversions. The number of diversions and the physical extent and
spacing is dependent upon the land slope, soil and runoff. The surface
runoff shall be collected and conveyed laterally along the diversion at
nonerosive and nonscouring velocities and discharged into a protected
area or outlet channel.
A.
B. Bench terraces.
Outlet channels. Outlet channels are constructed for the disposal of
storm runoff from diversions, bench terraces and other structures. The
design is based upon the runoff from predicted storm frequency and
includes the vegetative or structural measures required to protect the
channel from scour and erosion.
C.
Waterway stabilization structures. Structural devices such as drop
structures, grade stabilization structures and channel liners should be
utilized to dissipate the energy of flowing water by holding the water
slopes and velocities within nonscouring limits.
D.
Channel bank stabilization. Channel bank stabilization provides a
barrier that will withstand the erosive forces exerted by flowing water
or create a bank roughness that will reduce the erosive power by
dissipating the energy of the water as it moves along the bank line.
Methods commonly used include riprap, rock cribs (gabions), groins,
jetties, fencing, piling, etc.
E.
Stream channel improvement. Stream channel improvement may
require the straightening, realignment or the construction of a new
channel to designed cross-section and grade, as necessary. The design
shall include considerations regarding the stability of the bed and
banks of the proposed channel under the predicted runoff conditions.
F.
§ 70-26 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-27
70:165
§ 70-28. Approval for clearing and grading.48
Approval for clearing and grading shall be obtained from the Department
of Code Enforcement subject to the granting of temporary easements and
other conditions deemed necessary by said Department, in order to inspect
and enforce the performance of the specified erosion and sediment control
measures provided for in Article V.
§ 70-29. Fill classification.
The grading plans and specifications shall specify and delineate the use and
extent of fills in accordance with the following classifications:
§ 70-30. Materials.
All load-bearing fills shall meet the following requirements:
Sediment basins. Sediment basins are temporary earth-fill-type dams
constructed downstream from a development area which serve to
regulate runoff and trap sediment. Sediment shall be removed
mechanically as the basin behind the dam becomes filled. The structure
can be removed once stability is reached in the development area.
G.
Installation and maintenance. The installation and maintenance of the
specified erosion and sediment control measures shall be accomplished
in accordance with the procedures as set forth in § 70-23.
H.
Cut and fill slopes. The face of all such slopes shall be planted or
otherwise protected from erosion prior to the release of the permit
obligations. Responsibility shall remain on the permittee until such
planting is well established in accordance with § 70-23. Other exposed
areas susceptible to erosion shall be similarly protected.
I.
Type I fill: load-bearing fills proposed for support of buildings, walls
and other structures, the function thereof which would be especially
impaired by settlement.49
A.
Type II fill: load-bearing fills proposed for support of roadways,
pavements, utility lines and structures which would not be especially
impaired by moderate settlement.
B.
Type III fill: common fills proposed for landscaping or for other nonloadbearing
usage.
C.
No inclusions of organic or other deleterious materials which may
be subject to decay shall be permitted. All fills shall also be free of
inclusions of ice or snow.
A.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-27 § 70-30
70:166
§ 70-31. Ground preparation.
§ 70-32. Compaction.
All fills will be compacted in accordance with the following provisions:
§ 70-33. Structural rock.
Fills constructed predominantly of large rock, such as sandstone and iron
concretions, will be permitted only if the specifications for such fill are
prepared by and construction done under the direction and supervision of
an engineer.
§ 70-34. Maximum slope of fill.
No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension
greater than eight inches shall be buried or placed in any load-bearing
fill within two feet of finished grade or within two feet of foundation
base elevation. When such material is placed in fills, it shall be done
under the direction and supervision of an engineer.
B.
The natural ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing
all organic surface materials, noncomplying fill and unsuitable soils in
accordance with the following provisions, except as otherwise approved
by the Department of Code Enforcement and based on the
recommendations of the professional engineer.50
A.
Prior to placing Type I and Type II fills, the ground surface, if within five
feet of finished grade or foundation base elevation, shall be compacted
so as to achieve a density of not less than 90% of maximum density as
defined under § 70-32 within the top six inches.
B.
C. No fill shall be placed on frozen ground.
All Type I and II fills shall be compacted to a minimum of 95% and 90%,
respectively, of maximum density, as determined in the laboratory by
ASTM Test Methods D1557-66T, also known as the "Proctor Test." Type
III fill shall be compacted sufficiently so as to be stable and to prevent
an erosion hazard.
A.
In-place (field) density shall be determined by ASTM test or the
American Society of Highway Officials equivalent tests, Method
D1556-64T, or by equivalent test(s) approved by the Department of
Inspections.
B.
Fills shall be placed in approximately horizontal layers, each having a
loose thickness of not more then eight inches.
C.
No fill shall be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in slope
than two horizontal to one vertical.
A.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-30 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-34
70:167
§ 70-35. Existing features.
Existing features which would add value to development of natural or manmade
assets of the town, such as trees, watercourses, falls, beaches, vistas,
historic or architecturally significant buildings and similar irreplaceable
assets should be preserved, insofar as possible, through harmonious and
careful development.
§ 70-36. Maximum slope of cuts.
§ 70-37. Bench terraces.
The Department of Code Enforcement may require that the fill be
constructed with an exposed surface with a grade flatter than two
horizontal to one vertical or may require such other measures it deems
necessary for stability, vegetative establishment and maintenance and
safety.51
B.
Fills toeing out on natural slopes at a grade steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical shall not be made unless approved by the
Department of Code Enforcement.52
C.
Cuts shall not be more steep in slope than two horizontal to one
vertical.
A.
The Department of Code Enforcement shall require at any time that
the excavation be made with a cut face with a grade flatter than two
horizontal to one vertical, or said Department may require such other
measures as it deems necessary for stability, vegetative establishment
and safety.53
B.
Cut and fill slopes in excess of 30 feet but not more than 40 feet in
vertical height shall be terraced at approximate midheight. Terraces
in slopes with a vertical height greater than 40 feet shall be made
at equal vertical intervals not more than 20 feet apart. Depending on
soil conditions, terraces may be required of closer intervals by the
Department of Code Enforcement as it deems necessary for stability,
vegetative establishment and maintenance and safety. Bench terraces
shall be a minimum of five feet wide with an absolute minimum invert
gradient of 1% if sodded or 1/2% if paved and with a 10:1 lateral
slope towards the toe of the upper bank and must convey water with
minimum six-inch freeboard to an acceptable outlet.54
A.
Cuts and fills shall be set back from property lines and buildings shall
be set back from cut or fill slopes in accordance with the diagrams
entitled "Slope Setback from Property Line" and "Building Setback,"
B.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-34 § 70-37
70:168
§ 70-38. Drainage.
The following provisions apply to the conveyance and disposal of surface
water runoff:
which diagrams are incorporated herein by reference and a certified
copy of which shall permanently be kept on file in the office of the Town
Council of Indian Head.
Fill placed above the top of an existing or proposed surface with a slope
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical shall be set back from the
top of the slope a minimum distance of six feet.
C.
The setbacks established by this section are minimum and, depending
on soil conditions, may be increased by the Department of Code
Enforcement if deemed necessary for safety or stability or to prevent
possible damage from water, soil or debris.55
D.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the Department of Code
Enforcement may reduce the required setback where the necessity
for the setback may be eliminated or if the owner has a letter of
authorization to extend slopes onto the adjacent property.56
E.
Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to convey surface
water in such a manner as to prevent erosion, overflow or ponding.
Said water shall be conveyed to an acceptable outlet in accordance with
such applicable design criteria, standards and procedures as required
by the town specifications. The ponding of water shall not be permitted
above cut or fill slopes or on drainage terraces. Adequate drainage
facilities shall be provided to prevent such ponding.
A.
Erosion prevention. The permittee and the owner shall make adequate
provisions to prevent any surface and/or ground waters from materially
damaging the face of any cut or fill. All slopes shall be protected from
surface runoff from above by berms, swales or brow ditches.
B.
Grading around buildings. All areas shall be graded to provide for
positive drainage away from the building toward the approved disposal
area.
C.
Retention and infiltration. Subject to the requirements and
recommendations of the Charles County Soil Conservation District and
the Department of Water Resources, measures such as infiltration beds,
dry wells and retention ponds may be used to allow stormwater runoff
to percolate into the soil.
D.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-37 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-38
70:169

ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 70-39. Inspections. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-1991]
§ 70-40. Reports.57
All projects shall be inspected and reports filed by the Department
of Code Enforcement. The Department shall require inspection and,
where necessary, compaction control by an engineer of a soil testing
agency approved by the Department.
A.
Prior to initiating any operations subject to this chapter, the permittee
shall submit to the Department of Code Enforcement for its approval a
proposed inspection and construction control schedule as in Subsection
C below.
B.
After commencing initial grading operations, the permittee shall
require inspections by the Department of Code Enforcement at the
following stages in the development of the site or of each subdivision
thereof:
Upon completion of stripping, the stockpiling of topsoil, the
construction of temporary erosion control facilities and disposal of
all unsuitable materials and preparation of this ground to receive
fill but prior to beginning any placement.
(1)
Upon completion of rough grading but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements.
(2)
Upon completion of final grading, permanent drainage and erosion
control facilities but prior to any seeding, sodding or planting.
(3)
Upon completion of installation of all vegetative measures and all
other work in accordance with the grading permit. The Department
of Code Enforcement may make additional inspections as such
Department might deem appropriate.
(4)
C.
No work approved in accordance with the provisions of Subsection A
above shall proceed until the Department of Code Enforcement inspects
the site and approves the work previously completed or notifies the
permittee otherwise. Upon notification from the permittee as required
in Subsection B, said Department shall inspect the site and notify the
permittee of its approval or rejection within 24 hours, exclusive of
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. If the inspector does not make an
inspection within the specified time period, work may proceed without
presumption of approval, at the risk of the permittee. The Department
of Code Enforcement shall have the right to waive inspections, except
the final inspection, as necessary.
D.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-39 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-40
70:171
§ 70-41. Notices.58
Inspection reports.
When required by the Department of Code Enforcement, inspection
and testing shall be performed under the direction of a professional
engineer, who shall certify all inspection reports and test results.
Such reports shall include certification by the engineer of the
adequacy of:
Cleaned areas and benched or keyed surfaces prepared to
receive fills.
(a)
(b) Removal of unsuitable materials.
Construction of erosion control drainage devices, buttress fills,
underdrains, retaining walls and other grading appurtenances.
(c)
(d) The degree of compaction where tests are performed.
(1)
All certified inspection reports and certified test results shall be
periodically submitted to the Department of Code Enforcement
during the performance of the work.
(2)
A.
Final reports. The Department of Code Enforcement shall maintain
permanent files on its inspections. Upon completion of permitted work,
the Department of Code Enforcement may require the following for
its files and shall also require copies for the Charles County Soil
Conservation District:
An as-built plan and survey by a professional land surveyor or
professional engineer at the same scale as the original plan and
showing all improvements and final grade.
(1)
Certification by the owner that all grading, drainage, erosion
control measures and facilities and vegetative measures have been
completed in conformance with the approved plans and
specifications.
(2)
A report summarizing the inspection reports, field and laboratory
tests and location tests.
(3)
B.
The permittee or his agent shall notify the Department of Code
Enforcement when the grading operation is ready for final inspection.
Final approval shall be given in a timely manner when all work,
including installation of all drainage structures and erosion protective
devices, has been completed as well as the required vegetative
stabilization and the required reports have been submitted.
A.
If at any stage the work does not conform to the permit, to the plans
and specifications or to any instructions of the Department of Code
B.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-40 § 70-41
70:172
§ 70-42. Construal.
If any provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of law impose
overlapping or contradictory regulations or contain any restrictions
covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more
restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern.
§ 70-43. Violations and penalties.
Enforcement, a written notice to comply shall be given to the permittee.
Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and the
time within which corrections shall be made. Upon failure to comply
within the time specified, the permittee shall be considered in violation
of this chapter, in which case the bond or other types of security will be
forfeited and penalties imposed as under § 70-43 of this chapter.
Any violations of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General Penalty,
§ 1-36.59
A.
Injunctions. In addition to all other remedies provided by law, the Town
of Indian Head shall have the right of exparte injuctive relief against a
violation requiring correction or elimination of any violation.
B.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-41 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 70-43
70:173
Chapter 74
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 78.
§ 70-43 § 70-43
74:174
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 74-1. Purpose.60
The purpose of this chapter is to require that dwellings be kept clean and
free from dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage and similar matter and from vermin
and rodent infestation; to provide for the control of litter on vacant lots
or other properties and streets and sidewalks within the town; to regulate
refuse storage and collection and to make other necessary regulations
regarding health and sanitation; and to authorize the Town Manager to
issue orders compelling compliance with the provisions hereof and to
correct such conditions at the expense of the property occupants or owners
of properties upon which violations occur.
§ 74-2. Applicability.
§ 74-3. Clean conditions required; notice.61
Every dwelling within the town and every part thereof shall be kept so
clean and free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage or
similar matter as not to be a danger to the health of any occupant thereof
and shall be kept free from vermin and rodent infestation. It shall be the
duty of each occupant or owner of a dwelling unit to keep in a clean
condition that portion of the property which he occupies or over which he
has exclusive control. If the occupant or owner shall fail to keep his portion
of the property clean, as above provided, the Town Manager may send a
written notice to such occupant or owner requesting him to remedy said
condition within the time specified in said notice, said time not to be less
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings, dwellings,
structures, etc., located within the corporate limits of the Town of
Indian Head, and its terms shall apply to all such structures under the
jurisdiction of the municipal government of Indian Head. The failure
to enforce any provision of this chapter, whether known by town
authorities or not, shall not constitute a waiver of the provisions of this
chapter or any section contained therein.
A.
Whenever any person or persons shall be in actual possession of or have
charge, care or control of any property within the Town of Indian Head
as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or agent, such person
shall be deemed and taken to be the owner or owners of such property
within the intent and meaning of this chapter to the same extent as
the owner, and notice to any such person or any order or decision of
the Town Manager shall be taken to be a good and sufficient notice as
if such person or persons were actually the owner or owners of such
property.
B.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 74-1 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 74-3
74:175
than three days. Failure of such occupant or owner to comply with such
notice within such time shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ 74-4. Orders compelling compliance.62
The Town Manager is authorized to issue orders compelling compliance
with the provisions hereof and to correct such conditions at the expense of
the property occupants or owners of properties upon which violations occur.
§ 74-5. Scope.
The rules and regulations set forth in this Article shall also govern the
erection, construction and maintenance of all structures within the town.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 74-3 § 74-5
74:176
ARTICLE II
Refuse
§ 74-6. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REFUSE — All putrefactive and nonputrefactive solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and industrial wastes.
§ 74-7. General requirements.
All persons within the municipality are hereby required to keep their
premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from accumulations of
refuse, except when stored as provided in this Article.
§ 74-8. Storage.
§ 74-9. Location of containers. [Amended 7-11-1977 by Ord. No.
0-7-1-197763]
Each owner, occupant or other responsible person using or occupying
any building or other premises within this municipality where refuse
accumulates or is likely to accumulate shall provide and keep covered
an adequate number of metal refuse containers.
The refuse containers shall be strong, durable and rodent- and
insect-proof. They shall each have a capacity of not less than 20
nor more than 32 gallons, except that this maximum capacity shall
not apply to larger containers which are handled mechanically.
Furthermore, except for containers which are handled
mechanically, the combined weight of any refuse container and its
contents shall not exceed 75 pounds.
(1)
No refuse shall be placed in a refuse container until such refuse
has been drained of all free liquids.
(2)
A.
Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar materials shall be cut to a
length not to exceed four feet and shall be securely tied in individual
bundles weighing not more than 75 pounds each and being not more
than two feet thick before being deposited for collection.
B.
All solid waste containers in residential areas shall be placed at or near
the curb.
A.
Multifamily dwelling units or clusters of single-family dwelling units
utilizing dumpster service are excepted from this section. However,
dumpsters serving dwelling units described in this subsection shall
B.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 74-6 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 74-9
74:177
§ 74-10. Disturbing containers.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn over or in
any other manner disturb or use any refuse container belonging to another.
This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public refuse
containers for their intended purpose.
§ 74-11. Collection.
All residential, commercial and industrial solid waste accumulated within
the corporate limits shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of through
such service acceptable by the town. Collections shall be made regularly in
accordance with an announced schedule.
§ 74-12. Disposal.
The disposal of refuse in any quantity by any person in any place, public or
private, other than at the site or sites designated for refuse disposal by the
governing body is expressly prohibited.
be placed inconspicuously with the least possible disturbance of the
aesthetics of the area.
Violators shall be charged with creating a health hazard and nuisance
and shall be guilty of a municipal infraction. (See § 74-30.)
C.
§ 74-9 § 74-12
74:178
ARTICLE III
Litter
§ 74-13. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle as required and authorized in § 74-8.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet
or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature which:
GARBAGE — Putrefactive animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the
United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law; and, in addition thereto, includes any periodical or current
magazine regularly published with not fewer than four issues per year and
sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the town owned or used by the town and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit; or
C.
While containing reading material other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 74-13 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 74-13
74:179
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrefactive and nonputrefactive solid wastes and domestic
animal feces (except human body wastes), including garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and
industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrefactive solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
§ 74-14. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the town, except in public receptacles, in
authorized private receptacles for collection or in official town dumps.
§ 74-15. Prevention of scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 74-16. Sweeping into gutters.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 74-17. Maintenance of litter-free sidewalks.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the town shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises
free of litter.
§ 74-18. Litter from vehicles.
§ 74-13 § 74-18
74:180
§ 74-19. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town, except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are
not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as
provided herein.
§ 74-20. Handbills.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the town or
upon private property.
A.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
alley or other public place, nor shall any person drive or move any
vehicle or truck within the town, the wheels or tires of which carry onto
or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky
substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
B.
Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places. No
person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
town, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the town
for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver
thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept
it.64
A.
Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited
or vacant premises. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial
or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
B.
Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited
private premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill
directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in
or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of
inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in
this chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such
(1)
C.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 74-18 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 74-20
74:181
§ 74-21. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the town, whether owned by such person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 74-22. Maintenance of litter-free premises.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 74-23. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant property
within the town, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 74-24. Removal of animal waste.65
It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal to remove such animal's
feces from the property of others. A violation of this section shall constitute
a municipal infraction. (See § 74-30.)
§ 74-25. Removal of litter from open private property.
premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in
or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so
placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from
being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or
other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used
when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor
to newspapers, as defined herein, except that newspapers shall
be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent
their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
(2)
Notice to remove. The Town Manager is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
within the town, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter
located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health,
safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to
said owner at his last known address.
A.
65.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 74-20 § 74-25
74:182
Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within 14 days after receipt of written
notice provided for in Subsection A above or within 14 days after the
date of such notice, in the event that the same is returned to the
Town Post Office Department because of its inability to make delivery
thereof, provided that the same was properly addressed to the last
known address of such owner or agent, the Clerk-Treasurer is hereby
authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to
order its disposal by the town.
B.
Charge included in tax bill. When the town has effected the removal
of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost
thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 1% per month on the unpaid
balance from 30 days from the date of the completion of the work, shall
be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill
forwarded to such owner by the town, and said charge shall be due and
payable by said owner at the time of payment of such bill.
C.
§ 74-25 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 74-25
74:183

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 74-26. House trailers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, locate or occupy any house
trailer or portable building unless it complies with all plumbing, electrical,
sanitary and building provisions applicable to stationary structures and the
proposed location conforms to the zoning provisions of the municipality
and unless a permit therefor shall have been first duly issued by the Town
Manager, as provided for in the Building Code.66
§ 74-27. Stagnant water.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow any pool of stagnant
water to accumulate and stand on his property.
§ 74-28. Dead animals.
Any person owning or having possession of any dead animal not intended
for use as food shall promptly bury the same or notify the Health Officer and
dispose of such animal in such manner as the Health Officer shall direct.
§ 74-29. Maintenance of nuisances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any premises owned, occupied
or controlled by him to become or remain in a filthy condition or to permit
the use or occupation of the same in such manner as to create noxious
or offensive smells and odors in connection therewith or to allow the
accumulation or creation or unwholesome and offensive matter or the
breeding of flies, rodents or other vermin on the premises to the menace of
the public health or the annoyance or people residing within the vicinity.67
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 43, Building Construction.
67.Editor's Note: Former Secs. 6-705 and 6-706, dealing with abandoned refrigerators and
expectoration, respectively, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time
of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 74-26 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 74-29
74:185

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 74-30. Violations and penalties.68
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General
Penalty, § 1-37.
68.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 74-30 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 74-30
74:187
Chapter 78
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 43.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 61.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 74.
Rentals for human habitation — See Ch. 105.
§ 78-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
Subject to the provisions of § 78-2, the International Property Maintenance
Code 2006 as published by the International Code Council is hereby
adopted by the Town of Indian Head for the purpose of establishing
minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of
buildings, structures and property in the Town and the condemnation and
demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy or use.
Not less than one copy of the International Property Maintenance Code
2006 shall be kept on file in the Town Hall.
§ 78-2. Modifications.
The International Property Maintenance Code 2006, as adopted by § 78-1,
is modified as set forth below:
In the second line of Section 101.1, on page 1, in the space labeled
"[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" insert "Town of Indian Head."
A.
Section 102.3, on page 1, is revised to read as follows:
102.3. Application of other codes. Any repairs, additions or
alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of all other applicable
codes of the Town of Indian Head.
B.
Section 102.7, on page 1, is revised to read as follows:
102.7. Referenced code and standards. The standards referenced
in this code and listed in Chapter 8, except the International Zoning
Code, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference, except to the extent that
any of such standards have been expressly modified in the Code of the
Town of Indian Head. Where differences occur between the provisions
of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code
shall apply.
C.
New Section 102.9 is added to Section 102, on page 1, to read as
follows:
D.
§ 74-30 § 78-2
74:188
102.9. Conflicting provisions. In any situation where a provision of
this code conflicts with the provision of any other law, ordinance, code
or regulation, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the public health, safety and welfare
shall prevail, regardless which may have been enacted first.
Delete in its entirety Section 103, Department of Property Maintenance
Inspection, on pages 1 and 2, and substitute the following:
SECTION 103
CODE OFFICIAL
103.1. General. This code shall be administered and enforced by the
code official. The code official shall be the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Town, or such other person as the Town's chief executive officer
designates.
E.
Sections 106.3, 106.4 and 106.5, on page 3, are deleted, and new
Sections 106.3 and 106.4 are substituted, to read as follows:
106.3 Violations and penalties:
1. Knowing and intentional violations of this code, failures to comply
with this code, or refusals or failures to comply with a notice
issued pursuant to Section 107 of this code are declared to be
misdemeanors. Any person who knowingly and willfully commits
any of these acts shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as
set forth in Chapter 1, Article IV, and particularly § 1-36, of the
Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990, as amended). Each day
that one of these acts continues is a separate offense.
2. Except as provided in Subsection 1 above, violations of this code,
failures to comply with this code, or refusals or failures to comply
with a notice issued pursuant to Section 107 of this code are
declared to be municipal infractions and shall be subject to the
penalties and procedures as provided in chapter 1, Article III, and
particularly § 1-37, of the Code of the Town of Indian Head (1990,
as amended). The fine for each violation shall be $400 for each
initial violation and $400 for each day thereafter that the violation
continues. These acts are strict liability offenses. Each day that
one of these acts continues is a separate offense.
106.4 Prosecution. In addition to the penalties provided for in
Section 106.3, in case of any unlawful acts, the Code Official, with the
approval of the chief executive officer of the Town, may institute in the
name of the Town an appropriate civil action or proceeding against the
person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that
person:
F.
§ 78-2 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 78-2
74:189
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from further
execution of work;
2. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure;
3. To require the removal of work in violation; or
4. To prevent the occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance
with the provisions of this code.
The second sentence of Section 108.2 on page 4 is revised to read as
follows:
Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the Code Official shall cause the premises to be
closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract
or arrangement with private persons, and the cost thereof shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the structure, shall be a lien on the real
estate upon which the structure is located, and may be collected and
have the lien enforced in the same manner, and have the same rights,
priority rights, interest and penalties, as Town real property taxes.
G.
Section 109.5 on page 4 is revised to read as follows:
109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Subject to the availability of
funds in the Town's annual budget, costs incurred in the performance
of emergency work shall be paid from the treasury of the Town on
approval of the Code Official and the Town Manager of the Town.
Upon request of the Code Official, with the concurrence of the Town
Manager of the Town, the Town Attorney shall institute appropriate
action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is
or was located for the recovery of such costs.
H.
Section 110.3 on pages 4 and 5 is revised to read as follows:
110.3 Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply
with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the Code Official
shall cause the structure to be razed and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
persons, and the cost of such razing and removal shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the structure, shall be a lien on the real
estate upon which the structure is located, and may be collected and
have the lien enforced in the same manner, and have the same rights,
priority rights, interest and penalties, as Town real property taxes.
I.
Sections 111.2 through 111.7, inclusive, on page 5 are deleted, and new
Section 111.2 is substituted, to read as follows:
J.
§ 78-2 § 78-2
74:190
Chapter 81
HUNTING
§ 81-1. Prohibition.
Hunting of wildlife within the corporate limits of the Town of Indian Head,
Maryland, is strictly prohibited.
§ 81-2. Violations and penalties.69
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article IV, General Penalty, § 1-36.
Chapter 84
IMPACT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 96. Subdivision Regulations — See Ch. 122.
111.2 Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals referred to in Section
111.1 is the same Board of Appeals provided for in Chapter 6 of
the Code of the Town of Indian Head. All appeals filed pursuant to
Section 111.1 shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 6 and by
any rules of procedure adopted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to
Chapter 6.
The definition of "Code Official" as contained in Section 202 on page 7
is revised to read as follows:
CODE OFFICIAL. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town or such
other person as the Town's Town Manager may designate.
K.
In the first line of Section 304.14 on page 10, insert "January 1" in the
space labeled "[DATE]," and in the second line of Section 304.14 insert
"December 31" in the space labeled "[DATE]."
L.
In the fifth line of Section 602.3 on page 17, insert "January 1" in the
first space labeled "[DATE]," and insert "December 31" in the second
space labeled "[DATE]."
M.
In the third line of Section 602.4 on page 17, insert "January 1" in the
first space labeled "[DATE]," and insert "December 31" in the second
space labeled "[DATE]."
N.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 78-2 HUNTING § 81-2
81:191

ARTICLE I
Parks and Recreation Impact Fee
[Adopted 6-5-1989 by Ord. No. 5-1-89]
§ 84-1. Legislative authority.
The Town Council of Indian Head, Maryland, has the power and authority
to enact parks and recreation impact fees by virtue of Article 23A of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 84-2. Purpose.
These regulations are adopted for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Indian Head,
Maryland, by:
§ 84-3. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to these regulations:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — Any park site acquisition, site development,
equipment or facilities for public parks.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an
incorporated association or any other similar entity, but shall not include a
county, state or federal government entity.
§ 84-4. Applicability.
Requiring all new residential development to pay its proportionate fair
share of the land, capital facilities or funds necessary to accommodate
new residential development impacts on parks.
A.
Complementing the subdivision and zoning regulations of the Town of
Indian Head by requiring all new residential development within the
town to pay its share of costs attributable to the development of its
impact on public parks.
B.
Implementing the Town of Indian Head's Comprehensive Plan to help
ensure that adequate parkland and facilities are available in a timely
and well-planned manner.
C.
Any person who is granted a permit to proceed with the development of
land for purposes of constructing residential dwelling units in a manner
that creates a need for additional park facilities shall be required to
pay park and recreation impact fees in the manner set forth in these
regulations.
A.
If a change in an existing residential development or district is made
that would allow for additional dwelling units to be constructed, each
new dwelling unit shall pay the current parks and recreation impact fee
at that time.
B.
§ 84-1 IMPACT FEES § 84-4
84:193
§ 84-5. Fee schedule.
§ 84-6. Computation of fees; independent analysis.
These regulations shall apply to all new residential development within
the Town.
C.
These regulations shall not apply to affordable housing for families of
limited income, as defined in Article 83B, § 2-302, Annotated Code of
Maryland.
D.
At the option of the fee payer, the amount of the parks and recreation
impact fee may be determined by the following fee schedule. The fees
shown on this schedule are based on the factors explained in the Parks
and Recreation Impact Fee Technical Report available at the Town
Manager's office, 4195 Indian Head Highway, Indian Head, Maryland
20640.
A.
The parks and recreation impact fee shall be: [Amended 6-7-1999 by
Ord. No. 5-1-99; 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 4-1-03; 5-3-2004 by Ord.
No. 4-1-04; 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 4-1-05; 6-5-2006 by Ord. No.
4-1-06; 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 4-1-07]
Fees for residential units.
Residential Unit Type Fee1
Single-family detached $750
Townhouse, per unit $750
Multifamily, per unit $750
1 NOTE: This fee shall be collected upon application for a building
permit.
(1)
Waterfront District fees per dwelling unit.
Property Type Fee
Residential $3,250
Commercial, per square foot $1
(2)
B.
If a development approval is requested for a residential development
with mixed residential unit types, then the fee shall be computed by
calculating the space committed to the various residential types in the
development and apportioning the results to the residential unit types
on the schedule.
C.
When a question arises about which residential types on the schedule
shall apply to the development, the Town Manager of the Town of Indian
Head shall determine which residential land use types shall apply.
D.
§ 84-4 § 84-6
84:194
§ 84-7. Payment of fee; lien.
§ 84-8. Credits.
At the option of the fee payer or the Town Manager, the parks and
recreation impact fee may be computed by the use of an independent
impact analysis. The fee payer shall be responsible for the preparation
of the independent impact analysis, which shall be reviewed by the
Town Manager for his/her recommendation to the Town Council. The
Town Council may accept, reject or modify the independent impact
analysis.
A.
The Town Manager may opt to require an independent impact analysis
of the location if the intensity of the use or if the unusual nature of the
use indicates that the impacts on public parks would be substantially
higher than the impacts assumed for the purposes of the fee schedule
in § 84-5.
B.
The person who prepares the independent impact analysis shall be
approved by the Town Manager on the basis of professional training
and experience in preparation of development impact analysis. The
independent impact analysis shall follow the prescribed methodologies
and format established and published by the Town Manager. The fee
payer or the person who prepares the independent impact analysis,
prior to submission of the independent impact analysis, shall meet with
the Town Manager to review the methodology, the data used to study
and the preliminary results of any study.
C.
The fee shall be paid to the Town of Indian Head at the time of the
issuance of a building permit for the development, except as provided
in § 84-8. No building permit shall be issued within the town until any
applicable development impact fee has been paid to the Town of Indian
Head.
A.
Parks and recreation impact fees are a lien against the real property
served and shall be levied, collected and enforced in the same manner
as are town real property taxes and shall have the same priority and
bear the same interest and penalties as town real property taxes for lien
purposes.
B.
Any conveyance, contribution or construction received and accepted by
the Town of Indian Head from a developer shall be credited against the
parks and recreation impact fees due if the conveyance, contribution,
payment or construction provides the expanded park capacity on which
the parks and recreation impact fee is calculated. If the fee payer
wishes to receive credit against the amount of the parks and recreation
impact fee due for such conveyance, contribution or construction, the
fee payer may enter into a fee agreement with the Town Council. The
fee agreement shall provide for establishment of credits and payment
of the fee in a specified manner and time.
A.
§ 84-6 IMPACT FEES § 84-8
84:195
§ 84-9. Special fund.
There is hereby established the Town of Indian Head Parks and Recreation
Impact Fee Special Fund. Parks and recreation impact fees collected
pursuant to these regulations shall be earmarked and deposited in the
Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Special Fund to ensure that the Parks
and Recreation impact fees and all interest accruing from the fees are
designated and are expended to reasonably benefit the Town of Indian
Head. The special fund shall be administered by the Town Council and is
subject to investment or expenditures by the Town Council, in its absolute
discretion, solely for the purposes of these regulations.
§ 84-10. Use of funds.
All funds collected from parks and recreation impact fees shall be used
solely for the purpose of capital improvements, such as park sites and
other park facilities to increase the capacity of public parks, and not for
replacement, maintenance or operations.
§ 84-11. Refund of fees.
If a building permit expires and no construction has commenced, the fee
payer shall be entitled to a refund of any development impact fee as a
condition of its issuance. The fee payer shall apply to the Town Manager
for such refund within 60 days of expiration of the permit. The town shall
retain 10% of the fee as an administrative fee to offset the costs of collection
and refund. If the applicant fails to apply for said refund within 60 days of
the expiration of the permit, the impact fee shall be forfeited and all funds
retained.
The value of the land conveyed or facilities constructed by a developer
and accepted by the town for purposes of this section shall be
determined by an appraisal, paid for by the fee payer, on the fair market
value of the land and facilities as established by the town. Construction
must be according to town, county or state design standards.
B.
Any land awarded credit under this section shall be conveyed to the
town no later than the time at which parks and recreation impact
fees are required to be paid. The portion of the parks and recreation
impact fee represented by a credit for construction shall be deemed
paid when the construction is completed and accepted by the town
for maintenance or when adequate security for the completion of the
construction has been provided.
C.
For the purposes of this section, without the express approval of the
Town Council, land within a proposed development that would be
required by the Town of Indian Head Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision
Regulations70 shall not be included in any conveyance of parks facilities
in lieu of impact fees.
D.
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 84-8 § 84-12
84:196
§ 84-12. Annual review of fee schedule.
The impact fee schedule shall be reviewed annually by the Town Manager,
who shall recommend to the Town Council whether or not to modify the
schedule based on new data or technical information.
§ 84-12 IMPACT FEES § 84-12
84:197

ARTICLE II
School Construction
[Adopted 10-2-1989 as Ord. No. 9-3-89]
§ 84-13. County collection agent.
The town will act as agent for Charles County in the collection of school
construction impact fees in connection with the issue of building permits by
the town. It will be the responsibility of the county to provide to the town,
from time to time, specific instructions as to the circumstances under which
the school construction impact fee is payable and the amount of the fee
which must be collected in each circumstance. The town will collect from
the building permit applicant the school construction impact fee which is so
specified by Charles County.
§ 84-14. Resolution of disputes.
In the event of a dispute by a building permit applicant as to the amount
or applicability of the school construction impact fee, the dispute must be
resolved between the applicant and Charles County or a court of competent
jurisdiction. During the pendency of such a dispute, the town will not
issue the subject building permit unless so requested by the county or so
ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction and unless all town ordinance
requirements have been satisfied.
§ 84-15. Payment of fees.
§ 84-16. Indemnification of town.
The county will hold harmless and indemnify the town, its officials, its
employees and its agents against any and all liability, loss, claims, demands,
suits, judgments, costs, expenses and attorney fees incurred by the town,
its officials, its employees and its agents concerned with or arising from
the town's agreement to collect or the collection of the school construction
The town will require that the payment of any school impact fee be
made by check payable to Charles County. Payments received by the
town will be remitted to Charles County on a basis as determined by the
town. The town will not be responsible for collecting or taking any other
action with respect to any school construction impact fee payment
which is returned for insufficient funds or otherwise dishonored by
the permit applicant's bank. The town will not be required to suspend
or revoke a building permit for which a check was tendered and
subsequently returned for insufficient funds or otherwise dishonored.
Additionally, the town will not be responsible for any errors in assessing
or collecting the appropriate school construction impact fee in any
particular situation.
A.
The town will require that all applicable fees be paid to both the town
and the county prior to the issuance of a use and occupancy permit.
B.
§ 84-13 IMPACT FEES § 84-16
84:199
impact fee on behalf of Charles County. At the request of the town, the
county shall have the duty to defend any claim, demand or suit brought
against the town, its officials, its employees and its agents concerned with
or arising from the town's agreement to collect or the collection of the
school construction impact fee, without cost to the town, its officials, its
employees or its agents.
§ 84-17. Termination of agreement.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares recently
amended § 5.08 of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland or
Charles County Ordinance No. 89-55 invalid, in whole or in part, the town
may terminate its agreement to collect the school construction impact fees
upon 10 days' prior notice to Charles County.
§ 84-16 § 84-17
84:200
ARTICLE III
Supplemental Parks and Recreation Impact Fee for Waterfront
District
[Adopted 11-29-2005 by Ord. No. 11-01-0571]
§ 84-18. Intent of fee.
In addition to the general purposes set forth in § 84-2, additional demand for
waterfront recreation and park amenities will be created by new residential
and commercial development located in close proximity to the Potomac
River waterfront. The need for this type of public infrastructure will be over
and above the need for park and recreation land and amenities generally in
the Town. The provisions of §§ 84-18 through 84-25 are intended to require
new residential and commercial development in close proximity to the
waterfront to pay for the special type of park and recreation infrastructure.
§ 84-19. Establishment of Waterfront Impact Fee District.
A Waterfront Impact Fee District is created. The district consists of the
following properties:
§ 84-20. Creation and use of supplemental parks and recreation
impact fee.
In addition to the parks and recreation impact fee imposed pursuant to
§§ 84-1 through 84-12, a supplemental parks and recreation fee is created
for the purpose of funding capital improvements within the district. These
improvements shall consist of, and supplemental parks and recreation
impact fees shall be used exclusively for, the construction of a boardwalk
along the Potomac River, improvements to the tidal basin and Potomac River
shoreline, and similar types of waterfront improvements and amenities.
§ 84-21. Applicability.
The supplemental parks and recreation impact fee shall be paid by the
following:
All properties that lie within an area enclosed by the eastern boundary
of the Robinson Terminal property, Indian Head Highway, Dr. Andrews
Way (formerly Stark Road) and the Potomac River.
A.
All portions of the Naval Surface Warfare Center that are annexed into
the corporate limits of the Town after the creation of the district.
B.
71.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that its provision shall apply to any residential or
commercial development or redevelopment of land in the Town for which a building
permit has not been issued prior to the effective date of this article, even though an
application for a building permit may have been applied for prior to the effective date of
this article.
§ 84-18 IMPACT FEES § 84-21
84:201
§ 84-22. Payment; lien on property.
§ 84-23. Amount of fee.
The amount of the supplemental parks and recreation impact fee shall be as
follows:
§ 84-24. Special fund.
There is hereby established the Town of Indian Head Supplemental Parks
and Recreation Impact Fees — Waterfront District Fund. All supplemental
parks and recreation impact fees collected shall be earmarked and
deposited into this special fund to ensure that the supplemental parks
and recreation impact fees and all interest accruing from those fees are
designated and expended for the purposes specified in § 84-20 to
reasonably benefit the Waterfront Impact Fee District. This special fund
shall be administered by the Town Council and is subject to investment
or expenditures by the Town Council, in its sole discretion, solely for the
purposes allowed.
Each person who is granted approval to proceed with the development
of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential dwelling
units within the district.
A.
Each person who is granted approval to alter an existing structure
within the district for the purpose of creating one or more additional
dwelling units in that structure.
B.
Each person who is granted approval to proceed with the development
of land for the purpose of constructing one or more structures to be
used for commercial purposes within the district.
C.
Each person who is granted approval to alter an existing structure
within the district for the purpose of creating at least 50% more floor
space to be used for commercial purposes.
D.
Each person who is obligated to pay a supplemental parks and
recreation impact fee shall pay the fee prior to and as a precondition to
the issuance of a building permit by the Town.
A.
A supplemental parks and recreation impact fee is a lien against the
real property for which the fee is imposed as provided in § 84-7B.
B.
For residential properties, the amount of the fee shall be $3,250 per
dwelling unit.
A.
For commercial properties, the amount of the fee shall be $1 per square
foot. Where a structure is altered to create at least 50% more floor
space to be used for commercial purposes, the impact fee attributable
to that structure shall be computed based solely upon the increased
floor space.
B.
§ 84-21 § 84-25
84:202
§ 84-25. Additional provisions.
The following additional provisions apply to the supplemental parks and
recreation impact fee and §§ 84-18 through 84-24:
The terms "person" and "capital improvement" have the same meanings
as in § 84-3.
A.
The term "district" means the Waterfront Impact Fee District created
by § 84-19.
B.
The provisions of §§ 84-11 and 84-12 apply to the supplemental parks
and recreation impact fee.
C.
§ 84-25 IMPACT FEES § 84-25
84:203
Chapter 93
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 99.
§ 93-1. Loud and unnecessary noises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
endangers the health, safety or welfare of the town or which annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, rest, health, peace or safety of
others within the Town of Indian Head.
§ 93-2. Enumeration of prohibited noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, unnecessary,
disturbing and a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the town and
its people, in violation of § 93-1, but the enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive:
Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio,
television, hi-fi, stereo, phonograph or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of any persons in the vicinity. The operation of
any such machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. in such a manner to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from
the building, structure, device or vehicle in which it is located shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. Any person
who causes the production of said sound through the operation of the
machines or devices enumerated herein may be deemed a violator of
this chapter.
A.
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or the making of loud
and disturbing noises by the use of a clapper, bells, horns, musical
instruments or similar devices at any time or place so as to
unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or rest of any person
in any residence, hospital, school, place of business, street or public
place.
B.
The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or longcontinued
noises, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in
the vicinity.
C.
The use of any automobile, motorcycle, truck or vehicle so out of
repair or loaded or operated in such a manner as to create loud or
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
D.
§ 84-25 § 93-2
93:204
The creation of loud and excessive noises in connection with the loading
or unloading or the operation of any vehicle and the destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers.
E.
The operation or use of any power lawn mower, chain saw, fencepost
driller or the like between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
F.
Any of the following activities when occurring in close proximity to
residences between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.:
(1) The warming up or idling of buses, trucks or tractors.
The unnecessary, unreasonable or repeated idling, acceleration
and deceleration or starting and stopping of automobiles and
motorcycles.
(2)
G.
Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any
receiving set, musical instruments, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier, tape recorder or other machine or device for the producing
or reproducing of sound which is left upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising or for any other purpose except as
authorized by the government or in public emergencies, provided that
such devices may be employed in connection with nonprofit charitable,
educational, civic, religious or recreational activities in accordance
with permits first obtained therefor from the Town Manager pursuant
to § 93-3 hereof.
H.
Outdoor concerts, except in accordance with permits first obtained
therefor from the Town Manager pursuant to § 93-3 hereof.
I.
The excavation, grading, paving, erection, demolition, alteration or
repair of any premises, street, building or structure at any time on
Sundays or other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on Saturdays or between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on all
other days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health, safety and, if the nature of the emergency will allow the prior
procurement of a permit, then only in accordance with a permit first
obtained from the Town Manager as to public street work or from the
Town Building Inspector as to other work, pursuant to § 93-3 hereof.
Such a permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days
or less while the emergency continues. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
if the Mayor and Council or Town Manager, as the case may be, shall
determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by such
work within the prohibited hours and that loss or inconvenience would
result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work
to be done within the prohibited hours upon application being made at
the time the permit for the work is issued or during the progress of the
work.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to interior or
exterior repairs or to interior alterations, the work for which is
actually performed by a homeowner or occupant personally
(1)
J.
§ 93-2 NOISE § 93-2
93:205
§ 93-3. Permits.
§ 93-4. Appeals.
An applicant for a permit hereunder shall have the right to appeal to the
Town Council from the denial of the permit by the issuing individual. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal addressed to
the Mayor and Council. Such notice shall be filed within three days after
the issuing individual shall have notified the applicant of the denial of
the permit. The Mayor and Council shall act upon the appeal as soon as
practicable after receiving the notice thereof and shall give the applicant an
opportunity to be heard before taking action. The Mayor and Council may
affirm the issuing individual's denial of the permit or may grant the permit
with modifications or conditions.
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. upon residential
premises that are owned by such occupant, provided that the work
shall be done without undue noise or disturbance of the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to work performed
on Sundays in commercially and industrially zoned districts,
provided that it can be done without undue noise or disturbance to
nearby residences.
(2)
The creation of any excessive noise on any street or property adjacent
to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is
in use or adjacent to any hospital which reasonably interferes with the
working of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients
in the hospital.
K.
The individual charged with the responsibility of issuing permits for the
activities requiring permits in accordance with § 93-2 hereof shall issue
permits for such activities if such individual shall find that the activities
will not unduly or unnecessarily annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, that the activities will
not violate any other ordinance or law or create a public nuisance and
that the public health and safety will not be endangered thereby.
A.
Permits shall specify the dates and hours of the permitted activities,
which shall not be allowed between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. unless the issuing individual shall determine that it is in the best
interest of the town that the activities take place wholly or partially
during such hours.
B.
The individual is authorized to adopt and use such forms of applications
or permits as may be reasonably required in the performance of his
duties. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as
set forth in the Town of Indian Head Budget Ordinance.
C.
§ 93-2 § 93-5
93:206
§ 93-5. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to church bells or chimes
nor to the playing of bands or orchestras in a hall or building in a manner
which will not annoy the peace, comfort and quite of the neighboring
inhabitants nor to public utilities or municipal, county, state or federal
government agencies in connection with any emergency activities.
§ 93-6. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Chapter 96
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
3, Art. V.
Park and recreation impact fees — See Ch. 84,
Art. I.
§ 96-1. Hour of closing.
All public parks owned by the Incorporated Town of Indian Head, Maryland,
shall be closed to all individuals or groups of individuals after the hour of
9:00 p.m.
§ 96-2. Exceptions; special permits. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
2-1-91]
The Town Manager of the Town of Indian Head may issue special permits to
organized groups to exceed the closing time as specified in § 96-1.
§ 96-3. Revocation of special permits.
Special permits shall be immediately revoked in the event that the group or
individuals in the group are in violation of any section of the Town Code of
Ordinances and may be charged with violating such ordinances.
In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter, a violation of this
chapter is declared to be an infraction. The penalty for violations shall
be provided in Chapter 1, Article IV.
A.
The following officials are hereby empowered and authorized to enforce
this chapter:
(1) The Town Manager.
(2) The Town Building Inspector.
Any officer of the Charles County Sheriff's Department or Maryland
State Police.
(3)
B.
§ 93-5 PARKS § 96-4
96:207
§ 96-4. Responsibility of permit holder.
The individual to whom a special permit is issued shall be held responsible
by the town for removing all trash and debris generated by his/her group's
activity and for generally restoring the park's roads, grounds and facilities
to the condition which existed prior to his/her group's use of the park.
§ 96-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
2-1-91]
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, etc., violating any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article IV, General Penalty, § 1-36.
Chapter 99
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 74. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 119.
§ 99-1. Obstructing pavement.
It shall be unlawful for any storekeeper or other person to encumber,
obstruct or in any manner interfere with the free and uninterrupted use of
the public streets and sidewalks of the Town of Indian Head by leaving any
goods, wares, merchandise or other articles or thing thereon or by the use
of a commercial lift, except for loading or during the erection or repair of a
building.
§ 99-2. Dead animals.
No person shall cast any dead animal into any street, avenue or alley within
the limits of the Town of Indian Head.
§ 99-3. Trees.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or property holder whose
property contains trees, shrubbery or other vegetation to let the same grow
so as to impede persons or vehicles upon the sidewalks or streets of the
town by interference with one's view or by obstructing one's progress.
§ 99-4. Noise.
No mechanical device, machine or apparatus or instrument for
amplification of the human voice or of any sound or noise nor any bell,
horn, gong, whistle, drum or other noise-making article, instrument or
A.
§ 96-4 § 99-4
99:208
§ 99-5. Vandalism.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully break any
streetlights within the corporate limits of the town or to cut or break any
streetlight posts, parking signs or traffic signal devices in the Town of
Indian Head.
§ 99-6. Open containers of alcoholic beverages. [Added 6-1-1998 by
Ord. No. 5-1-9872]
No person shall possess in an open container any alcoholic beverage
anywhere within industrial or commercial zoned districts or upon any
street, avenue, alley, parking lot, playground, park or sidewalk or in any
building without the owner's or lessee's express consent, except on
premises for which an on-sale license for the sale of alcoholic beverages
shall have been issued; provided, however, that the Mayor or, in the absence
of the Mayor, the Town Manager may permit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages on any of the above places during special events or if, in his
judgment, the same would be in the public interest.
§ 99-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
2-1-91]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General Penalty, § 1-36.
device shall be struck, sounded, used, operated or caused to be used or
operated on or in any street, avenue, alley, highway, footway, sidewalk,
parking lot or other public space, nor shall loud noises be made by any
such article, instrument or device in or about barrooms, hotels or other
public places in the Town of Indian Head.
No person within the Town of Indian Head shall make any noise or
outcry or use or operate or cause to be sounded or operated any of the
things or devices defined herein for the purpose of advertising wares or
inviting the patronage or attention of any person for or to any business
or any vehicle or rides whatsoever.
B.
This section shall not apply to any parade or community event for which
a permit has been issued by the Town Manager.
C.
72.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 99-6,
Violations and penalties, as § 99-7.
§ 99-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 99-7
99:209
Chapter 105
RENTALS FOR HUMAN HABITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 78.
§ 105-1. Statement of policy.
It is declared to be the policy and intent of the Town of Indian Head that
all dwellings, dwelling units, and rooming units (whether located in a bedand-
breakfast home, rooming house, boardinghouse, hotel, single dwelling
or multiple dwelling) let or rented for human habitation shall be licensed
and regulated in accordance with this chapter to ensure the protection of
the health, welfare, safety and morals of persons residing in those units and
rooms. The provisions and requirements of this chapter are supplementary
to Chapter 78, and the International National Property Maintenance Code
adopted in Chapter 78, of this Code.
§ 105-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer of the Town of Indian Head or, in the absence of a duly appointed
Code Enforcement Officer, the Town Manager or the Town Manager's
designee. For purposes of conducting inspections required by this chapter,
the Code Enforcement Officer may assign such responsibility to a licensed
commercial inspection agency acting under the Code Enforcement Officer's
supervision.
DWELLING — A building or portion of a building designed or used for
residential occupancy.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for
cooking, purposes.
§ 105-3. Operating license required.
No person shall let or rent for human habitation any dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit unless its owner possesses a current operating
license issued by the Town for that specific dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit. A separate license is required for each dwelling, dwelling
unit and rooming unit let for human habitation.
A.
§ 99-7 § 105-3
105:210
§ 105-4. Issuance of operating license.
When an operating license is suspended or revoked, or an application
for renewal of an operating license is denied, a person may not rent or
let for human habitation the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit for
which the license has been revoked, suspended or denied until a new
license has been reissued or, in the case of a suspended license, the
license has been reinstated.
B.
An operating license may not be issued or renewed by the Town unless
the owner of the dwelling, dwelling unit or morning unit has applied to
the Town, on an application form provided by the Town, and has paid
the applicable license fee and all inspection fees then due and owing.
A.
As part of the operating license application, and as a precondition to
the Town's acceptance of the application, the owner shall:
Consent to inspections by the Town before the issuance or renewal
of an operating license, and during the term of such license,
including but not limited to upon a change of occupancy or upon
receipt of a complaint by the Town, to determine if the dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit for which the license is sought is
in compliance with this chapter and the International Property
Maintenance Code as adopted in Chapter 78 of this Code; and
(1)
Promise to comply and operate and maintain the dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and other applicable law.
(2)
B.
The Town may not issue a new operating license, and may not renew
an operating license, unless the dwelling, dwelling unit or morning unit
for which the license is sought:
Has been inspected by the Town and found by the inspector to
comply with the requirements of this chapter and with the
requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code
adopted by Chapter 78 of this Code; and
(1)
(2) Complies with all other requirements of law.
C.
An operating license shall be issued for a period of two years from the
date of issuance, unless sooner revoked. Subject to Subsection E of this
section, an operating license may be renewed for successive periods
not to exceed two years each.
D.
An operating license may not be renewed unless an application for
renewal has been made before the expiration of the current operating
license. Unless the Town has failed to give notice of a renewal date by
first-class United States Mail 90 days prior to the expiration date, a
penalty fee of $50 shall accompany any application filed less than 60
days prior to expiration.
E.
§ 105-3 RENTALS FOR HUMAN HABITATION § 105-5
105:211
§ 105-5. License and inspection fees.
§ 105-6. Failure to obtain operating license; violations and
penalties.
Any person who fails to obtain an operating license as required by this
chapter, after first having been given 15 calendar days' notice of that
person's failure to obtain the required license, is guilty of a municipal
infraction and is subject to a fine in the amount of $100 per day for each
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit for which a required license has
not been obtained. Each day that a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit continues to be let or rented for human habitation without having the
required operating license is a separate offense.
§ 105-7. Suspension and revocation of license.
Subject to § 105-9B of this chapter, the operating license fee shall be
$50. The fee shall be paid in advance of issuance of the license or
renewal.
A.
Every applicant and licensee shall pay a fee to the Town for each
inspection or reinspection conducted pursuant to this chapter. The
inspection fee shall be $50 for the inspection or reinspection of each
dwelling, except that where multiple dwelling units are located within a
dwelling, the fee shall be $50 for the inspection or reinspection of each
dwelling unit within that dwelling. The inspection fee in connection
with an application for the issuance or renewal of an operating license
is due and payable with the filing of the application. Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, the inspection fee for all other
inspections or reinspections is due and payable upon completion of the
inspection.
B.
If the Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable cause to believe that
one or more conditions exist in the licensed premises that may
constitute violations of this chapter or of the International Property
Maintenance Code adopted by Chapter 78 of this Code, the Code
Enforcement Officer may inspect the licensed premises. If the
inspection confirms that one or more conditions exist in the licensed
premises that constitute violations of this chapter or of the
International Property Maintenance Code adopted by Chapter 78 of
this Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall order the licensee, by
written notice sent by certified mail to the licensee's mailing address
as shown on the operating license application, to show cause before
the Town Manager, within 30 days from the date of the notice, why the
operating license for the licensed premises should not be suspended.
The order shall set forth the reasons for the proposed suspension
and identify what corrective action is required to bring the dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit into compliance. If, within this thirtyday
period, the licensee fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the
Town Manager why the license should not be suspended, the license
A.
§ 105-5 § 105-7
105:212
shall be suspended. If the violations that caused the suspension are
corrected to the satisfaction of the Town Manager within 30 days after
the date of suspension, the Town Manager shall vacate the suspension
and reinstate the operating license.
Repeated incidents.
If, within a sixty-calendar-day period, law enforcement agencies
respond on three or more separate occasions to one or more
incidents at a specific dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
licensed under this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
provide written notice to the licensee, sent by certified mail to
the licensee's mailing address as shown on the operating license
application, that if a law enforcement agency is required to respond
to any further incident at that same dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit within the one-hundred-eighty-day calendar-day
period commencing on the date of such written notice, the Town
Manager may suspend the operating license for that dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit. If a law enforcement agency
responds to an incident at the same dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit within such one-hundred-eighty-day period, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall order the licensee, by written notice,
sent by certified mail to the licensee's mailing address as shown
on the operating license application, to show cause before the
Town Manager, within 30 days from the date of the notice, why
the operating license for the licensed premises should not be
suspended. The order shall set forth the reasons for the proposed
suspension and identify what corrective action is required to
rescind the suspension. If, within this thirty-day period, the
licensee fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the Town Manager
why the license should not be suspended, the license shall be
suspended. If the licensee takes the corrective action designated in
the written notice to the satisfaction of the Town Manager within
30 days after the date of suspension, the Town Manager shall
vacate the suspension and reinstate the operating license.
(1)
As used in this Subsection B, the term "incident" means any
conduct occurring at a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
that, if proven, would constitute any of the following unlawful acts,
whether arising under federal law, state law or this Code:
(a) Disturbing the peace.
(b) Disorderly conduct.
(c) Domestic violence.
Any crime of violence including, but not limited to, assault,
battery, murder, manslaughter, and the attempts to commit any
such acts.
(d)
(2)
B.
§ 105-7 RENTALS FOR HUMAN HABITATION § 105-7
105:213
§ 105-8. Appeals.
Unlawful use, possession and/or distribution of controlled
dangerous substances and/or drug paraphernalia.
(e)
(f) Malicious destruction of property.
(g) Unlawful possession of weapons.
(h) Unlawful gaming.
(i) Prostitution.
(j) Rape and other sexual offenses.
The suspension imposed under Subsections A and B of this section
shall expire, and the operating license shall be revoked, 30 days after
the date of the suspension unless, during that thirty-day period, the
violations or other actions causing the suspension have been corrected
to the satisfaction of the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall send
to the property owner, by certified mail at the owner's address as
shown on the operating license application, written notice of any such
revocation and shall set forth the grounds for the revocation. The notice
shall inform the owner of the right to appeal the revocation, pursuant
to § 105-8 of this chapter.
C.
An operating license revoked pursuant to Subsection B of this section
may not be reinstated or renewed. However, after an operating license
has been revoked, the owner of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit may file an application for a new license pursuant to § 105-4 of this
chapter.
D.
The owner of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit who is aggrieved
by a decision of the Town to deny issuance, deny renewal, suspend or
revoke an operating license may appeal the decision to the Town Board
of Appeals.
A.
Appeals to the Board of Appeals shall be made within 10 days from the
receipt of notice of suspension or revocation. The appeal shall be made
by filing with the Board a letter or other statement setting forth the
decision or determination from which the appeal is taken, and alleging
sufficient facts to show an error in the decision or determination, or
that compliance with the decision or determination will result in severe
and undue hardship unwarranted by the circumstances. The appeal
shall be deemed to be made when the Board receives the letter or
statement.
B.
Within a reasonable time after receiving notice of an appeal, the Chair
of the Board shall fix a time and place for the hearing of the appeal,
and shall send notice of the hearing to the appellant or the appellant's
attorney of record.
C.
§ 105-7 § 105-8
105:214
§ 105-9. License suspension or revocation; revalidation,
reinspection and reissuance procedure.
In deciding an appeal, the Board of Appeals shall determine, based
upon all of the evidence presented to it, whether there is any error
in the decision or determination from which the appeal is taken, or
whether severe and undue hardship will result to the appellant, or
others, by enforcement of the decision or determination, not warranted
by consideration for the public health, safety and welfare. The Board
may reverse, affirm or modify, wholly or partly, the decision or
determination appealed from, and may make any further order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made upon all of
the evidence presented to it.
D.
Upon making a final determination, the Board shall give written notice
of the determination promptly to the appellant or the appellant's
attorney of record. If the determination requires some action to be
taken by the appellant, the notice shall state a reasonable time within
which the action shall be taken, and further shall state that unless the
action is taken within the time specified, the appellant will be subject
to the penalties provided in § 105-6.
E.
Reissuance of a license that has been revoked or denied upon
application for renewal shall be subject to payment of the full amount of
the applicable operating license fee, except that, at the discretion of the
Town Manager, when the operating license has been revoked or denied
for failure of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit to comply with
the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by Chapter
78 of this Code, the license may be reissued on a six-month basis,
subject to reinspection by the Town before each six-month renewal.
When subsequent inspection confirms that a dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit on a six-month-renewal cycle is being maintained to the
standards of the International Property Maintenance Code, the Town
Manager then shall place the property on a regular licensing schedule.
A.
The fee for a six-month license shall be the same as the fee for a
biannual license, except that the fee shall double, progressively, for any
subsequent denial or revocation that may occur while the property has
been issued a six-month operating license.
B.
A reinspection fee, in the amount of $50 shall be paid before another
inspection of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is made if, at the
time of the scheduled inspection, one or more of the following occurred:
The requesting party requested or was scheduled for inspection,
but work was not completed or violations were not abated.
(1)
The requesting party, either owner, agent, or tenant, or occupant
was not on site.
(2)
C.
§ 105-8 RENTALS FOR HUMAN HABITATION § 105-9
105:215
§ 105-10. Posting of unlicensed property.
§ 105-11. Revocation; vacating premises.
§ 105-12. Judicial relief for violations.
In addition to any other penalties specified in this chapter, the Town may
seek injunctive or other appropriate judicial relief to restrain or correct
violations of this chapter.
§ 105-13. Property manager.
Entry could not be made to the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
(3)
When an operating license has been suspended, revoked, denied or has
expired, the Code Enforcement Officer may cause to be posted on the
property where the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit is located a
notice that states as follows:
A.
A person may not remove such a notice until an operating license has
been obtained.
B.
When an operating license has been revoked, within 15 days after
notice from the Town all tenants and occupants of the dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit for which the operating license was
revoked shall vacate the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit until
a new operating license is issued. The owner of the dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit shall take all reasonable and necessary actions to
procure the removal of such tenants and occupants.
A.
In addition to the procedure described in § 105-7 of this chapter, and
upon issuing an order revoking an operating license, the Town Manager
may further order that the owner of the dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit for which the operating license was revoked shall be
liable for reasonable costs incurred by affected tenants or occupants,
for a period not to exceed 90 days, in order to obtain and relocate to
substitute housing within Charles County.
B.
Any person who fails to vacate or cause to vacate the dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit for which the operating license was revoked, after
due notice by the Town, is guilty of a municipal infraction and is subject
to a fine of $100 per day.
C.
The owner of any dwelling consisting of four or more rental dwelling
units is required to have a property manager located on the premises or
within a reasonable distance from the dwelling. The property manager
shall be responsible for the day-to-day care, maintenance and upkeep
of the dwelling and its grounds. For the purposes of this chapter, the
owner may be the property manager.
A.
§ 105-9 § 105-13
105:216
Chapter 110
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 43.
Chapter 116
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Chapter 119
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision Regulations — See Ch. 122. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 135.
The owner of each multiple dwelling required by Subsection A of this
section to have a property manager shall post the name and telephone
number of the property manager in a conspicuous place within each
dwelling.
B.
Subsections A and B of this section do not relieve the owner of the
multiple dwelling of the owner's duties and responsibilities prescribed
in this chapter and in the International Property Maintenance Code as
adopted by Chapter 78 of this Code, and any regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto. An owner shall not be relieved from any such duty
and responsibility, and shall not be entitled to defend against any
charge of violation thereof, by reason of the fact that the occupant or
tenant also is responsible for complying with such provisions and is in
violation thereof.
C.
§ 105-13 SIGNS § 105-13
110:217

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 119-1. Purpose.
This chapter shall apply to the opening, grading, construction,
improvement, maintenance and repair of public roads, including sidewalks,
driveways, curbs and gutters and storm drainage facilities, within the Town
of Indian Head.
§ 119-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words shall be hereby
defined as follows:
ALLEY — A way which affords, generally, a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting properties and is not intended for general traffic
circulation.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement.
EASEMENT — A strip of land on which a limited right-of-way is provided for
one or more designated purposes, without including title to the land.
ENGINEER-INSPECTOR — The official designated by the Town Manager to
administer this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, when said position
remains unfilled, the term "Engineer-Inspector" shall additionally imply
Town Manager.
INTERMEDIATE ARTERIAL — A route for which the major function is
movement of large volumes of vehicular through traffic.
LOCAL ROADS — A route for which the major function is movement of small
volumes of local vehicular traffic, primarily to provide access to abutting
property.
MINOR ARTERIAL — A route for which the major function is movement
of large volumes of primarily vehicular through traffic. Providing access to
abutting land is a minor function.
MINOR COLLECTOR — A route for which the major function is movement
of large volumes of local vehicular traffic. Providing through traffic access
is a secondary function.73
PEDESTRIANWAY — A passageway for pedestrians, and excluding motor
vehicles, which cuts through a block.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land of which the town has acquired title, by
dedication or purchase, to be designated for some future public purpose.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 119-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 119-2
119:219

ARTICLE II
Streets
§ 119-3. Street classification.
All existing and proposed streets in the incorporated area of the Town of
Indian Head shall be divided into four street classifications: intermediate
arterial, minor arterial, minor collector and local. The following existing and
proposed streets are hereby classified as follows:
§ 119-4. Official Transportation Plan Map.
The Official Transportation Plan Map shall accompany and be part of this
chapter. This map shall be dated and signed by the Mayor of the Town
of Indian Head and attested to upon adoption by the Town Clerk. It shall
be known as the "Official Transportation Plan Map of the Town of Indian
Head, Maryland," and shall be filed by the Clerk as part of this chapter.
Amendments to the Official Transportation Plan Map shall be approved
by the Town Council and shall promptly be portrayed on the Official
Transportation Plan Map. No such amendment shall become effective until
such time of portrayal on the Official Transportation Plan Map.
§ 119-5. Standards and specification.74
A. Intermediate arterial: Maryland Route 210.
Minor arterial:
(1) Blair Road and proposed extension.
(2) Maryland Route 225.
(3) Dogwood Street north to intersection of Oak Street.
B.
Minor collector:
(1) Jenkins Drive.
(2) Indian Head Avenue.
(3) Mattingly Avenue.
(4) Bland Drive.
(5) Dogwood Street north from intersection of Oak Street.
(6) Pine Street.
(7) McWilliams Street.
C.
D. Local: all other existing streets within the Town of Indian Head.
Proposed streets. All proposed streets within the Town of Indian Head
shall be classified as found on the Official Transportation Plan Map.
E.
§ 119-3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 119-5
119:221
§ 119-6. Cuts into road surface.
For road, curb and gutter specifications, the Charles County
Department of Public Works standards shall apply in the Town of Indian
Head.
A.
Pavement and right-of-way widths shall be as set forth in the Town
Subdivision Regulations.75
B.
Driveways and driveway aprons shall be in compliance with the
applicable Charles County Department of Public Works standards.
C.
Authority to cut into road surface. No public utility, corporation, person
or organization shall cut into the surface of any road in the town road
system until written permission for same has been issued by the town
and notice has been given, in writing, to the town of the location, nature
and extent of the cut and the length of time it will be open.76
A.
Emergency cut into road surface. In case of an emergency cut, notice
shall be given as soon as possible, but not more than 48 hours after it
is made.
B.
Unauthorized cut into road surface. In case of any cut into the surface
of any road in the town road system, the public utility, person,
corporation or organization making it shall be responsible for restoring
the road base and surface to its former condition and for repairing
paving failures and settlements due to the utility cut. Repairs to cut
areas shall be made in conformity with the applicable standards and
specifications.77
C.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Subdivision Regulations.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
77.Editor's Note: Former Secs. 4-1001 and 4-1002, dealing with provision for and inspection
of sidewalks, which immediately followed this subsection, were deleted at time of adoption
of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 119-5 § 119-6
119:222
ARTICLE III
Sidewalks
§ 119-7. Sidewalk maintenance.
It shall be the duty and obligation of the owner of property abutting a
sidewalk in a public right-of-way to maintain the abutting sidewalk,
driveway apron and sod in such a condition as to be safe for public use.
§ 119-8. Snow removal.
It shall hereby be the duty and obligation of the owner of property abutting
a sidewalk in a public right-of-way to remove the snow from the sidewalk
within 48 hours after the snow has fallen. Any owner of property abutting
a sidewalk in a public right-of-way who fails to remove the snow from the
abutting sidewalk within 48 hours after the snow has fallen shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine in the
amount of $25 or imprisonment for five days, or both.
§ 119-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 119-8
119:223

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 119-9. Violations and penalties.78
Except as otherwise provided, any person, corporation, association or
partnership, or the agent of any such person, who shall violate a provision
of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any requirements hereof shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by the penalties set forth in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article IV, General Penalty, § 1-36. The town shall
reserve the option of obtaining a mandatory injunction against the violator
to compel performance as required by this chapter.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 119-9 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 119-9
119:225
Chapter 122
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 126
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See Art. V of the
Charter.
Financial plan and budget — See Ch. 58.
§ 119-9 § 119-9
122:226
ARTICLE I
Payment of Delinquent Taxes
[Payment of delinquent property taxes and penalties therefor are
dealt with in § C5-9 of the Town Charter.]
TAXATION § 119-9
126:227

ARTICLE II
Personal Property Tax Exemption
[Adopted 7-2-1984 as Ord. No. 5-2-84]
§ 126-1. Grant of exemption. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
2-1-91]
The stock in business of every person, firm or corporation engaged in any
manufacturing or commercial business, as defined in § 7-222 of the Tax-
Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, shall be exempt from
the personal property tax levy of the Town of Indian Head, commencing with
the levy for the fiscal year 1983-1984.
§ 126-1 TAXATION § 126-1
126:229

ARTICLE III
Admissions and Amusement Tax
[Adopted 8-5-1991 as Res. No. 8-4-91]
§ 126-2. Tax on gross receipts imposed.
Pursuant to the authorization of § 4-102(b)(1) of the Tax-General Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from time to
time, a tax is imposed on the gross receipts derived from any admissions
and amusement charge as defined in § 4-101(b) of the Tax-General Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from time to
time, at the rate of 5%.
§ 126-3. Tax on reduced charges or free admissions.
Pursuant to the authorization of § 4-102(b)(2) of the Tax-General Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from time to
time, an additional tax is imposed on reduced charges or free admissions as
set forth in § 4-105(f) of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, as amended or recodified from time to time.
§ 126-2 TAXATION § 126-3
126:231
Chapter 132
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 135.
§ 132-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the keeping of dismantled,
wrecked, inoperative, unregistered or abandoned vehicles on private
property; to declare the same to be a nuisance; to provide for the abatement
of such nuisance and for penalties for the violation of this chapter; and to
provide for a lien on real estate for expense of such removal.
§ 132-2. Word usage and definitions.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and
words in the singular include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory, not merely directory.
A.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and
words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer that is:
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle that is self-propelled or propelled by
electric power obtained from overhead electrical wires and is not
operated on rails, except that "motor vehicle" shall not include any
bicycle equipped with an assisting motor.
OWNER OF A VEHICLE — The last known registered owner of an
inoperative vehicle is considered to be the prima facie owner of the
vehicle at the time at which a violation of this chapter is alleged to have
occurred.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
company or organization of any kind.
TOWN — The Town of Indian Head, Maryland.
TRAILER — A vehicle that has no motor power and is designed to carry
people or property and to be towed by a motor vehicle.
(1) Substantially dismantled or wrecked;
(2) Inoperative;
(3) Abandoned; or
(4) Not legally licensed to operate.
B.
§ 126-3 § 132-2
132:232
§ 132-3. Declaration of nuisance; exceptions. [Amended 10-2-1989
by Ord. No. 9-1-89]
§ 132-4. Procedure for abatement or removal of nuisance.
If a violation of § 132-3 hereof shall be alleged to have occurred, the
following procedure shall be instituted:
VEHICLE — Any device in, on or by which any individual or property is
or might be transported or towed on the highway.
No person shall park, store or leave or permit the parking, storing
or leaving of any inoperative vehicle or any parts thereof on private
property within the Town of Indian Head for a period of time in excess
of five days. The presence of an inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on
private property is hereby declared a public nuisance, which may be
abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
4-15-1998 by Ord. No. 4-2-98]
A.
This section shall not apply to:
Any inoperative vehicle or parts thereof enclosed within a building
or other enclosure that substantially blocks access to and the view
of such vehicle or parts from adjoining property and from adjacent
public streets.
(1)
Any inoperative vehicle or parts thereof located on private property
ordinarily or regularly used as a commercial establishment for
the storage or repair of inoperative vehicles or parts thereof in
conformance with the Town of Indian Head Zoning Regulations.
(2)
Any operable but unlicensed vehicle that is properly covered by
a car/truck cover purchased at an automotive dealership or
automotive parts and supply establishment. The car/truck cover
shall be of a color so as to inhibit the view of the vehicle but also
to blend in with the immediate surroundings of the vehicle. This
shall be limited to one operable but unlicensed vehicle per parcel
of property, as determined by the Charles County Tax Map.
(3)
B.
Initial notice of violation. Written notice shall be delivered or mailed
by certified mail, restricted delivery, return receipt requested, to the
owner of record of the property on which the vehicle is located to abate
the violation within five days of the date of delivery of the notice. A copy
of such notice shall be delivered or mailed by first-class mail, postage
prepaid, to the owner of such vehicle, if known, and the occupant of
the property on which the vehicle is located, if known. [Amended
4-15-1998 by Ord. No. 4-2-98]
A.
Noncompliance. If the terms of the notice are not complied with within
a five-day period after receipt of notice by certified mail or after a
seven-day period after the date of the mailing of the first-class letter,
as provided by Subsection A above, whichever period terminates first,
B.
§ 132-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 132-4
132:233
it shall be considered a municipal infraction pursuant to § 132-5 of this
chapter. In addition, the town shall have the power and authority to
take the vehicle into custody and remove it to a storage area maintained
or designated by the town, where the vehicle shall remain for at least
30 days or until it is reclaimed and all costs of towing, storage and
preservation of the vehicle are paid by the claimant whichever occurs
first. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1-91; 4-15-1998 by Ord.
No. 4-2-98]
Notice of impoundment.
Within seven days after a vehicle is taken into custody, notice
shall be sent by certified mail, restricted delivery, return receipt
requested, to:
(a) The last known registered owner of the vehicle; and
Each secured party, as shown on the records of the Maryland
Motor Vehicle Administration or as otherwise known.
(b)
(1)
The notice shall:
(a) State that the vehicle has been taken into custody.
State the year, make, model and vehicle identification number,
if known, and give such other or further description as is
reasonably necessary to identify the vehicle.
(b)
State the name and location of the facility where the vehicle is
being held.
(c)
Inform the owner and secured party of their rights to reclaim
the vehicle within 30 days after the date of the notice, upon
payment of all costs of towing, storage and preservation of the
vehicle.
(d)
State that the failure of the owner or secured party to
excercise the right to reclaim the vehicle within the time
provided shall be deemed a waiver by such party to all rights,
title and interest in the vehicle and consent to the sale of the
vehicle, as herein provided.
(e)
(2)
Alternate notice.
This subsection shall apply if:
The identity of the last registered owner of the vehicle
cannot be determined.
[1]
The last registration of the vehicle gives no address for the
owner.
[2]
The identity and address of each secured party cannot be
determined with reasonable certainty.
[3]
(a)
(3)
C.
§ 132-4 § 132-4
132:234
The certified mail notice required by Subsection C(1)
herein is returned as undeliverable or unclaimed.
[4]
Under any of the conditions described in Subsection C(3)(a)
above, the town shall give the notice specified in Subsection
C(1) above by publication in at least one newspaper of general
circulation in the town.
(b)
The notice by publication:
[1] May contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles.
Shall contain the information required by Subsection C(2)
of this section.
[2]
Shall be published within 15 days after the taking in
custody of the vehicle or, if notice by publication is made
because of the return as undeliverable of a prior notice
by certified mail, within 15 days after the return of that
notice.
[3]
(c)
Reclaiming of vehicle. Any vehicle removed pursuant to this chapter
may be redeemed at any time after its removal but prior to the sale of
the vehicle by the owner of the vehicle or by any secured party claiming
a security interest in the vehicle, upon reasonable proof of ownership or
of the existence of a security interest and upon payment by the claimant
of all expenses of removal, towing, storage, preservation and sale of the
vehicle, including all costs of notice and publication.
D.
Failure to reclaim vehicle.
If a vehicle is not reclaimed within 30 days after notice is given
hereunder, the owner or secured party is deemed to have waived
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and to have consented to
the disposition of the vehicle by public sale, and the town may sell
the vehicle at public sale.
(1)
Within seven days after a vehicle is sold, notice shall be sent by
certified mail, restricted delivery, return receipt requested, to:
(a) The last known registered owner of the vehicle; and
Each secured party, as shown on the records of the Maryland
Motor Vehicle Administration or as otherwise known.
(b)
(2)
If a vehicle is disposed of by sale, proceeds of the sale shall be
allocated as follows:
All expenses for towing, storage, preserving and selling the
vehicle, including all costs of notice and publication incurred
under this chapter, shall be paid first.
(a)
(3)
E.
§ 132-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 132-4
132:235
§ 132-5. Violations and penalties.79
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General
Penalty, § 1-37. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed or
continued.
§ 132-6. Effect of statute.
In any case where a provision of this chapter conflicts with a mandatory
provision of Article 23A, § 3, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as
amended, the provisions of Article 23A shall prevail and shall be
incorporated herein as if expressly set forth.
Chapter 135
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 119. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 132.
Any remaining proceeds shall be held for 90 days for the owner
of the vehicle and any secured party who may be entitled to the
proceeds.
(b)
If no person entitled to receive any remaining proceeds shall
claim them within such ninety-day period, the remaining
proceeds shall revert to the town.
(c)
Liability for expenses.
In the event of removal of any inoperative vehicle by the town,
the owner of the vehicle, the occupant of private property where
the vehicle is located and the owner of the private property where
the vehicle is located shall jointly and severally be liable for all
expenses of removal, towing, storing, preserving and selling the
vehicle, including all costs of notice and publication which have not
previously been paid to the town.
(1)
Such unpaid expenses shall be a lien on the real estate on which
the vehicle was located in the same manner and to the same extent
as an ad valorem tax.
(2)
F.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 132-4 § 132-6
135:236
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 135-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 135-2. Adoption and amendment of regulations.
The schedules contained in the various sections of this chapter for the
recording of regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
may be amended or added to from time to time, as deemed necessary by the
Town Council of the Town of Indian Head, by ordinance.
§ 135-3. Enforcement.
This chapter and the regulations adopted thereby will be enforced by the
Charles County Sheriff's Department.
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland (Maryland Vehicle Law), as now in force or as hereafter
amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
A.
The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day, or days celebrated as such.
B.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall
include the singular; the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
C.
§ 135-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 135-3
135:237

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 135-4. Use of sidewalks by motor vehicles.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in the
Town of Indian Head, nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon
or across any sidewalk, except in order to gain access to or egress from
a driveway or alley at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is
curbed, shall be properly cut down for the purpose.
§ 135-5. Speed limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets and highways
or parts thereof in the town is established at 25 miles per hour or as
otherwise posted.
§ 135-6. Trucks and commercial vehicles.
All through trucks, tractor trailers and heavy commercial and recreational
vehicles which are passing through the Town of Indian Head without
stopping and/or making deliveries are hereby barred from traveling on
those streets posted with official signs barring said through traffic, as
deemed by ordinance passed by the Town Council of Indian Head.
§ 135-7. Operation of vehicles on closed highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor upon
any street in the Town of Indian Head that is under construction,
resurfacing or repair in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice
that the same is closed to vehicular traffic. It shall also be unlawful to park
or remain parked on a closed street.
§ 135-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a maximum fine of $1,000
and/or a maximum term of imprisonment of six months.
§ 135-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 135-8
135:239

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 135-9. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 135-10. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof where official signs or other traffic control devices prohibit the
same.
§ 135-11. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts of streets where official signs or other traffic control devices prohibit
the same.
§ 135-12. Parking in violation of posted signs.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked upon any
street or parking area within the corporate limits of the town during hours
other than the hours specified or for longer than the time indicated on any
official sign posted for said street or parking area.
§ 135-13. Parking of unlicensed or unregistered vehicles.
No person or persons shall stop or park any motor vehicle on the streets
and/or alleys in the Town of Indian Head when the motor vehicle has not
been licensed or when the license tags for the motor vehicle have expired
or when the motor vehicle does not have valid license tags attached thereto.
§ 135-14. Additional parking regulations.
A. Fire hydrants. Parking is prohibited within 15 feet of all fire hydrants.
Manner of parallel parking. Every vehicle parked or stopped shall do so
with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the righthand
curb or edge of roadway.
B.
Manner of diagonal parking. All diagonal parking shall be accomplished
by having front wheels heading into the curb.
C.
Double parking. Double parking is prohibited on all town streets, except
for necessary home deliveries or emergency vehicles.
D.
A person shall not park a vehicle on an alley in the Town of Indian Head,
except for operators of trucks or other commercial vehicles who may
E.
§ 135-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 135-14
135:241
§ 135-15. Impoundment.
Police officers are hereby empowered to remove or cause to be removed any
vehicle which may be parked contrary to the laws of this town or contrary
to the laws of the State of Maryland and to place the same in a garage or
storage facility to hold the same until any applicable fine and storage/towing
charges shall have been paid.
only park thereon long enough to load or unload packages, persons or
freight.
Stopping, standing or parking is prohibited:
(1) In front of or in any way blocking a public or private driveway.
(2) On a crosswalk or sidewalk.
(3) Within an intersection.
Alongside of or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(4)
At any place where an official sign or painted curb of the State
of Maryland or the Town of Indian Head prohibits stopping or
standing. It is hereby specifically provided that wherever a curb
is painted red or yellow, there shall be no parking, stopping or
standing parallel to said curb.
(5)
(6) Within any area designated as a fire lane.
Within any area designated for handicapped parking unless the
vehicle so stopping, standing or parking displays a handicapped
registration plate or placard duly issued to said vehicle.
(7)
F.
It shall be unlawful for any bus (motor-driven passenger vehicle) to be
parked on any street or part of a street within the corporate limits of
the Town of Indian Head for a period exceeding one hour at any one
location.
G.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle designed or used for
carrying freight or merchandise in front of, alongside of or in the rear
of any private dwelling, except when actually unloading merchandise
or when the operator or owner of such vehicle is actually engaged in
rendering a service at or to such premises. [Added 4-15-1998 by Ord.
No. 4-1-98]
H.
No person shall stop, stand or park overnight vehicles without a current
registration, travel trailers, boat trailers, horse trailers, multipurpose
vehicles or boats on any public street. [Added 4-15-1998 by Ord. No.
4-1-98]
I.
§ 135-14 § 135-15
135:242
ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 135-16. Declaration of emergency; parking prohibited; signs.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of excessive snow and ice on highways or portions of highways so
indicated by the erection of signs, on highways or portions of highways
named in Subsection C below, an emergency may be declared due to
such hazards.
A.
After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be unlawful
during the period of such emergency for any person to park a motor
vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to remain parked on any highway
or portion thereof unless such vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with
adequate equipment to provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle
or tractor in motion so that other traffic on such highway will not be
blocked or seriously impeded.
B.
The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of this Article
shall be applicable during all periods of emergency declared as
provided in Subsection A of this section shall be as described below:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
C.
In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highway affected by this Article, the Town Manager
shall place at appropriate positions on such highways or portions
thereof signs reading as follows: SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE. SNOW
TIRES OR CHAINS REQUIRED. NO PARKING DURING SNOW
EMERGENCY. VEHICLES WILL BE TOWED AWAY.
D.
The Town Manager shall also, through radio, newspaper or other
available media, disseminate information as to the existence of such
emergency.
E.
§ 135-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 135-16
135:243

ARTICLE V
Parking Violations and Enforcement
§ 135-17. Duty of police officer in all cases of parking violations.
§ 135-18. Initial charges and reoccurring charges for violations.
The officer or authorized parking enforcement personnel who discovers
any vehicle illegally parked shall deliver to the operator a citation
or, if such vehicle is unattended, attach a citation to the vehicle in a
conspicuous place. In the absence of the operator, the registered owner
shall be presumed to be the person receiving the citation. A copy of the
citation shall be retained by the officer and shall bear his certification,
under penalty of perjury, attesting to the truth of the matter therein set
forth.
A.
The recipient of a citation may make payment for the violation directly
to the town office:
(1) By mail;
By use of the collection box installed at the front of the Town
Municipal Building; or
(2)
At such other depositories designated by the Town Council of
Indian Head.
(3)
B.
If he desires to stand trial for said offense, he may elect to do so
by notifying the Charles County Sheriff's Department of his intention
to stand trial, within five days of the issuance date set forth in the
citation. At the time the notice of intention to stand trial is given,
the person receiving the citation must also notify the Charles County
Sheriff's Department that he desires the presence of the person who
issued the citation at said trial. If the person receiving the citation does
not notify the Charles County Sheriff's Department that he desires the
presence of the person who issued the citation at the trial, it shall not be
necessary that the officer appear, and the copy of the citation bearing
the certification of the issuing person shall be prima facie evidence of
the matter therein set forth.
C.
Procedures for the trial of said offense shall be according to the
Maryland District Court Rules, including procedures for notification of
a date, time and place of trial, and shall provide for a trial date not less
than 15 days from the date on which the notice of intention to stand
trial was filed.
D.
The initial charges for parking violations are:
(1) Double-parked: $10.
(2) Parked at fire plug: $10.
(3) Blocking driveway: $10.
A.
§ 135-17 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 135-18
135:245
§ 135-19. Early payment.
Persons receiving a parking citation or the owner of a vehicle to which a
citation is attached may make payment to the town office or appropriate
fine box of an amount of $5 if such payment is made within 24 hours from
the time of violation.
§ 135-20. Late payment penalty.
Persons failing to pay the appropriate fine for the violation by the date of
payment set out on the citation and having failed to file a notice of intention
to stand trial for such offense shall be required to pay, in addition to the
initial charges, a late payment of $10.
§ 135-21. Administrative penalty.
The continued failure of the person receiving a parking citation or the
owner of a vehicle to which a citation is attached to make payment to
the town office shall have directed to him, by mail, a notice of delinquent
payment, which shall provide, in addition to the initial payment and the late
payment penalty, an additional administrative penalty of $10.
§ 135-22. Additional penalties.
The continued failure of the person receiving a parking citation or the
owner of a vehicle to which a citation is attached to make payment to the
town office after due written notice, as described in § 135-21, shall cause
the Charles County. Sheriff's Department to notify the Maryland Motor
Vehicle Administration to refuse registration or transfer of registration of
the subject vehicle until such time as the charge has been satisfied. At such
time as a violation is placed on the computer card, tape or other device
required by the flagging procedure, a final administrative charge of $15
shall be applied. These procedures shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of other penalties provided by law for persons failing to pay the fine for
parking offenses or stand trial for such offenses.
(4) Parked where official signs erected: $10.
(5) Improper parking: $10.
(6) Yellow line: $10.
B. The charge for each additional hour or fraction shall be $10.
§ 135-18 § 135-22
135:246
Chapter 140
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 43.
Financial plan and budget — See Ch. 58.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 74.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 116.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 119.
Subdivision Regulations — See Ch. 122.
§ 135-22 WATER AND SEWERS § 135-22
140:247

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Arts. 3 and 4, of the 1978 Code]
§ 140-1. When sanitary sewage disposal facilities required.
Any building or structure wherein people live, are employed or congregate
must be equipped with such sanitary facilities for sewage disposal as are
prescribed by this Article.
§ 140-2. Responsibility for installation and maintenance of
facilities.
The owner of any property required by this Article to have sanitary facilities
for sewage disposal shall be responsible for the proper installation of such
facilities. The occupant or person having immediate use and control of such
property shall be responsible for maintaining the facilities in a sanitary and
usable condition unless, by contractual arrangement between the parties,
the owner expressly agrees to retain such responsibility.
§ 140-3. When connection to sanitary sewers required.
Any building or structure within the meaning of § 140-1 and located on land
which abuts upon a street or other public way containing a sanitary sewer
must be equipped with sanitary sewage disposal facilities connected to such
sanitary sewer.
§ 140-4. When septic tank required.
Other such buildings and structures not located on land abutting on a
street or other public way containing a sanitary sewer must be equipped
with sanitary sewage disposal facilities connected to a septic tank approved
by the Mayor and Council unless it expressly authorizes and approves a
sanitary pit privy.
§ 140-5. Use of other facilities.
Where this Article requires a particular type of sewage disposal facility, the
use of any other type or disposal by any other means is hereby expressly
prohibited unless approved by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and
Council approves exceptions to the provisions of this Article only when the
lot size, soil composition, lay of the land or other unusual circumstances
make the installation and use of the prescribed facilities unfeasible and
provided that conditions favor such installations as adequate for protection
of the public health.
§ 140-6. Obstruction of sanitary sewers.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to deposit any
material in any toilet, bathtub, sink or other plumbing fixture which may
result in the obstruction of any sanitary sewer. This liability on the part of
§ 140-1 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-6
140:249
the occupant shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility of cleaning any
resultant chokage which shall subject the occupant to the penalties of this
Article upon proper proof of such willful malicious act.
§ 140-7. Cross-connections and other restricted connections.
§ 140-8. Violations and penalties.80
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General Penalty, § 1-36.
Definitions. The following definitions and terms shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this section:
AUXILIARY INTAKE — Any piping connection or other device whereby
water may be secured from a source other than that normally used.
BYPASS — Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the
water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water
purification plant.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection whereby the public
water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether
public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings,
in such manner that a flow of water into the public water supply
is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of
ineffective check or back-pressure valves or because of any other
arrangement.
INTERCONNECTION — Any system of piping or other arrangement
whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer,
drain, conduit, poll, storage reservoir or other device which normally
contains sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of
importing contamination to the public water supply.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — The waterworks system furnishing water to
the municipality for general use.
A.
Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a crossconnection,
auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection to be made.
B.
80.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 140-6 § 140-8
140:250
ARTICLE II
Connection Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 9 of the 1978 Code]
§ 140-9. Availability charges.
Every owner of a lot or parcel of property in the town upon which a building
permit application is executed for any residential or commercial use shall
be charged an availability charge for utility service as follows:
§ 140-10. Areas of financial responsibility.
A water system availability charge as set forth by ordinance for each
residential or commercial unit to be constructed in the town. Each
apartment unit shall be considered a separate unit relative to the
interpretation of this Article.
A.
A sewer system availability charge as set forth by ordinance for each
residential or commercial unit to be constructed in the town. Each
apartment unit shall be considered a separate unit relative to the
interpretation of this Article.
B.
Water service. In lieu of a set nonflexible connection charge, the
following delineates the areas of financial responsibility for waterline
installation.
The property owner or developer, as appropriate, shall purchase
from the town a corporation stop, at cost, for the connection to
the main. An additional cost defined by ordinance shall be assessed
to the applicant relative to the labor for the connection and
administrative services.
(1)
The property owner or developer, as appropriate, shall supply
material and labor for the installation of a cutoff valve enclosed in
a curb box at the property line.
(2)
The property owner or developer, as appropriate, shall purchase
from the town, at cost, a water meter to be installed at the property
line or such other location as predetermined by the town. Said
costs for installation shall be borne by the property owner or
developer.
(3)
The property owner or developer, as appropriate, shall furnish
labor and material for the installation of the service line from the
main connection to the serviced building. Said service line shall
be copper tubing. The former shall be used under any roadway.
Where two dissimilar metals are connected, a dialectric union shall
be used. Costs shall be borne by the property owner or developer.
(4)
A.
Sewer service. In lieu of a set nonflexible connection charge, the
following delineates the areas of financial responsibility for sewer line
installation:
B.
§ 140-9 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-10
140:251
§ 140-11. Opening of streets by utility or contractor.
§ 140-12. Extension of utilities.
The property owner or developer, as appropriate, shall purchase
from the town, at cost, the saddle and any additional material for
making the connection to the main. An additional cost defined by
ordinance shall be assessed to the applicant relative to labor and
administrative services.
(1)
The property owner or developer, as appropriate, shall furnish
labor and material for the installation of the service line from the
main connection to the serviced building.
(2)
Service lines installed under any roadway shall be only four-inch or
larger cast-iron sewer pipe.
(3)
The property owner or developer, as appropriate, shall furnish
labor and material for the installation of a cleanout at the property
line, which shall be plugged on top.
(4)
Opening of street. The town shall specify where the street is to be
opened for connections to be made to the utility system.
A.
Opening of street by property owner or developer. The property owner
or developer, as appropriate, shall bear all costs performed in opening
the street for utility connections.
B.
Opening of street by contractor. The contractor opening the street shall
be responsible for safety precautions while the street is open and shall
provide and maintain barricades, lights and removal of all debris made
by opening and closing the street.
C.
Closing of street. The contractor opening the street shall be responsible
for closing the street to the following specifications:
(1) The ditch shall be filled with crushed gravel.
The gravel shall be tamped in layers of six inches or less to within
eight inches of the existing surface.
(2)
Four inches of Type P cement shall be placed over the gravel.
[Amended 9-4-1978 by Ord. No. 9-1-1978]
(3)
The road repairs after closing shall be made by four inches of
bituminous concrete applied to the finished cement.
(4)
D.
Payment of street opening, closing and pavement repairs. The property
owner or developer, as appropriate, shall bear the cost of the street
opening, closing and pavement repairs and pay the contractor directly.
E.
§ 140-10 § 140-12
140:252
§ 140-13. Payment procedure.
§ 140-14. Violations and penalties.82
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General Penalty, § 1-36.
Costs of utility extensions. The costs of all utility extensions, including
appurtenances, shall be borne by the property owner or developer, as
appropriate.
Where said extension shall benefit more than one parcel or lot, the
cost to the individual property owner shall be computed by dividing
the total cost of the extension by the front footage of each affected
lot.
(1)
The developer shall bear the cost for all utility extensions,
availability and utility connection costs for all lots within said
subdivision. All systems shall be dedicated to the Town of Indian
Head.
(2)
A.
Appurtenances and materials. When available, appurtenances and
material, including but not limited to hydrants, water meters, etc., shall
be purchased from the town, at cost. When not available, all material
and appurtenances shall be approved by the town.
B.
Utility extensions in annexed areas. Annexed areas shall receive utility
extensions based on the requirements and procedures of this section,
as stated herein.81
C.
Time of payments. All fees, charges and costs, as delineated herein,
shall be paid in full at the time of building permit approval, with
the exception of excavation costs, appurtenances or other items as
determined by the town.
A.
Purchase of material from the town. Material to be purchased from
the town shall be paid in full at the time of permit approval. The
property owner or developer shall show proof of purchase of material
not available from the town by submitting an invoice within one month
of permit approval.
B.
Adjustment of fees. The Town Council shall have the discretion, after
public hearing, to abate or adjust any fees or costs defined in an
ordinance by amending such ordinance.
C.
81.Editor's Note: Former Art. 6, Sale of Water, as amended, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
82.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 140-12 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-14
140:253

ARTICLE III
Mandatory Connections
[Adopted 6-2-1980 as Ord. No. 5-1-80]
§ 140-15. Charter authority, enactment.
Pursuant to Article VIII, § C8-5, of the Town Charter of Indian Head, the
Mayor and Council does hereby adopt the following Article.
§ 140-16. Connection to water system required.
All properties, commercial or residential, located within the Incorporated
Town of Indian Head shall connect to and be served by the town's water
system.
§ 140-17. Violations and penalties.83
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to
condemnation procedures as set forth in the current BOCA Existing
Structures Code.
83.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 140-15 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-17
140:255

ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers
[Adopted 12-3-1984 as Ord. No. 12-1-84; revised and readopted at
time of adoption of Code84]
§ 140-18. Objectives and purpose.
§ 140-19. Definitions and word usage.
It is the objective of the Town Council of the Town of Indian Head,
Maryland, to permit the discharge of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes to the sewerage system of the Town of Indian Head, provided
that such discharge does not damage the sewerage system, unduly
restrict the capacity of the system to receive wastewater, adversely
affect the treatment process or in any other way constitute a detriment
to the sewerage system, including the sewers, the pumping facilities,
the wastewater treatment plant or the receiving waters.
A.
It is declared to be the purpose of this Article to specify:
Those wastewaters, including industrial wastes, which will be
accepted in the sewerage system of the Town of Indian Head.
(1)
Types of wastes which will be prohibited from discharge to the
sewerage system of the Town of Indian Head.
(2)
Conditions, including pretreatment or screening, under which
certain wastes will be accepted in the sewerage system of the Town
of Indian Head, after review and upon approval of the Town Council
or Town Engineer.
(3)
B.
Unless the content specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms used in this Article shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five
days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter, as determined in
accordance with the latest edition of the American Public Health
Association's Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater or by the latest edition of Methods for Chemical Analysis
of Water and Wastes published by the Environmental Protection Agency
or by a method acceptable to the State Department of Health.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of soil,
waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
conveyed to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner
face or the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
A.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art I.
§ 140-18 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-19
140:257
ENGINEER — A consulting engineer retained by the Town of Indian
Head or a duly authorized representative of the Town of Indian Head.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and disposing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid and solid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON or ESTABLISHMENT OR OWNER — Any individual, firm,
company, association, society, public or private corporation, the state or
any other entity whatsoever.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTED WATERS — Waters which have been contaminated by the
addition of sewage, industrial wastes or other harmful or objectionable
materials in amounts in excess of that allowed by the governing
regulatory agencies.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely in flowing water.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is controlled by the Town of Indian
Head or its duly authorized representative.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe or conduit which carries wastewater
and to which storm-, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
SCREENING — The removal of solids by straining through No. 20 mesh
screens, or finer, if desired by the town wastewater supervisor.
SEWAGE or SANITARY SEWAGE — The wastewaters from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, except
industrial wastes.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit defined as a sanitary sewer.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating
and disposing of wastewater.
SLUG — Any discharge of significant quantities, in the opinion of the
Engineer, of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes, five times the average twenty-fourhour
concentration or flows during normal operation.
§ 140-19 § 140-19
140:258
§ 140-20. Use of public sewer required.
§ 140-21. Prohibited discharge.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A pipe or conduit
which carries storm- and surface waters and drainage, but excludes
sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by the wastewater process.
TOWN — The Town Council of Indian Head, a municipal corporation of
the State of Maryland, or its duly authorized representative.
WASTEWATER — Sewage and/or industrial wastes.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT
— Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating
wastewater.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any manner on public or private property within the Town
of Indian Head or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town of
Indian Head any sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters.
A.
Where public sewers are provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
B.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties that are equipped
with toilet facilities and are situated within the town and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located a
public sanitary sewer of the town are hereby required at their expense
to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this Article, within 60 days after date
of official notice to do so.
C.
New sewers and connections to the sewer system will be properly
designed and constructed.
D.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, tide-water, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer.
A.
Industrial cooling water or process waters free of contamination may
be discharged, on approval of the Engineer, to a storm drain or natural
outlet, if such discharges are allowed by the governing state or federal
B.
§ 140-19 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-21
140:259
§ 140-22. Restricted discharges.
regulatory agencies and are in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters, materials or wastes to any public sewer or
storm drain:
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, motor oil, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases.
(1)
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides in excess of 0.2 milligram per
liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
(2)
Solid or viscous substances capable of causing an obstruction to
the flow in the sewer or other interferences with the proper
operation of the sewerage system, such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
shells, tar, waxes, plastics, wood, unground garbage, paunch
manure, hair, fleshings, entrails or paper products such as dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
(3)
C.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewerage
system the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes
if, in the opinion of the Engineer, such wastes can harm either the
sewers, pumping facilities, wastewater treatment process or equipment
or have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise
endanger life, public property, limb or constitute a nuisance. In forming
his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Engineer will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of the subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, the materials
of construction of the sewers, the nature of the wastewater treatment
process, the capacity of the wastewater treatment plant and other
pertinent factors. The wastes thus prohibited, except as may be
approved by the Engineer, are:
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. [65°
C.].
(1)
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 1/4 pound
per day or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° F. [0° and 65° C.].
(2)
A.
§ 140-21 § 140-22
140:260
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder or comminutor equipped with
a motor of 3/4 horsepower [0.76 horsepower metric] or greater
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Engineer.
(3)
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any
such material received in the wastewater at the treatment plant
exceeds the limits established by the Engineer for such materials.
(4)
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Engineer in compliance
with applicable state and federal regulations.
(5)
Acids or alkalies having pH values upon point of discharge into
the public sewer lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or which would
in any way cause damage to sewer, structures, equipment or
wastewater treatment process.
(6)
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs, as defined herein.
(a)
Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable canning solutions.
(b)
(7)
(8) All industrial wastes that will not pass a No. 20 mesh screen.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers and said waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in Subsection A of this
section and which are prohibited from discharge to the sewerage
system because, in the judgment of the Engineer, they may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewerage system, treatment process or
receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute
a public nuisance, the town may:
Reject the waste discharge or not approve the request for
treatment of the proposed wastes, as the case may be; or
(1)
Request the owner to comply with the following requirements in
order to obtain the written approval of the Engineer and thereby
be permitted to discharge the particular wastewater to the public
sewerage system:
Pretreat, at his expense, the wastewater to an acceptable
condition for discharge to the public sewers, as described
herein, except that he would be required to pay standard town
surcharge rates for handling excess amounts of BOD and/or
suspended solids. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Engineer
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 140-22 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-22
140:261
and of the State Department of Health and the State
Department of Water Resources, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are
obtained, in writing.
Provide necessary and approved controls over the quantities
and rates of discharge.
(b)
The Engineer may require any or all of the following: preliminary
treatment, payment of the town surcharge rate where applicable or
flow-equalization as conditions before approval of the discharge of the
wastes to the sewer.
If the Engineer permits discharge to the sewer after preliminary
treatment or equalization of wastes flows, the design and
installation of the requisite facilities and equipment shall be subject
to the joint review and approval of the Engineer, the State
Department of Health and the State Department of Water
Resources, subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws.
(1)
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
his expense.
(2)
As part of such preliminary treatment, the Engineer will require
grease removal and screening of industrial wastes, where
applicable. Facilities for said pretreatment will be subject to the
approval of the Engineer.
(3)
C.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes,
sand, shellfish particles or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be designed to reduce the liquid waste
velocity to a maximum of one foot per second and, unless otherwise
authorized by the Town Engineer, shall have a minimum depth of two
feet six inches, and the velocity shall be determined by the peak hourly
discharge. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the Engineer and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection by the town or the Engineer.
D.
When required by the Engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such approved meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by
E.
§ 140-22 § 140-22
140:262
§ 140-23. Allowable concentrations.
The maximum allowable concentration of heavy metals or substances for
discharge to the town sewer system is:
Aluminum 1.0 part per million
Arsenic 0.1 part per million
Phenol 1.0 part per million
Cadmium 1.0 part per million
Chromium (hexavalent) 1.0 part per million
Copper 1.0 part per million
Cyanide 0.2 part per million
Lead 1.0 part per million
Mercury 1.0 part per million
Nickel 1.0 part per million
Iron 5.0 parts per million
Zinc 5.0 parts per million
the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be
safe and accessible at all times.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this Article shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the
American Public Health Association or the latest edition of Methods for
Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes published by the Environmental
Protection Agency or by a method acceptable to the State Department
of Health and shall be determined at the control manhole provided
or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. Sampling
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect of constituents upon the sewerage system and to determine
the existing hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analysis
involved will determine whether twenty-four-hour composites or grab
samples should be taken. pH is to be determined by periodic grab
samples. When additional sampling and analysis beyond the normal are
requested by a wastewater contributor, he shall pay the town's cost for
performing the same unless said samples show appreciable difference
from the previous sampling and analysis.
F.
When the wastewater treatment facilities have reached a point near
maximum loading as determined and approved by the state and/or the
Town Engineer, the town shall prohibit increased industrial discharge,
either on the basis of flow or quantity of waste constituents, or both.
G.
§ 140-22 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-24
140:263
§ 140-24. Rates and charges.
Rates and charges shall be as set forth in the Annual Financial Plan and
Budget Ordinance.85
§ 140-25. Authority of Engineer.
§ 140-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who maliciously, willfully or negligently breaks, damages,
destroys, uncovers, defaces or tampers with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewerage system
shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. In addition, the Engineer and other duly authorized employees
of the town shall institute legal proceedings against such person to
recover damages for any losses incurred.
A.
The Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the town, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the town shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including shellfish
preparation and packaging, metallurgical, chemical, oil, ceramic,
foodstuffs, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers,
waterways or waste treatment facilities.
B.
The Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the town, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewerage system lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with
the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
C.
While performing necessary work on private properties, the Engineer
or duly authorized employees of the town shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the owner, and the owner
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the town employees, and
the town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its
property by town employees and against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions as required in § 140-22E.
D.
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Financial Plan and Budget.
§ 140-24 § 140-26
140:264
Any person found to be violating any provision of this Article shall be
served by the town with a written notice, stating the nature of the
violation and providing a time limit deemed reasonable by the Engineer
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
A.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV, General
Penalty, § 1-36.
B.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article will become
liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the town
by reason of such violation.
C.
§ 140-26 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-26
140:265

ARTICLE V
Utility Bills
[Adopted 4-2-1990 as Ord. No. 3-1-90]
§ 140-27. Effect of multiple tenancy.
Effective July 1, 1990, principal owners of buildings with multiple
tenants shall be sent utility bills for their respective buildings.
A.
The Town Manager shall notify, in writing, all principal owners of
buildings affected by this Article to advise them of this Article and the
delinquent status, if any, of their tenants.
B.
For owners who, at their expense, have new structures built or existing
structures modified so that each tenant is served by a separate water
meter and shutoff, the owner may request that the utility bill be sent to
the tenant. This does not exempt the owner from any delinquent bills
that may occur.
C.
§ 140-27 WATER AND SEWERS § 140-27
140:267
Chapter 145
ZONING
Chapter A149
GAS LIGHT FRANCHISE
§ A149-1. Authority granted; permission for construction; rules and
regulations.
Authority be and the same is hereby granted to Washington Gas Light
Company, its successors and assigns (hereinafter referred to as "Company")
to acquire, lay, install, operate and maintain underground pipes or conduits
and accessory equipment for the transmission, distribution and sale of gas
and, in connection therewith, to make necessary cuts and excavations in
the sidewalks, streets, alleys, roads, lanes, highways, squares, paved or
unpaved, and other public places within the present or future limits of
Indian Head upon the following terms and conditions:
§ A149-2. Liability.
The Company shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Indian Head
from and against any and all claims of whatsoever nature against the Town
of Indian Head arising from or out of the excavations and installations
herein permitted and shall reimburse the Town of Indian Head for any
and all loss or expense, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by
the Town of Indian Head in the defense of any claim arising out of said
excavations and installations.
§ A149-3. General service provisions.
Under this permit the Company shall construct and extend its service in
accordance with the general service provisions of the Company on file with,
and approved by, the Public Service Commission of Maryland.
Before the Company shall begin any such underground construction,
it shall make application to and obtain, from the proper regulatory
authorities having jurisdiction, a permit for such construction under
such terms and conditions as such authority may designate. The
Company shall be responsible to return the area under construction
to its original state and/or superior state than prior to the initiation of
construction.
A.
All work under this permit shall be done in such a manner as to
avoid damage to other underground installations or any construction
performed by the town, by the Maryland State Roads Commission or
any other governmental agency.
B.
§ 140-27 § A149-4
145:268
§ A149-4. Franchise fee.
If, at any time during the term of this franchise, the Company pays a
franchise fee to any municipal government located in the State of Maryland,
the Company agrees to pay a negotiated franchise fee to the Town of Indian
Head. The negotiated franchise fee shall be a fee which is at least equal to
the fee paid to the other municipal government.
§ A149-5. Acceptance of franchise.
As evidence of its acceptance of this franchise upon said terms and
conditions set forth herein, and of its agreement to abide by and perform
each and all said terms and conditions, the Company shall cause to be
indicated on a copy of this ordinance its acceptance thereof, in its corporate
name signed by the president or a vice president, its corporate seal to be
thereto affixed and attested by its secretary or an assistant secretary and
shall file such acceptance with the Clerk of the Town Council.
§ A149-6. Term.
This franchise shall expire 50 years from the effective date of this
ordinance.
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
4-1-04 5-3-2004 Impact fees: parks and recreation
amendment; 2005 financial plan and
budget
Ch. 84, Art. I; see Ch. 58
7-1-04 8-2-2004 Approval of trust agreement NCM
4-1-05 6-6-2005 Impact fees: parks and recreation
amendment; 2006 financial plan and
budget
Ch. 84, Art. I; see Ch. 58
6-1-05 7-5-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
11-1-05 11-29-2005 Impact fees: supplemental parks and
recreation impact fee for Waterfront
District
Ch. 84, Art. III
1-1-06 2-6-2006 Approval of extension of lease
agreement
NCM
1-2-06 2-6-2006 Bond NCM
4-1-06 6-5-2006 Impact fees: parks and recreation
amendment; 2007 financial plan and
budget
Ch. 84, Art. I; see Ch. 58
§ A149-4 GAS LIGHT FRANCHISE § DL-1
A149:269
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
9-1-06 10-2-2006 2007 financial plan and budget
amendment
See Ch. 58
10-1-06 11-6-2006 Building construction amendment;
general penalty amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 1, Art. IV
10-2-06 11-6-2006 Building construction amendment;
general penalty amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 1, Art. IV
10-3-06 11-6-2006 Building construction amendment;
general penalty amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 1, Art. IV
10-4-06 11-6-2006 Building construction amendment;
general penalty amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 1, Art. IV
10-5-06 11-6-2006 Property maintenance and housing
standards amendment; general
penalty amendment
Ch. 78; Ch. 1, Art. IV
10-6-06 11-6-2006 Building construction amendment;
general penalty amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 1, Art. IV
10-7-06 11-6-2006 Building construction amendment;
general penalty amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 1, Art. IV
10-8-06 11-6-2006 Building construction amendment;
general penalty amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 1, Art. IV
10-9-06 11-6-2006 Building construction amendment;
general penalty amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 1, Art. IV
10-10-06 11-6-2006 Building construction amendment;
general penalty amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 1, Art. IV
2-1-07 2-21-2007 2007 financial plan and budget
amendment
See Ch. 58
4-1-07 5-7-2007 Impact fees: parks and recreation
amendment; 2008 financial plan and
budget
Ch. 84, Art. I; see Ch. 58
4-2-07 4-19-2007 2007 financial plan and budget
amendment
See Ch. 58
5-1-07 6-4-2007 Zoning amendment See Ch. 145
11-1-07 11-12-2007 2008 financial plan and budget
amendment
See Ch. 58
2-1-08 3-3-2008 Zoning amendment See Ch. 145
2-2-08 3-3-2008 Cable television amendment Ch. 47
4-1-08 4-17-2008 2008 financial plan and budget
amendment
See Ch. 58
4-2-08 5-5-2008 2009 financial plan and budget
amendment
See Ch. 58
7-1-08 8-4-2008 2009 financial plan and budget
amendment
See Ch. 58
§ DL-1 § DL-1
A149:270
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
9-1-08 9-18-2008 Personnel amendment See Ch. 25
10-1-08 11-3-2008 Building construction amendment
(2006 Building Code)
Ch. 43
10-2-08 11-3-2008 Building construction amendment
(2006 Electrical Code)
Ch. 43
10-3-08 11-3-2008 Building construction amendment
(2006 Energy Conservation Code)
Ch. 43
10-4-08 11-3-2008 Building construction amendment
(2006 Existing Building Code)
Ch. 43
10-5-08 11-3-2008 Building construction amendment
(2006 Fuel Gas Code)
Ch. 43
10-6-08 11-3-2008 Building construction amendment
(2006 Mechanical Code)
Ch. 43
10-7-08 11-3-2008 Building construction amendment
(2006 Plumbing Code)
Ch. 43
10-8-08 11-3-2008 Property maintenance and housing
standards amendment
Ch. 78
10-9-08 11-3-2008 Building construction amendment
(2006 One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Code)
Ch. 43
10-10-08 12-1-2008 Building construction amendment
(2006 Fire Code)
Ch. 43
11-01-08 2-2-2009 Travel and expense policy
amendment
Ch. 23, Art. I
04-01-09 5-4-2009 2010 financial plan and budget NCM
§ DL-1 GAS LIGHT FRANCHISE § DL-1
A149:271

Town of Indian Head, Maryland
Zoning Ordinance
March 23, 2008
ARTICLE I
Section 100
Section 101
Section 102
Section 103
Section 104
Section 105
Section 106
Section 107
Section 108
Section 109
Section 110
Section 111
Section 112
Section 113
ARTICLE II
Section 200
Section 201
ARTICLE III
Section 300
Section 301
Section 302
Section 303
Section 304
Section 305
Section 306
Section 307
Section 308
Section 309
Section 310
Town of Indian Head, Maryland
Zoning Ordinance
Table of Contents
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Short Title 1. 1
Intent/Authority 1. 1
Jurisdiction 1. 1
Interpretation 1. 2
Severability 1. 3
Location and boundaries of zones 1. 3
Permitted uses 1. 4
Adequate public facilities requirements 1. 4
Accessory uses on vacant lots 1. 5
No use or sale of land or buildings except in conformity with chapter
provisions 1. 5
Violations and penalties 1. 5
Relationship to existing zoning, subdivision, and flood control
ordinances 1. 5
Fees 1. 5
Computation of time 1. 5
BASIC DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Definitions of Basic Terms 2. 1
Lots Divided by District Lines 2. 28
ADMINISTRATIVE MECHANISMS
Appointment and Terms of Planning Commission Members 3. 1
Meetings of the Planning Commission 3. 1
Quorum and Voting 3. 2
Planning Commission Chairman 3. 2
Powers and Duties of Planning Commission 3. 2
Advisory Committees 3. 3
Appointments and Terms of Board of Appeals 3. 3
Meetings of the Board of Appeals 3. 3
Quorum 3. 4
Voting 3. 4
Board of Appeals Officers 3. 5
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 1
Section 311
Section 312
Section 313
Section 314
ARTICLE IV
Part I
Section 400
Section 401
Section 402
Section 403
Section 404
Section 405
Section 406
Section 407
Section 408
Section 409
Section 410
Section 411
Section 412
Section 413
Section 414
Section 415
Section 416
Section 417
Section 418
Section 419
Section 420
Part II
Section 450
Section 451
Section 452
Section 453
Section 454
Section 455
Section 456
Section 457
Section 458
Section 459
Powers and Duties of Board of Appeals 3. 5
Zoning Administrator 3. 5
Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator 3. 6
Town Council 3. 6
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
Zoning Permits
Permits Required 4. 1
Severability 4.2
Time Limits for Zoning and Building Permits 4.2
Permit Application Requirements and Procedures 4.2
Certificate of Occupancy 4.4
Inspection and Supervision During Installation 4.6
As -Built Site Plan 4.6
No Occupancy, Use, or Sale of Lots Until Requirements Fulfilled 4. 7
Who May Submit Permit Applications 4. 7
Applications To Be Complete 4.7
Staff Consultation Before Formal Application 4. 8
Staff Consultation After Application Submitted 4. 8
Authorizing Use or Occupancy Before Completion Of Development
Under Zoning Permit 4.9
Completing Developments In Phases 4.9
Expiration Of Permits 4. 10 •
Effect Of Permit On Successors And Assigns 4. 11
Amendments To And Modifications Of Permits 4. 11
Reconsideration Of Board Action 4. 12
Maintenance Of Common Areas, And Facilities 4. 12
Records of Zoning Administrators 4. 13
Structures And Uses To Be As Provided In Building Permits, Plans, And
Certificates of Occupancy 4. 13
Special Exception Permits
Intent 4. 13
Initiation of Special Exceptions 4. 13
Application for Special Exception 4. 14
Hearing on Application 4. 14
Authorization 4. 14
Standards - General 4. 14
Effect of Denial of a Special Exception 4. 15
Complaints 4. 15
Revocation 4. 15
Standards for Specific Special Exceptions 4. 16
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2
ARTICLE V
Section 500
Section 501
Section 502
Section 503
Section 504
Section 505
ARTICLE VI
Section 600
Section 601
Section 602
Section 603
Section 604
Section 605
ARTICLE VII
Section 700
Section 701
Section 702
Section 703
Section 704
Section 705
ARTICLE VIII
Section 800
Section 801
Section 802
Section 803
Section 804
Section 805
Section 806
Section 807
ARTICLE IX
Part I.
Section 900
Section 901
APPEALS, VARIANCES, INTERPRETATIONS
Appeals 5. 1
Variances 5. 1
Interpretations 5. 4
Requests To Be Heard Expeditiously 5. 5
Burden of Proof in Appeals and Variances 5. 5
Board Action on Appeals and Variances 5. 5
HEARING PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS
Hearing Required on Appeals and Applications 6. 1
Notice of Hearing 6. 1
Evidence 6.2
Modification of Application at Hearing 6. 2
Record 6.2
Written Decision 6.2
ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW
Complaints Regarding Violations 7. 1
Persons Liable 7. 1
Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations 7. 1
Penalties and Remedies for Violations 7. 1
Permit Revocation 7. 2
Judicial Review 7. 2
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
Intent 8. 1
Definitions 8. 1
Continuation of Nonconforming Situations and Completion of
Nonconforming Projects 8. 1
Nonconforming Lots 8. 1
Extension or Enlargements of Nonconforming Situations 8. 3
Repair, Maintenance, Reconstruction 8. 4
Change in Use of Property Where a Nonconforming Situation Exists 8. 5
Abandonment and Discontinuance of Nonconforming Situation 8. 6
ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
Zoning Districts
Districts Established 9. 0
Residential Districts 9. 0
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 3
March, 2008
Section 902 Commercial Districts 9. 1
Section 903 Planned Development Districts 9. 1
Section 904 Floodplain and Floodway Districts 9.2
Section 905 Open Space District 9.2
Part II. Special Overlay District - Highway Corridor
Section 930 Purpose 9. 3
Section 931 Affected Development 9.4
Section 932 Tree Protection 9. 5
Section 933 Retention of and/ or Creation of a Minimum Visual Buffer along the Rt.
210 Corridor Right -of -Way 9. 6
Section 934 Exemptions From Buffer Requirements 9. 7
Section 935 Permitted Activity in Minimum Visual Buffer Before and After
Development 9. 8
Section 936 Architectural Review 9. 9
Section 937 Performance Incentives 9. 13
Section 938 Access Standards 9. 16
Section 939 Corridor Master File 9. 16
Section 940 Waivers of Corridor Requirements 9. 17
Section 941 Architectural Review Board 9. 17
Section 942 Plan Review Procedures of Application for Corridor Review 9. 18
Section 943 Appeal to Planning Commission 9. 18
Part III. Special Overlay District - Chesapeake Bay Critical Area
Section 950 Purpose 9. 19
Section 951 Implementation of the Critical Area Provisions 9. 19
Section 952 Enforcement 9.20
Section 953 Development in the Critical Area Overlay District 9.20
Section 954 Intensely Developed Areas 9.22
Section 955 Limited Development Areas 9.25
Section 956 Resource Conservation Areas 9.30
Section 957 Growth Allocation 9.33
Section 958 Grandfathering 9.35
Section 959 Intrafamily Transfers 9. 37
Section 960 Variances 9. 38
Section 961 Critical Area Program Amendments 9.38
Section 962 Water Dependent Facilities 9. 39
Section 963 Structures on Piers 9.43
Section 964 Shore Erosion Protection Works 9.44
Section 965 Forest and Woodland Protection 9.47
Section 966 Commercial Timber Harvesting 9. 50
Section 967 Agriculture 9. 51
Section 968 Surface Mining in the Critical Area 9. 54
Section 969 Natural Parks 9.56
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4
Section 970
Section 971
Section 972
Section 973
Section 974
Part IV.
Section 975
Section 976
Section 977
ARTICLE X
Section 1000
Section 1001
Section 1002
Section 1003
Section 1004
Section 1005
Section 1006
Section 1007
Section 1008
ARTICLE XI
Part I
Section 1100
Section 1101
Section 1102
Section 1103
Section 1104
Part II
Section 1130
Section 1131
Section 1132
Section 1133
Section 1134
Section 1135
Section 1136
Section 1137
Section 1138
Habitat Protection 9.57
The 100 -foot Buffer 9.57
Threatened and Endangered Species and Species in Need
of Conservation 9. 61
Plant and Wildlife Habitat and Nontidal Wetlands Protection 9.64
Anadromous fish Propagation Waters 9.68
Zoning Map
Official Zoning Map 9.70
Interpretation of District Boundaries 9.70
Amendments to the Official Zoning Map 9.71
PERMISSIBLE USES
Use of the Designations P and SE in the Table of Permissible Uses 10. 1
Reserved 10. 1
Permissible Uses and Specific Exclusions 10. 1
Accessory Uses 10.2
Permissible Uses Not Requiring Permits 10. 2
Change in Use 10. 3
Combination Uses 10.4
More Specific Use Controls 10. 4
Permissible Uses Table of Permissible Uses by Zoning Districts 10.4
SUPPLEMENTARY USE AND DESIGN REGULATIONS
General Provision - Miscellaneous Uses
Town Center Mixed Use Development (TCMX) 11. 1
Waterside Mixed Use District 11. 5
Reserved 11. 5
Temporary Emergency Construction, or Repair Residences 11. 5
Special Events 11. 6
Specific Supplementary Use and Design Regulations
Accessory Apartments 11. 7
Animal Board Facilities and Veterinary Hospitals 11. 8
Antenna or Tower Greater than 50 Feet in Height and Associated
Substation 11. 8
Antique Shops 11. 8
Art or Cultural Centers 11. 9
Automobile Filling Stations 11. 9
Automobile and Light Truck Storage Lots 11. 10
Automobile, Truck, and Trailer Rentals, Outdoors 11. 10
Boarding Houses, Bed & Breakfasts, Country Inns 11. 11
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 5
Section 1139 Child or Elderly Care Centers ( Day Care Centers) 11. 12
Section 1140 Clinics 11. 14
Section 1141 Drive-in/ Fast Food Restaurants, Banks 11. 15
Section 1142 Education Institutions, Private 11. 16
Section 1143 Festivals or events, Occasional, Outdoor 11. 17
Section 1144 Funeral parlors or Undertaking Establishments 11. 18
Section 1145 Greenhouses, Commercial Nurseries 11. 19
Section 1146 Golf Courses and Country Clubs 11. 19
Section 1147 Golf Driving Range 11. 20
Section 1148 Group Residential Facility for Housing Exceptional People 11. 20
Section 1149 Home Occupations 11. 22
Section 1150 Hospitals 11. 22
Section 1151 Hotels and Motels 11. 23
Section 1152 Housing for the Elderly or Handicapped 11. 24
Section 1153 Mini -Warehouses 11. 24
Section 1154 Nursing Care Institutions 11. 25
Section 1155 Parking and Storage Requirements for Major Commercial Vehicles and
Recreational Equipment 11. 27
Section 1156 Public Utility Buildings and Public Utility Structures 11. 28
Section 1157 Retail Establishments in a Group of Multiple -Family Dwellings 11. 29
Section 1158 Retail Establishments in an Office Building 11. 30
Section 1159 Residential Structures - Single Family Attached and
Multi -Family Units 11. 31
Section 1160 Service Clubs and Philanthropic Institutions 11. 34
Section 1161 Swimming Pools, Commercial 11. 34
Section 1162 Swimming Pools, Community 11. 35
Part III Manufacturing/Processing Performance Standards
Section 1180 Smoke 11. 36
Section 1181 Noise 11. 36
Section 1182 Vibration 11. 37
Section 1183 Odors 11. 39
Section 1184 Air Pollution 11. 39
Section 1185 Disposal of Liquid Wastes 11. 39
Section 1186 Electrical Disturbance or Interference 11. 39
ARTICLE XII DENSITY, DIMENSIONAL, AND DESIGN REGULATIONS
Section 1200 Minimum Lot Size 12. 1
Section 1201 Residential Density 12. 1
Section 1202 Minimum Lot Widths 12. 1
Section 1203 Building Setback Requirements 12. 1
Section 1204 Accessory Building Requirements 12. 5
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 6
Section 1205
Section 1206
Section 1207
Section 1208
Section 1209
ARTICLE XIII
Section 1300
Section 1301
Section 1302
Section 1303
Section 1304
Section 1305
Section 1306
Section 1307
ARTICLE XIV
Section 1400
Section 1401
Section 1402
Section 1403
Section 1404
Section 1405
Section 1406
ARTICLE XV
Section 1500
Section 1501
Section 1502
Section 1503
Section 1504
Section 1505
ARTICLE XVI
Building Height Limitations 12. 6
Cluster Subdivisions 12. 6
Traditional Neighborhood Development 12. 7
Density on Lots Where Portion Dedicated to the Town 12. 10
Schedule of Zone Regulations 12. 12
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND OPEN SPACE
Neighborhood Parks Required 13. 1
Neighborhood Parks: Purpose and Standards 13. 2
Provision of Common Open Space 13. 2
Open Space Requirement - Ownership 13. 3
Management of Common Open Space Property 13. 3
Bond for Improvements 13. 4
Homeowners Associations 13. 4
Flexibility in Administration Authorized 13. 4
UTILITIES
Utility Ownership and Easement Rights 14. 1
Underground Utilities 14. 1
Utilities to be Consistent With Internal and External Development 14. 1
Electric Service 14. 1
Lighting Requirements 14. 2
Lighting Standards 14. 2
Sites For and Screening of Dumpsters 14.4
DRAINAGE, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL AND
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Reserved 15. 1
Natural Drainage System Utilized to Extent Feasible 15. 1
Developments Must Drain Properly 15. 1
Storm Water Management 15. 1
Sedimentation and Erosion Control 15. 2
Existing Slopes of25% or Greater 15. 3
SIGNS
Section 1600 Definitions 16. 1
Section 1601 Permit Required for Signs 16. 2
Section 1602 Signs Excluded From Regulation 16. 2
Section 1603 Certain Temporary Signs: Permit Exemptions and
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 7
Section 1604
Section 1605
Section 1606
Section 1607
Section 1608
Section 1609
Section 1610
Section 1611
Section 1612
Section 1613
Section 1614
Section 1615
Section 1616
Section 1617
Section 1618
ARTICLE XVII
Part I
Section 1700
Section 1701
Section 1702
Section 1703
Section 1704
Section 1705
Section 1706
Section 1707
Section 1708
Section 1709
Section 1710
Section 1711
Part II
Section 1750
Section 1751
Section 1752
Section 1753
ARTICLE XVIII
Additional Regulations 16. 3
Determining the Number of Signs 16. 5
Computation of Sign Area 16. 5
Total Building Sign Surface Area 16. 6
Freestanding Sign Surface Area 16. 6
Number of Freestanding Signs 16. 7
Subdivision and Multi -Family Entrance Signs 16. 8
Location and Height Requirements 16. 8
Sign Illumination and Signs containing Lights 16. 8
Miscellaneous Restrictions and Prohibitions 16. 9
Maintenance of Signs 16. 10
Unlawful Cutting of Trees or Shrubs 16. 11
Nonconforming Signs 16. 11
Reserved 16. 13
Maximum Total Sign Area by Zoning District 16. 13
Permitted Signs by Type and by Zoning District 16. 14
PARKING AND LANDSCAPING OF PARKING FACILITIES
Parking
Definitions 17. 1
Number of Parking Spaces Required 17. 1
Flexibility in Administration Required 17. 5
Parking Space Dimensions 17. 6
Required Widths of Parking Area Aisles and Driveways 17. 6
General Design Requirements 17. 7
Vehicle Accommodation Area Surfaces 17. 8
Joint Use of Required Parking Spaces 17. 9
Satellite Parking 17. 10
Special Provisions For Lots With Existing Buildings 17. 11
Loading and Unloading Areas 17. 11
Parking Facilities for the Physically Handicapped 17. 12
Landscaping of Parking Facilities
Intent 17. 14
Sites Affected 17. 14
Perimeter Landscaping 17. 15
Interior Landscaping for Parking Lots 17. 16
SCREENING & SHADING
Part I Buffers
Section 1801 Purpose 18. 1
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 8
March, 2008
Section 1802
Section 1803
Section 1804
Section 1805
Section 1806
Section 1807
Section 1808
Section 1809
Section 1810
Part II
Section 1850
Section 1851
Section 1852
Section 1853
ARTICLE XIX
Section 1900
Section 1901
Section 1902
Section 1903
Section 1904
Section 1905
Section 1906
ARTICLE XX
Section 2000
Section 2001
Section 2002
Section 2003
Section 2004
Section 2005
Section 2006
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C
APPENDIX D
Location of Bufferyards 18. 1
Determination of Required Bufferyard 18. 1
Responsibility for Bufferyards 18. 2
Tables of Required Bufferyards 18. 2
Bufferyard Requirements 18. 3
Bufferyard Use 18. 3
Ownership of Bufferyards 18. 3
Bufferyards Which Exceed Minimum Requirements 18. 4
Contractual Reduction of Bufferyards 18. 4
Shading
Town Findings and Declaration of Policy: Shade Trees 18. 4
Required Trees Along Dedicated Streets 18. 5
Retention and Protection of Large Trees 18. 5
Shade Trees in Parking Areas 18. 6
ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS
Adequate Public Facilities Required 19. 1
Fire Suppression 19. 1
Streets 19. 1
Schools 19. 3
Sewerage 19. 3
Storm Drainage 19.4
Water 19. 5
AMENDMENTS
Amendments In General 20. 1
Initiation of Amendments 20. 1
Planning Commission Consideration of Proposed Amendments 20. 1
Hearing Required; Notice 20. 2
Town Council Action on Amendments 20. 2
Amendments for Floating Zones 20.4
Amendment Procedure Within the Critical Area District 20.4
Basic Information Required With Zoning and Building Permit
Applications
Specifications on Driveway Entrances
Specifications for Street Design and Construction
Vehicle Accommodation Area Surfaces
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9
APPENDIX E
APPENDIX F
Guide for Landscaping
Bufferyard Requirements
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 10
March, 2008
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 100. Short Title
This Ordinance shall be known, cited, and referred to as the Town ofIndian Head Zoning Ordinance.
Section 101. Intent/Authority
a) This Ordinance is intended to promote the orderly development ofthe Town ofIndian Head,
Maryland, in accordance with the Official Comprehensive Land Use Plan or any of the
component parts thereof and in compliance with Article 66B of the Annotated Code of
Maryland as amended. This ordinance is also intended to implement the requirements ofthe
Maryland Economic Growth, Resource Protection and Planning Act of 1992 and to regulate
the use of land in the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area in accordance with COMAR 27. 01. 01-
27.01. 11. It is also the intent of this Ordinance that the extent of its applicability shall be
automatically changed in accordance with the provisions hereof or with any provision of
State Law which may hereinafter affect the applicability of this Ordinance.
b) _. The purpose ofthis zoning ordinance is to implement the Comprehensive Land Use Plan for
the Town ofIndian Head and to promote the health, safety, order, convenience and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town in accordance with present and future needs. It is the
further purpose of this Zoning Ordinance to provide for economic and efficient land
development, encourage the most appropriate use of land, provide for convenient and safe
movement of people and goods, control the distribution and density of population to areas
where necessary public service can be provided, protect historic and environmental areas,
protect water quality and promote habitat protection in the portions ofTown located in the
Chesapeake Bay Critical Area , encourage good civic design, and provide for adequate public
utilities, facilities and services.
c) The regulations and provisions contained in this Zoning Ordinance were adopted and became
effective March 23, 2004.
d) The Zoning Map for the Town ofIndian Head, Maryland, as contained in this Ordinance is
hereby adopted as the official zoning map for the Town of Indian Head.
Section 102. Jurisdiction
This Ordinance shall be effective throughout the Town's Planning Jurisdiction. The Town's planning
jurisdiction comprises that area within the corporate boundaries of the town. Such planning
jurisdiction may be modified from time to time in accordance with Article 66B " Zoning and
Plamiing" of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Section 103. Interpretation
1
1. 1
a) The regulations set by this Ordinance within each district shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion and protection ofthe public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, environment and natural resources, and general welfare, and shall
apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land except as hereinafter provided.
b) It is not the intent of by this Zoning Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way
impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law, ordinance or resolution, or with any
rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or
issued pursuant to law relating the use of buildings or premises, or with any private
restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed, or recorded plat. Where this Zoning
Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the
heights or buildings or requires greater lot areas, larger yards, or other open spaces than are
imposed or required by such existing provisions oflaw, ordinance, or resolution, or by such
rules, regulations, or permits, or by such private restrictions, the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance shall control.
c) Whenever these regulations, subdivision plats, or development plans approved in
conformance with these regulations, are in conflict with other local ordinances, regulations,
or laws, the more restrictive ordinance, regulation, law, plat, or plan shall govern and shall be
enforced by appropriate local agencies. When subdivision and development plans, approved
by the Planning Commission, contain setback or other features in excess of the minimum
Zoning Ordinance requirements, such features as shown on theapproved plan shall govern
and shall be enforced by the local permit official. Private deed restrictions or private
covenants ( for a subdivision), which have not been approved by the Planning, Commission
and made a part of the approved subdivision plan, do not fall within the jurisdiction of
enforcement by any local agency and cannot be enforced by the permit official.
d) To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to require
change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building or premises on which an
application for a certificate or permit was filed with the Town Manager prior to the date of
adoption of this Ordinance or amendment thereto, providing that the application meets all
zoning and other requirements in effect on the date of said application. The issuance ofsaid
certificate or permit shall be valid only if it is exercised within 180 days from the date of
issuance ofthe certificate or permit. " Exercised", as set forth in this section, shall mean that
binding contracts for the construction ofthe mainbuilding or other main improvement have
been let, or in the absence of contracts, that the main building or other main improvement is
under construction to a substantial degree or that prerequisite conditions involving
substantial investments shall be under contract, in development, or completed. When
construction is not a part of the use, " exercised" shall mean that the use is in operation in
compliance with the conditions as set forth in the permit or certificate.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 1. 2
II) Section 104. Severability
a) It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses, and phrases of this ordinance are severable, and if any such section,
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by
any court ofcompetent jurisdiction in a validjudgement or decree, such unconstitutionality
or invalidity shall not affect any ofthe remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or
phrases ofthis ordinance since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation
into this ordinance ofsuch unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase.
Section 105. Location and boundaries of zones
a) The location and boundaries ofzones established in the each district shall be as shown on the
Zoning Map for the Town ofIndian Head. This map, sections or portions thereof, together
with all notations, dimensions, designations, references, and other data shown thereon, are
made a part of this Ordinance to the same extent as if the information set forth on the map
were fully described and incorporated herein.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries ofany ofthe zones established in this chapter,
as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
b)
c)
Zone boundary lines are intended to follow street, alley, or lot lines or lines parallel
or perpendicular thereto, unless such zone boundary lines are otherwise identified on
the zoning map;
ii) Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following street or alley lines
or proposed street lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries;
iii) Where zone boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines and
are not more than 10 feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be such boundaries;
iv) In unsubdivided property, or where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location ofany
such boundary, unless the same is identified on such maps, shall be determined by the
use of the map scale shown thereon and scaled to the nearest foot.
Any area annexed to Indian Head after the date of adoption shall immediately upon such
annexation be automatically classified in the most nearly comparable zone until a zoning
map amendment for such area has been adopted by the Town Council. The Commission
shall recommend to the Council appropriate zoning for the annexed area within six ( 6)
months after the effective date of such annexation.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 1. 3
April, 2004
Section 106. Permitted uses
a) For the purpose ofthis Ordinance, permitted uses are listed for the various districts. Unless
the contrary is clear from the context of the list of permitted uses or other regulations
contained within this Ordinance, uses not specifically permitted are prohibited, except that a
use may be declared by the Planning Commission to be allowed upon application following
public hearing and finding that:
i) The use reflects the nature of the permitted use; and
ii) That there is no appreciable difference in the quality, character, or degree of the
requested use as compared with the permitted uses.
b) No building or tract ofland shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted hereinafter
in the zoning district in which such building or tract of land shall be located, with the
exception of the following:
i) Uses lawfully existing on the effective date of this Ordinance.
ii) Special exceptions, approved by the Board of Appeals, in accordance with the
provisions of Article IV, Part II of this Ordinance.
iii) Planned Development Districts approved by the Town Council, in accordance with
the provisions of Section 903 of this Ordinance.
c) Uses lawfully existing on the effective date ofthis Ordinance and rendered nonconforming
by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations ofArticle VIII ofthis Ordinance.
Section 107. Adequate public facilities requirements
a) No concept or plan for a subdivision or development plan for a Planned Development shall
be approved unless the Planning Commission first determines that adequate facilities, within
the criteria as specified by appropriate resolutions of the Town Council, are available to
support and service the proposed subdivision or Planned Development.
b) The applicant shall submit with any subdivision concept plan or PUD development plan
sufficient information and data to demonstrate the expected impact on the use ofthe public
facilities by Town residents or occupants ofthe proposed subdivision or PUD.
c) Sections 1900 through1906 specify the criteria for determining the adequacy of facilities
serving the proposed development.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 1. 4
Section 108. Accessory uses on vacant lots
No accessory uses or structures shall be permitted on vacant lots unless the principal use or structure
is previously existing or until construction has begun on the principal use or structure to the point of
putting in place footings and foundation members and providing the construction on the principal use
or structure is diligently pursued, or unless such use or structure is permitted by the provisions of
Section 1003 of this Ordinance.
Section 109. No use or sale of land or buildings except in conformity with chapter provisions
a) Subject to Article VIII of this chapter, no person may use, occupy, or sell any land or
buildings or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or sale of land or buildings under his
control except in accordance with all ofthe applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
For the purposes of this section, the " use" or "occupancy" of a building or lands relates to
anything and everything that is done to, on, or in that building or land.
Section 110. Violations and penalties
Violation of this Ordinance shall be punishable as provided in Section 703.
Section 111. Relationship to existing zoning, subdivision, and flood control ordinances
To the extent that the provisions of this Ordinance are substantially the same as the previously
adopted provisions that they replace in the town's zoning, subdivision, or flood control ordinances,
they shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments unless otherwise
specifically provided. In particular, a situation that did not constitute a lawful, nonconforming
situation under the previously adopted Zoning Ordinance does not achieve lawful, nonconforming
status under this chapter merely by the repeal of the Zoning Ordinance.
b)
Section 112. Fees
Fees established in accordance with the Town ofIndian Head Budget Ordinance shall be paid upon
submission of a signed application or notice of appeal, unless otherwise determined by the Zoning
Inspector.
Section 113. Computation of time
a) Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. When the period oftime prescribed is
less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall be excluded.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
1. 5
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
b) Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever a person has the right or is required to do
some act within a prescribed period after the service ofa notice or other paper upon him and
the notice or paper is served by mail, three days shall be added to the prescribed period.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 1. 6
April, 2004
ARTICLE II BASIC DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Section 200. Definitions of Basic Terms
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context, the words and
phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this ordinance.
To amplify and clarify all provisions of this Ordinance, the following rules shall apply:
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the
singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural number shall include
the singular number, unless the obvious construction of the wording indicates
otherwise.
2. The word " shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
3. The word "may" is permissive.
4. The word " lot" shall include the words " piece", " parcel" and " plots"; the word
building" includes all other structures of every kind regardless of similarity to
buildings; and the phrase " used for" shall include the phrase " arranged for" and
occupied for".
5. All " measured distances" shall be to the nearest " integral foot". If a fraction is
one- half foot or more, the " integral foot" next above shall be taken.
Accessory Apartment. A second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single- family
detached dwelling, or in a separate accessory structure on the same lot as the main dwelling, for use
as a complete, independent living facility. Such a dwelling is an accessory use to the main dwelling.
See Section 1130)
Accessory Use. A use that is incidental or subordinate to, and on the same lot as a principal use. (See
Section 1003)
Accessory Structure. A subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the
principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
Administrator. (See Section 312)
Adult Day Care Center. A public or private institution, agency, or establishment where care is
provided to medically handicapped adults who are 16 years old or older; live alone or with a spouse,
relative or friend; and have a disability that is: a reasonably static physical impairment that prevents
gainful employment or the accomplishment of the routine of normal daily activities outside of an
institutional or sheltered environment; or a permanent or recurrent mental impairment that requires
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 1 March, 2008
domiciliary of institutional care in a sheltered environment. Also included in this definition is care
provided for the elderly who are: 55 years old or older; live alone or with a spouse, family relative, or
friend; needs temporary supervision and care during part of a day in a protective group setting; and
has a disability that is: a reasonably static physical impairment that prevents: gainful employment; or
the accomplishment of the routine of normal daily activities without assistance; or a permanent or
recurrent mental impairment.
Afforestation. The establishment of a tree crop on an area from which it has always or very long
been absent, or the planting of open areas which are not presently in forest cover.
Agriculture. All methods of production and management of livestock, crops, vegetation, and soil.
This includes, but is not limited to, the related activities of tillage, fertilization, pest control,
harvesting, and marketing. It also includes, but is not limited to, the activities of feeding, housing,
and maintaining of animals such as cattle, dairy cows, sheep, goats, hogs, horses, and poultry and
handling their by-products. This definition does not include gardening.
Agricultural easement. A non -possessory interest in land which restricts the conversion of use of
the land, preventing non- agricultural uses.
Alley. A right of way that provides secondary service access for vehicles to the side or rear of
abutting properties.
Amend or amendments. Any repeal, modification or addition to a regulation; any new regulation;
any change in the number, shape, boundary or area of a zone; or any repeal or abolition ofany map,
part thereof or addition thereto.
Amenity space. Space required by the sector plan and other space devoted to such uses as uncovered
open space for public enjoyment consisting of such things as, but not limited to, green areas, gardens,
malls, plazas, walks, pathways, promenades, arcades, lawns, fountains, decorative plantings, passive
or active recreational areas. Such space shall not include parking or maneuvering areas for vehicles.
Area devoted to this purpose shall be easily and readily accessible to the public or residents ofthe
development. In areas where pedestrian walkways are shown on an approved and adopted master
plan or sector plan, such area within the percentage required for amenity space as is necessary shall
be devoted to the provision of pedestrian walkways or paths for general public use.
Anadromousfish Fish that travel upstream (from their primary habitat in the ocean) to freshwater in
order to spawn.
Aquaculture means: ( a) Farming or culturing of finfish, shellfish, other aquatic plants or animals or
both, in lakes, streams, inlets, estuaries, and other natural or artificial water bodies or impoundments;
b) Activities include hatching, cultivating, planting, feeding, raising, and harvesting of aquatic
plants and animals and the maintenance and construction of necessary equipment, buildings, and
growing areas; and ( c) Cultivation methods include, but are not limited to, seed or larvae
development and grow out facilities, fish ponds, shellfish rafts, rack and longlines,
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 2 March, 2008
Antenna. Equipment designed to transmit or receive electronic signals.
Assisted Living Facility. A residential facility that provides housing and supportive services,
supervision, personalized assistance, health-related services, or a combination of these services to
meet the needs of residents who are unable to perform or who need assistance in performing the
activities ofdaily living in a way that promotes optimum dignity and independence for the residents.
Automobile Dismantling and Storage Yard. ( See junk or salvage yard)
Automobile Service Station. ( See Gas sales)
Barren land. Unmanaged land having sparse vegetation.
Base Flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Also known as the 100 -year flood.
Basement. A story partly underground and having at least one- half of its height above the average
adjoining grade. A basement shall be termed a cellar when more than one- halfofits height is below
the average adjoining grade. A basement or cellar shall be counted as a story if the vertical distance
from the average adjoining grade to the ceiling is over five feet.
Bed and Breakfast Home. " Bed and breakfast home" or " tourist home" means a single- family,
owner -occupied dwelling that provides for the lodging ofup to eight transient guests at any one time,
none of whom remain for more than fourteen consecutive nights each, and that provide no food or
beverage service for the transient guests other than for breakfast provided in the area ofthe dwelling
that is generally used by the resident family for the consumption of food. ( See Section 1138)
Best Management Practices ( BMPs). Conservation practices or systems of practices and
management measures that control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by
nutrients, animal waste, toxics and sediment. Agricultural BMPs include, but are not limited to, strip
cropping, terracing, contour stripping, grass waterways, animal waste structures, ponds, minimal
tillage, grass and naturally vegetated filter strips, and proper nutrient application measures.
Billboard. ( See Sign.) A structure on which is portrayed information which directs attention to a
business commodity, service or entertainment not necessarily related to the other uses permitted on
the premises upon which the structure is located, not including painted walls.
Blighted Area. Any area in which a majority of buildings have declined in productivity by reason of
obsolescence, depreciation or other causes to an extent that they no longer justify fundamental
repairs and adequate maintenance; or in which dwellings predominate that, by reason of depreciation,
overcrowding, faulty arrangement or design, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities or any
combination of these factors, are detrimental to the public safety, health or morals.
Block. That property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 3 March, 2008
intercepting streets or the nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way,
unsubdivided acreage, river, or live stream, or between any ofthe foregoing and any other barrier to
the continuity of development.
Board. The Town of Indian Head Board of Zoning Appeals.
Buffer. A naturally vegetated area or vegetated area established or managed to protect aquatic,
wetland, shoreline, and terrestrial environments from man-made disturbances.
Bufferyard. A combination ofsetback and a visual buffer or barrier in a yard or area together with
the planting required thereon ( see section 1801).
Building. A structure designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage or shelter.
Building, floor area of The total number of square feet area in a building, excluding cellars,
uncovered steps, and uncovered porches, but including the total floor area ofaccessory buildings on
the same lot.
Building, height of The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of finished ground
surface along the front of the building to the highest point of roof surface of a flat roof; to the deck
line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or
gambrel roof. If a building is located on a terrace, the height above the street grade may be increased
by the height of the terrace.
FLAT
HEE-HT
HIP
GALE
GAMBREL MA BARP
HE: HT HE6HT
6 041ENTj LINEKWAGJE
Building Permit. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator that authorizes the recipient to make
use of property in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance, plus other requirements as
indicated by the Zoning Administrator.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 4 March, 2008
Building, Principal. The primary building on a lot or a building that houses a principal use.
Building Setback Line. A line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any enclosed porch,
vestibule, or other enclosed portion ofa building shall not project (except as provided in Article XI).
Build -to Line. An alignment which dictates the front yard setback from a street or public right-ofway,
to be followed by buildings or structures fronting thereon. The build -to line does not apply to
building projections or recesses.
Building Scale. The relationship between the mass of a building and its surroundings, including the
width of street, open space, and mass of surrounding buildings.
Camper Park. Any site, lot, parcel or tract of land which is improved, used or intended to provide a
location for the servicing or temporary accommodation of one ( 1) or more trailers which are used for
travel, camping or recreational purposes.
Canopy. A permanent roof -like structure which may be free- standing or projected from a wall of a
building or its supports.
Certificate ofOccupancy. A certificate which permits use of any structure, premises, or part thereof
See section 404).
Certify. Whenever this Ordinance requires that some agency certify the existence of some fact or
circumstance to the Town, the Town may require that such certification be made in any manner that
provides reasonable assurance of the accuracy of the certification. By way of illustration, and
without limiting the foregoing, the Town may accept certification by telephone from some agency
when the circumstances warrant it, or the Town may require that the certification be in the form ofa
letter or other document.
Childcare Center, Day Care Center, or Day Nursery. A public or private institution, agency, or
establishment that is licensed by the State of Maryland and provides care to 9 or more children
younger than 16 years of age in a facility located outside the home of the child' s parent(s) or legal
guardian( s) for all or part of a 24 hour day on a regular basis and at least twice a week. Such a facility
is generally described as a childcare center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent
cooperative, pre- school, play group, drop-in center, or similar term.
Circulation Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used for access to parking or
loading areas or other facilities on the lot. Essentially, driveways and other maneuvering areas (other
than parking aisles) comprise the circulation area.
Cluster Development. A residential development to which dwelling units are concentrated in a
selected area or selected areas ofthe development tract so as to provide natural habitat or other open
space uses on the remainder.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 5 March, 2008
Colonial nesting water birds. Includes herons, egrets, terns, and glossy ibis. For the purposes of
nesting, these birds congregate (that is " colonize") in relatively few areas, at which time, the regional
populations of these species are highly susceptible to local disturbances.
Combination Use. A use consisting of a combination on one lot of two or more principal uses
separately listed in the Table of Permissible Uses, Section 1008. ( Under some circumstances, a
second principal use may be regarded as accessory to the first, and thus a combination use is not
established. See Section 1003. In addition, when two or more separately owned or separately
operated enterprises occupy the same lot and all such enterprises fall within the same principal use
classification, this shall not constitute a combination use.)
Commission. The Town of Indian Head Planning Commission.
Community sewerage system. Any system for the collection, transportation, and disposal of sewage
or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, including various devices for the treatment of such sewage and
industrial wastes. Such system serves 25 or more individual lots, dwelling units, businesses,
commercial or industrial establishments or any combination thereof, and may be privately or publicly
owned and/or operated.
Community water supply system. A source of water supply and distribution system that includes
treatment and storage facilities, serves 25 or more individual lots, dwelling units, businesses,
commercial or industrial establishment, or any combination thereof, and may be publicly or privately
owned and/or operated.
Comprehensive Plan. The Town of Indian Head Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Town Council
on November 3, 1997 and any future amendments, revisions or updates that may be officially
adopted by the Town Council.
Condominium. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common with other
purchasers in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with separate interest in space in a
residential building, such as an apartment. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate
interest in other portions of such real property.
Conservation easement. A non -possessory interest in land which restricts the manner in which the
land may be developed in an effort to reserve natural resources or open space.
Convenience Store. A one- story, retail store containing less than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area
that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to
customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a " supermarket"). It is designed
to attract, and depends upon a large volume of, stop -and -go traffic. Illustrative examples of
convenience stores are those operated by the " High's," " 7- 11," and " Dash In" chains.
Cover crop. The establishment of a vegetative cover to protect soils from erosion and to restrict
pollutants from entering the waterways. Cover crops can be dense, planted crops of grasses or
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 6 March, 2008
legumes, or crop residues such as corn, wheat or soybean stubble which maximize infiltration and
411 prevent runoff from reaching erosive velocities.
Critical Area. All lands and waters within or adjacent to the Town of Indian Head as defined in
Section 8- 1807 of the Natural Resources Article, Annotated Code of Maryland. They include:
1) all waters ofand lands under the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries to the head oftide as
indicated on the State wetlands maps and all State and private wetlands designated under Title
16 of the Environment Article, Annotated Code of Maryland;
2) all land and water areas within 1, 000 feet beyond the landward boundaries of State or
private wetlands and the heads of tides designated under Title 16 ofthe Environment Article,
Annotated Code of Maryland; and
3) modification to these areas through inclusions or exclusions proposed by the Town of
Indian Head and approved by the Commission as specified in Section 8- 1807 of the Natural
Resources Article, Annotated Code of Maryland.
Critical Area Commission. The Maryland Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Commission.
Day Care Home. A residence licensed by the State of Maryland in, which care is given to a child in
place of parental care, for less than 24 hours a day, in a residence located outside the home of the
child' s parents for which the day care provider is paid. No more than eight (8) children consisting of
no more than four (4) children under age two (2), including the provider' s own, under the age of 6,
may be provided for.
Density. The number of dwelling units per acre within a defined and measurable area.
Developer. A person who is responsible for any undertaking that requires a zoning permit,
conditional -use permit, sign permit, or subdivision approval.
Development or Development Activities. The subdivision of land; construction, reconstruction,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement ofany structure, installation ofa sign; and
any mining, landfill or land disturbance, such as grading, paving, and excavation.
Developed woodlands. Those areas of one acre or more in size which predominantly contain trees
and natural vegetation and which also include residential, commercial, or industrial structures and
uses.
Dimensional Nonconformity. A nonconforming situation that occurs when the height, size, or
minimum floor space of a structure or the relationship between an existing building or buildings and
other buildings or lot lines does not conform to the regulations applicable to the district in which the
property is located.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 7 March, 2008
Documented breeding bird areas. Forested areas where the occurrence of interior dwelling birds,
during the breeding season, has been demonstrated as a result of on- site surveys using standard
biological survey techniques.
Drive- in establishment. A place of business being operated for the retail sale of food and other
goods, services, or entertainment. It is designed to allow its patrons to be served or accommodated
while remaining in their automobiles or allows the consumption of any food or beverage obtained
from a carry -out window in automobiles or elsewhere on the premises.
Driveway. That portion ofthe vehicle accommodation area that consists of a travel lane bounded on
either side by an area that is not part of the vehicle accommodation area.
Duplex. See Residence, Duplex.
Dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including single- family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multi -family dwellings (not including
hotels and motels).
Dwelling, attached. A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party
wall or walls.
Dwelling Unit. An enclosure containing sleeping, kitchen, and bathroom facilities designed for and
used, or held ready for use, as a permanent residence by one family.
Ecosystem. A more or less self-contained biological community together with the physical
environment in which the community's organisms occur.
Elderly or handicappedpeople.
a) People who are 62 years of age or over.
b) Families where either the husband or wife is 62 year of age or older.
c) People who have physical impairments which (1) are expected to be of long continued and
indefinite duration, (2) substantially impede the ability to live independently, and ( 3) are of
such a nature that the ability to live independently could be improved by more suitable housing
conditions.
Excess stormwater run-off All increases in stormwater resulting from:
a) An increase in the imperviousness of the site, including all additions to buildings, roads,
and parking lots;
b) Changes in permeability caused by compaction during construction or modifications in
contours, including the filling or drainage of small depression areas;
c) Alteration of drainageways, or regrading of slopes;
d) Destruction of forest; or
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 8 March, 2008
e) Installation of collection systems to intercept street flows or to replace swales or other
drainageways.
Expenditure. A sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to fulfill some obligation. The
term also includes binding contractual commitments to make future expenditures, as well as any
other substantial changes in position.
Family. One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit. More than five ( 5)
unrelated individuals occupying a dwelling unit shall not be considered a family.
Family Day Care. The care given to 8 or fewer children younger than 13 years old or to a
developmentally disabled person younger than 21 years old in place ofparental care for less than 24
hours a day, in a residence located outside the home of the child' s parents, for which the provider is
paid in cash or in kind, and registered under COMAR 13A. 14. 01.
Fisheries activities. Commercial water dependent fisheries facilities including structures for the
parking, processing, canning, or freezing of finfish, crustaceans, mollusks, and amphibians and
reptiles and also including related activities such as wholesale and retail sales product storage
facilities, crab shedding, off-loading docks, shellfish culture operations, and shore -based facilities
necessary for aquacultural operations.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to be inundated by water from the base flood. As used in this
Ordinance, the term refers to that area designated as subject to flooding from the base flood ( 100 -
year flood) on the " Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" prepared by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, a copy of which is on file in Town Hall.
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot. As used in this chapter, the term refers to that area designated as a
floodway on the "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development, a copy of which is on file in the Town Hall.
Forest. A biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants covering a land area of
one acre or more. This also includes forests that have been cut, but not cleared.
Forest Interior Dwelling Birds. Species of birds which require relatively large forested tracts in
order to breed successfully ( for example, various species of flycatchers, warblers, vireos, and
woodpeckers).
Forest Management. The protection, manipulation, and utilization of the forest to provide multiple
benefits, such as timber harvesting, water transpiration, wildlife habitat, etc.
Forest Practice. The alteration of the forest either through tree removal or replacement in order to
improve the timber, wildlife, recreational, or water quality values.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 9 March, 2008
Frontage. The length of all property fronting on one side of a street between the two ( 2) nearest
intersecting streets, measured along the line of the street; or, if dead -ended, then all of the property
abutting on one side between an intersection street and dead end of the same.
Frontage, Zoning Lot. The length of all the property ofsuch zoning lot fronting on a street measured
between side lot lines.
Garage, Parking A building designed and used for the storage ofautomotive vehicles operated as a
business enterprise with a service charge or fee being paid to the owner or operator for the parking or
storage of privately owned vehicles.
Garage, private. A garage used for storage purposes only and having a capacity of not more than
four (4) vehicles.
Garage, service. A building, or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or
used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, or storing motor -driven vehicles.
Garage, storage. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for storage of motor -
driven vehicles and where motor -driven vehicles are not equipped, hired, or sold.
Garden apartments. Multi -family housing units that share a common outside access. Ownership is
not a factor in this type of unit, which may be either rental or condominium.
Gas Sales. Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and automobile
accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail and where, in addition, minor repair work may be
performed, such as ignition service, tire repair, repair and replacement ofminor parts, such as pumps
and filter, brake service, and the like. " Gas sales" does not include a repair or body shop, but shall
include self-service filling stations and any convenience store accessory to or associated with such
gas sales.
Gross Developable Area. ( Total site acreage) minus ( tidal wetland acreage) equals ( gross
developable area).
Gross Floor Area. The total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions of the
building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage.
Gross Residential Density. For the total site, excluding areas designated as tidal wetlands, gross
residential density shall not exceed the average number of dwelling units per acre as permitted.
Group Home, private. " Group home" means a residence in which individuals who have been or are
under treatment for a mental disorder may be provided care or treatment in a homelike environment,
as provided for in Mental Hygiene Law, 10- 514, of the Annotated Code of Maryland. A large
private group home admits at least nine but not more than sixteen individuals; a small private group
home admits at least four but not more than eight individuals.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 10 March, 2008
Group Home/Halfway House. A home for not more than nine people who have demonstrated a
tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct, together
with not more than two people providing supervision and other services to such persons, all ofwhom
live together as a single housekeeping unit.
Group Home/ Handicapped or Infirm Home. A residence within a single dwelling unit for at least six
6) but not more than nine (9) people who are physically or mentally handicapped or infirm, together
with not more than two (2) persons providing care or assistance to such persons, all living together as
a single housekeeping unit. Persons residing in such homes, including the aged and disabled,
principally need residential care rather than medical treatment.
Guest, permanent. A person who occupies, or has the right to occupy, a hotel or apartment hotel
accommodation as his domicile and place of permanent residence.
Habitable Floor. Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating,
cooking, or recreation, or any combination thereof. A floor used only for storage is not a habitable
floor.
High -Volume Traffic Generation. All uses in the 2.000 classification other than low-volume traffic
generation uses.
Heliport. An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, that is used or intended to be
used with regularity for the landing and taking off of helicopters and includes major helicopter
support facilities such as for fueling, maintenance, parking or hangaring, administration offices,
cargo loading, and waiting room. Heliports may be public or private. Before operation, heliports
shall obtain new occupancy permits.
Helistop. An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, that is used or intended to be
used with regularity for the landing or taking off of helicopters but without major helicopter support
facilities. An area is a helistop if helicopters land and take off more than 10 times per week or use
the site for more than 30 days. Helistops may have minor support facilities, such as a small sheltered
waiting or loading area and a small administrative office, if necessary, but shall not have major
support facilities for fueling, maintenance, parking or hangaring, major cargo loading area, large
waiting room or major administrative offices. Helistops may be public or private. Before operation,
helistops shall obtain new occupancy permits.
Helistop temporary. An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, whether public or
private, that may be used for the landing and taking offofhelicopters on an occasional or temporary
basis, but without helicopter support facilities. An area is a temporary helistop if helicopters land
and take off no more than 10 times per week or use the site not more than 30 days, or if helicopters
land and take off on only sporadic occasions or during emergencies. If a site is used more than 10
times per week or is used for more than thirty days, regardless of frequency of use the site shall be
considered either a helistop or a heliport, depending upon the type of use, and shall be required to
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 11 March, 2008
meet the standards and requirements of whichever shall apply. Temporary helistops shall not need
new occupancy permits.
Highly Erodible Soils. Soils with a slope greater than 15 percent; or those soils with a K value
greater than . 35 and with slopes greater than 5 percent.
Historic waterfowl staging and concentration area. An area of open water and adjacent marshes
where waterfowl gather during migration and throughout the winter season. These areas are historic
in that their location is common knowledge and because these areas have been used regularly during
recent times.
Home Occupation. A home occupation is an activity carried out for financial gain in a residential
dwelling and is subordinate to the residential use of the property.
Hospital. A building or group of buildings having room facilities for one or more abiding patients,
used for providing services for the in-patient medical or surgical care ofsick or injured humans and
which may include related facilities such as laboratories, out- patient departments, training facilities,
central service facilities, and staff offices, providing, however, that such related facility must be
incidental and subordinate to the main use and must be an integral part of the hospital operation.
Hotel. A building in which lodging or boarding are provided for more than 20 people, primarily
transient, and offered to the public for compensation, and in which ingress and egress to and from all
rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. A
hotel may include restaurants, taverns or club rooms, public banquet halls, ballrooms and meeting
rooms.
Hydric soils. Soils that are wet frequently enough to periodically produce anaerobic conditions,
thereby influencing the species composition, growth, or both, of plants on those soils.
Hydrophytic vegetation. Those plants cited in " Vascular Plant Species Occurring in Maryland
Wetlands" ( Dawson, F. et al., 1985) which are described as growing in water or on a substrate that is
at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content (plants typically found
in water habitats).
Intermediate Care Home. An assisted living facility maintained for the purpose of providing
accommodations for not more than seven occupants needing medical care and supervision at a lower
level than that provided in a nursing care institution but at a higher level that provided in institutions
for the handicapped or infirm.
Junk (or salvage) yard. An open area where waste or scrap materials (including but not limited to
scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles) are bought, sold, exchanged,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled. A "junk or salvage yard" includes an auto wrecking
yard and the storage of inoperable vehicles, but does not include uses established entirely within
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 12 March, 2008
enclosed buildings.
Kennel. A commercial operation that (i) provides food and shelter and care of animals for purposes
not primarily related to medical care ( a kennel may or may not be run by or associated with a
veterinarian), or (ii) engages in the breeding of animals for sale, or (iii) any place where more than
two adult animals (over 6 months) are kept for a boarding or other fee, or (iv) any place where more
than five adult animals are kept for any purpose.
K Value. The soil erodibility factor in the Universal Soil Loss Equation. It is a quantitative value
that is experimentally determined.
Land-based aquaculture. The raising of fish or shellfish in any natural or man-made, enclosed or
impounded, water body.
Land clearing. Any activity that removes the vegetative ground cover.
Landforms. Features of the earth's surface created by natural causes.
Loading and Unloading Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used to satisfy the
requirements of Section 1710.
Lot. A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as
recorded deed or a recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of
transfer of title. If a public body or any authority with the power of eminent domain condemns,
purchases, or otherwise obtains fee simple title to or a lesser interest in a strip of land cutting across a
parcel of land otherwise characterized as a lot by this definition, or a private road is created across a
parcel of land otherwise characterized as a lot by this definition, and the interest thus obtained or the
road so created is such as effectively to prevent the use of this parcel as one lot, then the land on
either side of this strip shall constitute a separate lot. Subject to Section 803, the permit -issuing
authority and the owner of two or more contiguous lots may agree to regard the lots as one lot if
necessary or convenient to comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
it-ITER-10R I, Ta Il • Lar.-- N,
IYd
Lot1 L iT 11 rrotRux
IM
1. - i tE-..,
CQYIE;i
T.
alrEktOF I ' worm
F1; f3WfAGE I•--
2. 13 March, 2008
Lot, corner. A lot abutting on and at the intersection of two or more streets. ( See Lot Line, Front
and Yard, Front definitions.)
Lot, flag. A lot or parcel with less frontage on a public street than is normally required with access
provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, through. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two ( 2) more or less parallel public
streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines hall be deemed front lot lines.
Lot Area. The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except that: ( i) when the legal
instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot extending into a public street right-of-way,
then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the street right-of-way line, or if
the right-of-way line cannot be determined, a line running parallel to and 30 feet from the center of
the traveled portion of the street, and ( ii) in a residential district, when a private road that serves
more than three dwelling units is located along any lot boundary, then the lot boundary for purposes
of computing the lot area shall be the inside boundary of the traveled portion of that road.
Lot Coverage. The computed ground area occupied by all buildings within a lot.
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line of a lot,
measured within the lot boundaries.
Lot Lines. The property lines bounding the lot.
Lot Line, front. That boundary of a lot which is along an existing private or dedicated public street
or where a public street exists is along a public way. In the case of a corner lot, both boundaries
along a public way shall be considered front lot lines.
Lot Line, rear. The lot line not intersecting a front lot line that is most distant from and most closely
parallel to the front lot line.
I
I
I
1
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
Ai: ifyr LINE
1
I
OW LOT LtrlJ.
STREET 0 1
2. 14 March, 2008
Lot Line, side. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line nor a rear lot line.
Lot ofRecord. A parcel of land which has been legally recorded in the land records of the Town of
Indian Head.
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the required front
yard setback line.
REQUIRED FRONT
5E1 -DAM
Low -Volume Traffic Generation. Uses such as furniture stores, carpet stores, major appliance stores,
etc. that sell items that are large and bulky, that need a relatively large amount of storage or display
area for each unit offered for sale, and that therefore generate less customer traffic per square foot of
floor space than stores selling smaller items.
Manufactured Housing (see also Mobile Home) Single- family detached housing that is built to the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, is transportable in
one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis; but which is not construted with a permonent
hitch or other device allowing transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a
permanent site and does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame.
Marina. Any facility for the mooring, berthing, storing, or securing ofwatercraft, but not including
community piers and other non-commercial boat docking and storage facilities.
Marquee. A roof -like structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building or
its supports and may overhang the public way.
Mean High Water Line (MHWL). The average level of high tides at a given location.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 15 March, 2008
Mobile Home. A dwelling unit that: ( i) is not constructed in accordance with the standards set forth
in the town's building code applicable to site -built homes, and ( ii) is composed of one or more
components, each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be
transported to the home site on its own chassis, ( iii) exceeds 40 feet in length and eight feet in width
and ( iv) was built prior to the enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974.
Mobile Home, Park. A residential use in which more than one manufactured home or mobile home
is located on a single lot.
Modular Home. A dwelling unit composed of components substantially assembled in a
manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent
foundation. Among other possibilities, a modular home may consist of two sections transported to
the site in a manner similar to a mobile home, or a series ofpanels or room sections transported on a
truck and erected or joined together on the site.
Motel, Motor Court, Motor Hotel, Lodge, or Inn. The same as " Hotel" except it is designed to
accommodate any number of guests, the building or buildings are designed primarily to serve tourists
traveling by automobile, and ingress and egress to rooms need not be through a lobby or office.
Motor vehicle sales. Storage and display for sale of more than one ( 1) motor vehicle or any type of
trailer provided the trailer is unoccupied, and where repair or body work is incidental to the operation
of the new or used vehicle sales.
Naturalfeatures. Components and processes present in or produced by nature, including, but not
limited to, soil types, geology, slopes, vegetation, surface water, drainage patterns, aquifers, recharge
areas, climate, flood plains, aquatic life, and wildlife."
Natural Heritage Area. Any communities ofplants or animals which are considered to be among the
best Statewide examples of their kind, and are designated by regulation by the Secretary of the
Department of Natural Resources.
Natural vegetation. Those plant communities that develop in the absence of human activities.
Nature -dominated. A condition where landforms or biological communities, or both, have
developed by natural processes in the absence of human activities.
Nonconforming Lot. A lot existing at the effective date of this Ordinance ( and not created for the
purposes of evading the restrictions of this Ordinance) that does not meet the minimum area
requirement of the district in which the lot is located.
Nonconforming Project. Any structure, development, or undertaking that is incomplete at the
effective date of this Ordinance and would be inconsistent with any regulation applicable to the
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 16 March, 2008
district in which it is located if completed as proposed or planned.
Nonconforming Situation. A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this chapter, any
existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to one or more of the
regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is located. Among other
possibilities, a non -conforming situation may arise because a lot does not meet minimum acreage
requirements, because structures exceed maximum height limitations, because the relationship
between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density and setback requirements) is not
in conformity with this chapter, or because land or buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by
this chapter. Nonconforming signs shall not be regarded as nonconforming situations for purposes of
Article VIII but shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 1615 and 1616.
Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming situation that occurs when property is used for a purpose or
in a manner made unlawful by the use regulations applicable to the district in which the property is
located. ( For example, a commercial office building in a residential district may be a nonconforming
use). The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made of the property. ( For example,
all the activity associated with operating a retail clothing store in a residentially zoned area
constitutes a nonconforming use.)
Nonpoint source pollution. Pollution generated by diffuse land use activities rater than from an
identifiable or discrete facility. It is conveyed to waterways through natural processes, such as
rainfall, storm runoff, or groundwater seepage rather than by deliberate discharge. Non -point source
pollution is not generally corrected by " end -of -pipe" treatment, but rather by changes in land
management practices.
Non-renewable resources. Resources that are not naturally regenerated or renewed.
Non -tidal wetlands. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
hydrophytic vegetation. The determination ofwhether an area is a nontidal wetland shall be made in
accordance with the publication known as the " Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands", published in 1989 and as may be amended. Nontidal wetlands do not
include " tidal wetlands" regulated under Title 16 of the Environment Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland.
Nursing Care Home. A facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled nursing care and
medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital or institutional facility to not
more than nine persons.
Nursing Facility. An institutional facility (or a distinct part of an institution) which is primarily
engaged in providing skilled nursing care and related services for residents who require medical or
nursing care, rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation ofinjured, disabled, or sick persons, or on a
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 17 March, 2008
regular basis, health- related care and services to individuals who because oftheir mental or physical
condition require care and services (above the level ofroom and board) which can be made available
to them only through institutional facilities, and is not primarily for the care and treatment of mental
diseases.
Office, general. An office for the use of ( 1) professional people such as doctors, lawyers,
accountants, etc., or ( 2) general business offices such as insurance companies, trade associations,
manufacturing companies, investment concerns, banks and trust companies, real estate companies,
etc., but not including any kind of retail or wholesale store or warehouse, except as otherwise
provided herein.
Office, professional. A single- family structure used for professional office purposes by any member
of a recognized profession, such as, but not limited to, doctors, lawyers, architects, accountants,
engineers, and veterinarians, but not including medical or dental clinics or veterinarian clinics.
Professional offices do not include general business offices, such as the offices of insurance
companies, trade associations, manufacturing companies, investment concerns, banks or real estate
companies.
Offsets. Structures or actions that compensate for undesirable impacts.
Open space. Land and water areas retained in an essentially undeveloped state.
Overburden. The strata or material in its natural state, before its removal by surface mining,
overlying a mineral deposit, or in between mineral deposits.
Palustrine. All non -tidal wetlands dominated by trees, shrubs, persistent emergent plants, or
emergent mosses or lichens and all such wetlands that occur in tidal areas where the salinity due to
ocean -derived salts is below one- half part per 1, 000 parts of water.
Parking Area, Lot, or Structure. A structure, or an off-street area for parking or loading and
unloading, whether required or permitted by this Zoning Ordinance, including driveways, access
ways, aisles, and maneuvering areas, but not including any public or private street right-of-way.
Parking Area Aisles. A portion of the vehicle accommodation area consisting of lanes providing
access to parking spaces.
Parking, floor area. The floor area of a structure as defined herein less storage and warehouse areas
used principally for non-public purposes of said structure. Any basement or cellar space used for
retailing shall be included in the parking floor area for the purpose of calculating requirements for
accessory off-street parking spaces and accessory off-street loading berths.
Parking Space. A portion of the vehicle accommodation area set aside for the parking of one
vehicle.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 18 March, 2008
Person. An individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation firm, partnership, association,
organization, or other entity acting as a unit.
Physiographic features. The soils, topography, land slope and aspect, and local climate that
influence the form and species composition of plant communities.
Pier. A structure built out over water with piles used for access to the water, watercraft and other
water oriented activities.
Pier, Community. Boat docking facilities associated with subdivisions or similar residential areas,
and with condominium, apartment and other multiple family dwelling units. Private piers are
excluded from this definition.
Pier, Private. Pier serving the occupant of a single residential property.
Planned Residential Development. A development constructed on a tract of at least five acres under
single ownership, planned and developed as an integral unit, and consisting of single-family detached
residences combined with either two-family residences or multi -family residences, or both, all
developed in accordance with Section 1182.
Planned Unit Development (PUD). A development constructed on a tract of at least 25 acres under
single ownership, planned and developed as an integral unit, and consisting of a combination of
residential and nonresidential uses on land within a PUD district (See Section 903) in accordance
with Section 1183.
Planning Commission. The Town of Indian Head Planning Commission.
Port. A facility or area established or designated by the State or local jurisdictions for purposes of
waterborne commerce.
Private harvesting. The cutting and removal of trees for personal use.
Project approvals. The approval of development, including approval of subdivision plats and site
plans; inclusion of areas within floating zones; issuance of variances, special exceptions, and
conditional use permits; and issuance of zoning permits. The term does not including building
permits.
Property Lines. The lines bounding a zoning lot, as defined herein.
Public water -oriented recreation. Shore -dependent recreation facilities or activities provided by
public agencies which are available to the general public.
Public Way. Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 19 March, 2008
Receive -Only Earth Station. An antenna and attendant processing equipment for reception of
electronic signals from satellites.
Reclamation. The reasonable rehabilitation of disturbed land for useful purposes, and the protection
of the natural resources of adjacent areas, including waterbodies.
Redevelopment. The process of developing land which is or has been developed.
Reforestation. The establishment of a forest through artificial reproduction or natural regeneration.
Renewable resource. A resource that can renew or replace itself and, therefore, with proper
management, can be harvested indefinitely.
Residence, commercial apartment. A multi -family residence located above and or behind the
principal commercial use.
Residence, Duplex. A two-family residential use in which the dwelling units share a common wall
including without limitation the wall of an attached garage or porch) and in which each dwelling
unit has living space on the ground floor and a separate, ground floor entrance.
Residence, Multi -Family. A residential use consisting of a building containing three or more
dwelling units. For purposes of this definition, a building includes all dwelling units that are
enclosed within that building or attached to it by a common floor or wall ( even the wall of an
attached garage or porch).
Residence, Multi -Family Apartments. A multi -family residential use other than a multi -family
conversion or multi -family townhouse.
Residence, Multi -Family Conversion. A multi -family residence containing not more than four
dwelling units and results from the conversion of a single building containing at least 2, 000 square
feet of gross floor area that was in existence on the effective date of this provision and that was
originally designed, constructed and occupied as a single-family residence.
Residence, Multi -Family Townhouses. A multi -family resident use in which each dwelling unit
shares a common wall (including without limitation the wall of an attached garage or porch) with at
least one other dwelling unit and in which each dwelling unit has living space on the ground floor
and a separate, ground floor entrance.
Residence, Primary with Accessory Apartment. A residential use having the external appearance ofa
single-family residence but in which there is located a second dwelling unit that comprises not more
than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the building nor more than a total of 750 square feet.
Residence, Single -Family Detached, One Dwelling Unit Per Lot. A residential use consisting of a
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2.20 March, 2008
single detached building containing one dwelling unit and located on a lot containing no other
dwelling units.
Residence, Two -Family Apartment. A two-family residential use other than a duplex, two- family
conversion, or primary residence with accessory apartment.
Residence, Two -Family Conversion. A two-family residence resulting from the conversion of a
single building containing at least 2,000 square feet of gross floor area that was in existence on the
effective date of this provision and that was originally designed, constructed and occupied as a
single-family residence.
Retail Store. Stores selling one kind or various kinds of goods, as distinct from services, such as, but
not limited to, drug stores, grocery stores, department stores, camera shops, book stores, and record
shops.
Restaurants
a) Restaurant, standard - A food serving establishment whose principal business is the sale of
food and the principal method of operation is its service when ordered from a menu to seated
customers at a table, booth or counter inside the establishment. A snack bar or refreshment
stand at a public or nonprofit community swimming pool, playground or park, operated solely
for the convenience of its patrons shall not be considered a restaurant.
b) Restaurant, fast food - an establishment where ready -to -eat food primarily intended for
immediate consumption is available upon a short waiting time and wrapped or presented so
that it can readily be eaten outside or inside the premises.
c) Restaurant, fast food cafeteria - any establishment where ready -to -eat food is available upon
a short waiting time and served to customers on a tray through a cafeteria line for consumption
at a table, booth or counter inside the establishment.
d) Restaurant, fast food carry -out - any establishment where ready -to -eat food primarily
intended for immediate consumption is available upon a short waiting time and packaged or
presented so it can readily be eaten away from the premises as there are no facilities for on
premises consumption of food.
e) Restaurant, drive-in or drive-thru - any establishment where ready -to -eat food primarily
intended for immediate consumption is available upon a short waiting time and packaged or
presented so that it can be readily eaten inside the premises and whose method of operation is
also to serve customers in motor vehicles either at a drive-thru window or while parked.
Riparian habitat. A habitat that is strongly influenced by water and which occurs adjacent to
streams, shorelines, and wetlands.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2.21 March, 2008
Road. All private ways used to provide motor vehicle access to ( i) two or more lots or (ii) two or
more distinct areas or buildings in unsubdivided developments.
Rooming House. ( See Boarding House).
Seasonallyflooded water regime. A condition where surface water is present for extended periods,
especially early in the growing season, and when surface water is absent, the water table is often near
the land surface.
Selective Cutting. The removal of single, scattered, mature trees or other trees from uneven -aged
stands by frequent and periodic cutting operations.
Shoreline Erosion Hazard Area. Any shoreline that has a historical shoreline erosion of four (4) to
eight (8) feet or greater according to the Atlas of Historic Erosion Rates in Maryland ( 1965, Coastal
Resources Division, Tidewater Administration).
Sign. Any device that (i) is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot where such device is
located to accomplish either ofthe objectives set forth in subdivision (ii) of this definition; and ( ii) is
designed to attract the attention of such persons or to communicate information to them.
Sign, Freestanding. A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure (such as a
pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or
other structure having a principal function other than the support of a sign. A sign that stands
without supporting elements, such as a " sandwich sign," is also a freestanding sign.
Sign, Nonconforming. A sign that, on the effective date of this Ordinance, does not conform to one
or more of the regulations set forth in this Ordinance, particularly Article XVI.
Sign, Off - Premises. A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business,
service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other activity that is conducted, sold, or offered at
a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
Sign Permit. A permit issued by the land -use administrator that authorizes the recipient to erect,
move, enlarge, or substantially alter a sign.
Sign, Temporary. A sign that (i) is used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or event that is
designed, intended or expected to take place or to be completed within a reasonably short or definite
period after the erection of such sign, or (ii) is intended to remain on the location where it is erected
or placed for a period of not more than 15 days. If a sign display area is permanent but the message
displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary. All existing
temporary signs shall abide by this Ordinance with the date ofadoption beginning the 15 day bonus.
Significantly eroding areas. Areas that erode two feet or more per year.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2.22 March, 2008
Species in need ofconservation. Those fish and wildlife whose continued existence as part of the
State' s resources are in question and which may be designated by regulation by the Secretary of
Natural Resources as in need of conservation pursuant to the requirements of Natural Resources
Article 10- 2A-06 and 4-2A-03, Annotated Code of Maryland.
Special Events. Circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, or other types of special events that (i) run for
longer than one day but not longer than two weeks, ( ii) are intended to or likely to attract substantial
crowds, and ( iii) are unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property
where the special event is to be located.
Special Exception. A permit issued by the Board of Zoning Appeals that authorizes the recipient to
make use ofproperty in accordance with the requirements ofthis Ordinance as well as any additional
requirements imposed by the Board.
Spoil pile. The overburden and reject materials as piled or deposited during surface mining.
Steep slopes. Slopes of 15 percent or greater incline.
Storage. The keeping, either indoors or outdoors, of equipment, vehicles, or supplies used in the
conduct of a trade, business, or profession. Storage does not include the overnight parking in
residential zones ofa single vehicle weighing no more than two and one-half (2. 5) tons gross vehicle
wight which, although used primarily for business, trade, or professional purposes, also provides
daily transportation to and from work.
Stormwater Management.
a) For quantitative control, a system of vegetative and structural measures that control the
increased volume and rate of surface runoff caused by man-made changes to the land; and
b) For qualitative control, a system of vegetative, structural, and other measures that reduce or
eliminated pollutants that might otherwise be carried by surface runoff.
Street. A public street or a street with respect to which an offer of dedication has been made.
Street, Arterial. A major street in the town's street system that serves as an avenue for the circulation
of traffic into, out of, or around the town and carries high volumes of traffic.
Street, Collector. A street whose principal function is to carry traffic between minor, local, and sub -
collector streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties. It
serves or is designed to serve, directly or indirectly, more than 100 dwelling units and is designed to
be used or is used to carry more than 800 trips per day.
Street, Cul-de- sac. A street that terminates in a vehicular turn around.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 23 March, 2008
Street, Local. A street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting properties. It serves or is
designed to serve at least 10 but not more than 25 dwelling units and is expected to or does handle
between 75 and 200 trips per day.
Street, Marginal Access. A street that is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street and that is
designed to provide access to abutting properties so that these properties are somewhat sheltered
from the effects of the through traffic on the arterial street and so that the flow of traffic on the
arterial street is not impeded by direct driveway access from a large number of abutting properties.
Street, Minor. A street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting properties. It serves or is
designed to serve not more than nine dwelling units and is expected to or does handle up to 75 trips
per day.
Street, Private. A public way that is privately owned and maintained.
Street, Sub -collector. A street whose principal function is to provide access to abutting properties
but is also designed to be used or is used to connect minor and local streets with collector or arterial
streets. Including residences indirectly served through connecting streets, it serves or is designed to
serve at least 26 but not more than 100 dwelling units and is expected to or does handle between 200
and 800 trips per day.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected.
Subdivision. The division of a tract of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions
for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future).
Subdivision, Major. Any subdivision other than a minor subdivision.
Subdivision, Minor. A subdivision that does not involve any of the following: (i) the creation of
more than a total of three lots; ( ii) the creation of any new public streets, ( iii) the extension of a
public water or sewer systems, or (iv) the installation of drainage improvements through one or more
lots to serve on or more other lots.
Temporary Emergency, Construction or Repair Residence. A residence ( which may be a mobile
home) that is (i) located on the same lot as a residence made uninhabitable by fire, flood, or other
natural disaster and occupied by the persons displaced by such disaster, or (ii) located on the same lot
as a residence that is under construction and occupied by the persons intending to live in such
permanent residence when the work is completed, or (iii) located on a nonresidential construction
site and occupied by persons having construction or security responsibilities over such construction
site.
Thinning. A forest practice used to accelerate tree growth of quality trees in the shortest interval of
time.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2.24 March, 2008
Topography. The existing configuration ofthe earth's surface including the relative relief, elevation,
and position of land features.
Tourist Home. ( See Bed and Breakfast Home)
Tower. Any structure whose principal function is to support an antenna.
Townhouse. One of a group of attached, single- family dwellings which are designed as single
structures, with each dwelling unit separated by firewalls, fire separations, or similar party wall. No
more than eight ( 8) dwelling units shall be attached.
Tract. A lot (see definition). The term tract is used interchangeably with the term lot, particularly in
the context of subdivisions, where one " tract" is subdivided into several " lots".
Transitional habitat. A plant community whose species are adapted to the diverse and varying
environmental conditions that occur along the boundary that separates aquatic and terrestrial areas.
Transportation facilities. Anything that is built, installed, or established to provide a means of
transport from one place to another.
Travel Trailer. A structure that (i) is intended to be transported over the streets and highways (either
as a motor vehicle or attached to or hauled by a motor vehicle) and (ii) is designed for temporary use
as sleeping quarters but that does not satisfy one or more of the definitional criteria of a mobile
home.
Tributary streams. Those perennial and intermittent streams in the Critical Area which are so noted
on the most recent U.S. Geological Survey 7- 1/ 2 minute topographic quadrangle maps ( scale
1: 24,000) or on more detailed maps or studies at the discretion of the Town of Indian Head.
Use. The activity or function that actually takes place or is intended to take place on a lot.
Use, permitted. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts provided
it conforms with all regulations, requirements, and standards of such district and is listed in the Table
of Permissible Uses.
Use, Principal. A use listed in the Table of Permissible Uses and clearly the dominant use of the
property.
Utility Facilities. Any above -ground structures or facilities ( other than buildings, unless such
buildings are used as storage incidental to the operation of such structures or facilities) owned by a
governmental entity, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any entity defined as a public utility
and used in connection with the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage
of water, sewage, electricity, gas oil, or electronic signals. Excepted from this definition are utility
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 25 March, 2008
lines and supporting structures listed in Section 1004.
Utility Facilities, Community or Regional. All utility facilities other than neighborhood facilities.
Utility Facilities, Neighborhood. Utility facilities that are designed to serve the immediately
surrounding neighborhood and that must, for reasons associated with the purpose of the utility in
question, be located in or near the neighborhood where such facilities are proposed to be located.
Utility transmission facilities. Fixed structures that convey or distribute resources, wastes, or both,
including but not limited to electrical lines, water conduits and sewer lines.
Variance. A grant of permission by the board of zoning appeals that authorizes the recipient to do
that which, according to the strict letter of this chapter, he could not otherwise legally do.
Vehicle Accommodation Area. That portion of a lot that is used by vehicles for access, circulation,
parking, and loading and unloading. It comprises the total of circulation areas, loading and
unloading areas, and parking areas.
Wash plant. A facility where sand and gravel is washed during processing.
Water- based aquaculture. The raising of fish and shellfish in any natural, open, free-flowing water
body.
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert,
drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash, in and including any area adjacent thereto which is subject to
inundation by reason of overflow or water.
Water -use industry. An industry that requires location near the shoreline because it utilizes surface
waters for cooling or other internal purposes.
Waterfowl. Birds which frequent and often swim in water, nest and raise their young near water,
and derive at least part of their food from aquatic plants and animals.
Wetlands, tidal (state): any land under the navigable waters of the state below the mean high tide,
affected by the regular rise and fall of the tide.
Wildlife corridor. A strip of land having vegetation that provides habitat and safe passage for
wildlife.
Wholesale Sales. On -premises sales of goods primarily to customers engaged in the business of
reselling the goods.
WoodedArea. An area of contiguous wooded vegetation where trees are at a density ofat least one
Zoning Ordinance
Town of'Indian Head, Maryland 2.26 March, 2008
six-inch or greater caliper tree per 325 square feet of land and where the branches and leaves form a
contiguous canopy.
Wrecking Permit. A permit required for razing, demolishing, or removing a building or structure,
either entirely or in part.
Yard. An open green space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance. A
yard" extends along a lot line and to a depth or width specified in the yard requirements for the
zoning district in which such zoning lot is located.
Rear Yard
C 1 Building 1
Setback
Side Yard Building Setback
i_._, Building1 >
Setback
Front Yard
Building
f
Setback Side Yard
V .
Yard, front. A yard extending along the full length ofthe front lot line ofthe zoning lot. In the case
of a corner lot, both yards extending along the public streets shall be considered front yards.
Yard, rear. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line of the zoning lot.
Yard, side. A yard extending along a side lot line measured from the front yard to the rear yard.
Yard, corner side. A side yard which adjoins a public street.
Yard, interior side. A side yard which is locate immediately adjacent to another zoning lot or to an
alley separating such yard from another zoning lot.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2.27 March, 2008
Yard, transitional. That yard which must be provided on a zoning lot in a business -commercial
district which adjoins a zoning lot in a residential district, or that yard which must be provided on a
zoning lot in either a residential or business -commercial district.
Zoning Administrator. The official designated as the official responsible for enforcing and
administering all requirements of the Town of Indian Head Zoning Ordinance.
Zoning Overlay District. A district which is placed over the existing regular or parent zoning
because of siting of a zoning district or imposes additional restrictions and includes all those districts
listed as Special Districts in Article IX, Part II.
Zoning Parent District. Those basic districts initially listed other than Special Districts in Article IX.
Zoning Permit. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator that authorizes the recipient to make
use of property in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 201. Lots Divided by District Lines
a) Whenever a single lot one acre or less in size is located within two or more different zoning
districts, the district regulations applicable to the district within which the large portion of the
lot lies shall apply to the entire lot.
b) Whenever a single lot greater than one acre in size is located within two or more different
zoning districts, each portion ofthat lot shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to the
district in which it is located.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2. 28 March, 2008
S tion 201. Lots Divided by District Lines
a) enever a single lot one acre or less in size is located within two or more d' ferent zoning
dis , 'cts, the district regulations applicable to the district within which the 1.. e portion ofthe
lot li- . shall apply to the entire lot.
b) Wheneve single lot greater than one acre in size is located withi two or more different
zoning distil ts, each portion of that lot shall be subject to all the re ya lations applicable to the
district in whic ' it is located.
Zoning Ordina ce
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 2.29 June, 2007
ARTICLE III ADMINISTRATIVE MECHANISMS
Section 300. Appointment and Terms of Planning Commission Members
a) There shall be a planning commission consisting of seven members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Town and shall be qualified by knowledge and experience in matters pertaining to
the development of the Town. All seven members shall be appointed by the Town Council. The
members shall be appointed to represent as many different geographical areas ofthe Town ofIndian
Head as is possible. Members shall be appointed for terms oftwo years or until their successors are
appointed and qualified. The respective terms of the members shall be on a staggered basis.
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council for the unexpired term only.
Members of the commission may receive such compensation as deemed appropriate and shall be
reimbursed for all necessary and reasonable expenses actually incurred in the performance of their
official duties.
b) One member of the Town Council shall also be an ex- offico, non-voting member of the
planning commission and shall be selected by the Mayor with the approval ofthe Council. The term
of this member shall correspond to his official term as a member of the Council. The term on the
Planning Commission of the member of the Council shall cease whenever his official tenure as a
member of the Council terminates.
Section 301. Meetings of the Planning Commission
a) The Planning Commission shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall meet frequently
enough so that it can take action on all complete applications in an expeditious manner. This shall
entail at least one regular meeting each month.
b) The Planning Commission need not conduct its meetings strictly in accordance with the quasijudicial
procedures set forth in Article IV, V, and VI. However, it shall conduct its meetings so as to
obtain necessary information and to promote the full and free exchange of ideas.
c) Minutes shall be kept of all Planning Commission proceedings.
d) All Planning Commission meetings shall be open to the public, and whenever feasible the
tentative agenda for each meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting.
e) Whenever the Planning Commission is called upon to make recommendations, on any proposal
requiring a public hearing, the Zoning administrator shall post on or near the subject property one or
more notices that are sufficiently conspicuous in size, location, and content to provide reasonably
adequate notice to potentially interested persons concerning the matter that will appear on the
Commission's agenda at a specified date and time. Such notice(s) shall be posted at least two weeks
prior to the meeting at which the matter is to be considered. Written notice shall be sent to adjoining
property owners if and to the extent required by any regulation or requirements of the planning
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 3. 1
commission adopted under Subsection 304(b).
Section 302. Quorum and Voting
a) A quorum for the planning commission shall consist of a majority of the commission
membership (excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the board to take official action.
b) All actions ofthe planning commission shall be taken bymajority vote, a quorum being present.
c) A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member.
d) All Advisory members, shall have all the privileges of membership except the right to vote.
Section 303. Planning Commission Chairman
a) The Planning Commission shall annually elect one chairman and one vice chairman from among
its members.
b) The chairman and vice chairman may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues.
Section 304. Powers and Duties of Planning Commission
a) The planning commission may:
i. Make studies and recommend to the Town Council plans, goals, and objectives
relating to the growth, development and redevelopment ofthe Town.
ii. Develop and recommend to the Town Council policies, ordinances, administrative
procedures, and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient
manner.
iii. Make recommendations to the Town Council concerning proposed zoning
amendment requests.
iv. Hear and decide applications for land development and approve subdivision plats and
site development plans.
b) The planning commission may adopt rules and regulations governing its procedures and
operations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 3. 2
Section 305. Advisory Committees
a) From time to time, the Town Council may appoint one or more individuals to help the planning
commission carry out its planning responsibilities with respect to a particular subject area. Byway
of illustration, without limitation, the Town Council may appoint advisory committees to consider
the comprehensive development plan, housing plans, economic development plans, etc.
b) Members of such advisory committees shall sit as nonvoting members of the planning
commission when such issues are being considered and lend their talents, energies, and expertise to
the planning commission. However, all formal recommendations to the Town Council shall be made
by the planning commission.
c) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Town Council from establishing independent advisory
groups, committees, or commissions to make recommendations on any issue directly to the Town
Council.
Section 306. Appointments and Terms of Board of Appeals
a) There shall be a board of appeals consisting of five members to be appointed by the Town
Council. The members shall be individuals who are residents ofthe Town. No member ofthe board
of zoning appeals shall be a member of the planning commission nor shall any member hold other
elective or appointive office in the Town government. Appointment shall be for, staggered terms of
four years. If a vacancy occurs, by resignation or otherwise; among the, members -of the board of
zoning appeals, the Town Council shall appoint a member forthe unexpired term. Members ofthe
board may receive such compensation as the TownCouncil deems appropriate and shall be
reimbursed for all reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their
official duties.
b) The Town Council shall designate one alternate member for the board ofappeals who maybe
empowered to sit on the board in the absence of a member ofthe board.
Section 307. Meetings of the Board of Appeals
a) The board of appeals shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall meet frequently enough
so that it can take action on all complete applications in an expeditious manner.
b) The board shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the quasi-judicial procedures set forth
in Articles IV, V, and VI.
c) All meetings ofthe board shall be open to the public, and whenever feasible the tentative agenda
for each board meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 3. 3
d) The board shall keep an audio recording ofall proceedings and minutes showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or, ifabsent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
Section 308. Quorum
a) A quorum for the board of appeals shall consist of a majority ofthe regular board membership
excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the board to take official action.
b) A member who has withdrawn from the meeting without being excused as provided in Section
309 shall be counted as present for purposes of determining whether a quorum is present.
Section 309. Voting
a) The concurring vote ofthe majority ofthe board membership (excluding vacant seats) shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination ofthe administrator or to
decide infavor ofthe applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under any ordinance or
to grantany variance.
411 b) Once amember is physically present at a board meeting, any subsequent failure to vote shall be recorded as an affirmative vote unless the member has been excused in accordance with
Subsection (c) or has been allowed to withdraw from the meeting in accordance with Subsection (d).
c) A member may be excused from voting on a particular issue by majority vote of the
remaining members present under any of the following circumstances:
i. If the member has a direct financial interest in the outcome ofthe matter at issue, or
ii. If the matter at issue involves the member's own official conduct, or
iii. If participation in the matter might violate the letter or spirit of a member's code of
professional responsibility, or
iv. If a member has such close personal ties to the applicant that the member cannot
reasonably be expected to exercise sound judgment in the public interest.
d) A member may be allowed to withdraw from the entire remainder of a meeting by majority
vote of the remaining members present for any good and sufficient reason other than the member's
desire to avoid voting on matters to be considered at that meeting.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 3. 4
e) Amotion to allow a member to be excused from voting or excused from the remainder ofthe
meeting is in order only ifmade by or at the initiative of the member directly affected.
f) A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member.
Section 310. Board of Appeals Officers
a) The Board ofAppeals shall annually elect one ofits members to serve as chairman, who will
preside over the board's meetings, and one member vice chairman, who will preside over the board's
meetings in the absence ofthe chairman. The person so designated shall serve in this capacity for a
term of one year.
b) The chairman or any member temporarily acting as chairman may administer oaths to
witnesses coming before the board.
c) The chairman and vice-chairman maytake part in all deliberations and vote on all issues.
Section 311. Powers and Duties of Board of Appeals
a) The board of appeals shall hear and decide:
i. Appeals from any order, decision, requirement, or interpretation made by the
administrator, as provided in Section 500.
ii. Applications for Special Exception Uses, as provided in Section 452.
iii. Applications for variances, as provided in Section 501.
iv. Questions involving interpretations of the zoning map, including disputed district
boundary lines and lot lines, as provided in Section 502.
v. Any other matter the board is required to act upon by any other Town ordinance.
b) The board may adopt rules and regulations governing its procedures and operations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
Section 312. Zoning Administrator
Except as otherwise specifically provided, primary responsibility for administering and enforcing this
Ordinance shall be the Town Manager. The Town Manager may assign responsibility to one or more
individuals. The person or persons to whom these functions are assigned shall be referred to in this
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 3. 5
Ordinance as the " zoning administrator" or " administrator". The term " staff' is sometimes used
interchangeably with the term "administrator".
Section 313. Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator
The zoning administrator shall have the power to administer this ordinance on a day to day basis.
The administrator shall also prepare staffcomments on such matters as required bythis ordinance or
when so directed by the Town Council, Planning Commission, or Board of Zoning Appeals. The
administrator is primarily responsible for insuring that this work is completed on a timely basis. The
planning director may serve as the zoning administrator.
Section 314. Town Council
The Town Council is the local elected legislative body. The Town Council's primary responsibility
relative to this ordinance shall be to make final decisions on zoning amendment petitions and to
make such appointments as identified in this ordinance. In considering proposed changes in the text
ofthis ordinance or in the zoning map, the Council acts in its legislative capacity and must proceed
in accordance with the requirements of Article XX.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 3. 6
April, 2004
ARTICLE IV DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
Part I Zoning Permits
Section 400. Permits Required
a) No building or other structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building or structure be
moved, added to, enlarged, or structurally altered, and no excavation for any building or
other structure shall begin without the issuance of a building permit by the Zoning
Administrator.
b)
c)
No building, or other structure, or land shall be used, nor shall any building, structure, or land
be converted, wholly or in part, to any other use, except for a single-family dwelling,
agricultural purposes, accessory uses, or home occupations permitted under the provisions of
this Ordinance, until an occupancy permit, certifying compliance with these regulations, has
been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
In addition to the building permit and occupancy permit, the following permits may be
required by the Zoning Administrator:
Permits Authorized by the Board ofAppeals. The ZoningAdministrator shall issue
permits in conformance with the written authorization of the Board of Appeals
concerning administrative review appeals, special exception permit appeals,
dimensional variance appeals, or other appeals as authorized in this Zoning
Ordinance.
ii. Wrecking Permits. No building or other structures shall be razed, demolished, or
removed, either entirely or in part, nor shall any of said activities be commenced,
without a wrecking permit.
iii. Sign Permits. No sign shall be created, erected, moved, added to, or structurally
altered, nor shall any of said activities be commenced without a sign permit.
iv. Other Permits. Additional permits, including approvals by other agencies, including
but not limited to the Maryland Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Commission, maybe
required to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
d) Permits are issued under this ordinance only when a review of the application submitted,
including the plans contained therein, indicates that the development will comply with the
provisions of this ordinance if completed as proposed. Such plans and applications as are
finally approved are incorporated into any permit issued, all development shall occur strictly
in accordance with such approved plans and applications.
e) Physical improvements to land to be subdivided may not be commenced except in
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 1
accordance with a certificate of approval issued by the Planning Commission for major
subdivisions or after final plat approval by the Zoning Administrator for minor
subdivisions.(See Subdivision Regulations.)
f) In the discharge ofhis duties, the Zoning Administrator or his authorized representative shall
have the authority to enter at any reasonable hour any building, structure, or premise in the
Town to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. He may adopt a badge of office for
himself and assistants that shall be displayed for the purpose ofidentification. The assistance
and cooperation of sheriffs and/ or police, fire, and health departments and all other Town
officials shall be available to him as required in the performance ofhis duties.
In the event that the owner or occupant denies access for inspection, the owner/occupant
shall be responsible for all legal and administrative costs associated with the issuance of an
administrative search warrant or injunction from the appropriate court.
Section 401. Severability
a) Compliance with Other Codes, Statutes, and Regulations. Nothing in this section or other
sections of the Zoning Ordinance shall be construed to exempt any applicant for a permit
from compliance with all local, state, and federal codes, statutes, and regulations.
b) Prior Permits. No building permit which was lawfully issued prior to the original effective
date ofthis Ordinance and which is in full force and effect at said date shall be invalidated by
the passage ofthis Ordinance - provided that all such permits shall expire not later than 120
days from the effective date of this Ordinance, unless actual construction shall have begun
and continued pursuant to the terms of said permit.
c) Conflict with Other Permits. Except as provided herein, no permit pertaining to the use of
land or buildings shall be issued by any agency, department or employee unless a Zoning
Permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. Anypermit issued in conflict with the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and void.
Section 402. Time Limits for Zoning and Building Permits
Any building permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized use or construction for which the
permit was issued is not commenced within 180 days of the date of issuance, or is suspended or
abandoned for a period of 180 days. The Zoning Administrator may, upon good cause shown,
extend a permit without additional charge for an additional period not exceeding 180 days.
Section 403. Permit Application Requirements and Procedures
a) All applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans and information as the Town
ofIndian Head deems to be necessary to determine compliance and provide for enforcement
of this Zoning Ordinance. The application materials listed in Appendix A shall be the
minimum. Additional information may be required.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4.2
b) After reviewing the application materials, the Zoning Administrator shall mark the
application either as " Approved" or "Disapproved" and attest to the same by signature on
such copy. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing not later than 45
days after receipt of the site plan.
c) Site Plans Required:
Minor Site Plan. A minor site plan shall be filed for a single-family dwelling, a
duplex, a residence with an accessory apartment, any accessory building, an addition
or change of a commercial or industrial structure, or for a special exception use
which does not require a building permit. Upon determination by the Zoning
Administrator, in those cases where a field inspection indicatesthat the scope ofthe
proposed building, addition, accessory use, or special exception is of such a nature
that the provisions for the handling ofnatural and stormwater, sediment control, offstreet
parking, set -backs, water and sewerage, and other requirements cannot be
adequately addressed with a minor site plan, a major site plan shall be required.
ii. Major Site Plan. All applications for building permits, other than those accompanied
by a minor site plan, or those that are considered minor or major subdivisions (see
definitions), shall be accompanied by a major site plan.
iii. General Development Plan.
1. A general development plan is a site plan by which, at the early stages of
development design, the Planning Commission may consider, approve, ,or
restrict major aspects ofthe development without requiring an undue amount
of final design work on the part of the developer. The general development
plan is less detailed and specific than a major site plan in terms of exact
arrangement ofbuildings, parking areas, open spaces, access points, and any
other site design features. No building permits can be issued based upon a
general development plan.
2. General development plans shall be required as follows:
a. All applications for zoning map amendments shall be accompanied
by a general development plan
b. General development plans shall be required to permit more than one
principal structure and its accessory structures on a lot or parcel of
land.
iv. Subdivision Plat. If the permit involves the subdivision of land, an approved
subdivision plat shall be required as provided in Land Subdivision Rules and
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4.3
Regulations.
v. Sign Permits. Requirements for sign permits shall be as provided in Article XVI.
vi. Stormwater Management Plan. A permit may not be issued for any parcel or lot
unless a stormwater management plan has been approved or waived by the Zoning
Administrator as meeting all the requirements of the Stormwater Management
Ordinance.
d) The following additional requirements shall be applicable to site plans required under this
section:
i. Compliance with applicable established design criteria, construction standards, and
specifications for all improvements as maybe required by the Town Council and this
Zoning Ordinance.
ii. The building permit shall not be issued unless and until the State Highway
Administration has approved the site plan as it relates to access point design details
and parking lot circulation layout on a state highway.
iii. Other Approvals. If this Zoning Ordinance requires approval by another agency ,
including but not limited to the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Commission, ofcertain
site plan features, such approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of a building
permit.
iv. Development Plan as Site Plan. In any case, where the Zoning Administrator has
approved a detailed final development plan showing essentially the same information
as required above for the property seeking a building permit, no separate site plan
shall be required to be prepared. The applicant shall be required to supply such
supplementary information as necessary to comply with all requirements of this
Section.
v. Any or all ofthe information required for a minor or major site plan maybe waived if
the Zoning Administrator finds that it is not needed to make a determination of
zoning compliance.
vi. The basic information required with building permit applications is shown in Appendix
A.
Section 404. Certificate of Occupancy
a) Certificate ofOccupancy Required. No person shall use or permit the use ofany structure or
premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, enlarged or moved,
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4.4
April, 2004
wholly or partly, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator. Such certificates shall show that the structure or use, or both, or the premises,
or the affected part thereof, are in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to issue such certificate ifit is found that all
of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance have been met and to withhold or revoke such
certificate unless all requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable
regulations have been met. Within 14 calendar days after written notification that the
building or premises is ready for inspection, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued or
written notice given to the applicant stating in fact why a certificate of occupancy cannot be
issued.
b) Temporary Certificates ofOccupancy. A temporary certificate ofoccupancy may be issued
by the Zoning Administrator for a period not exceeding six (6) months during alterations or
partial occupancy of a building pending its completion in accordance with general rules or
regulations concerning such additional conditions or safeguards as are necessary in the
circumstances of the case to protect the safety of the general public.
c) Certificate of Occupancy for Existing Uses or Structures. Upon request from the owner or
tenant, and upon inspection to determine the facts in the case, the Zoning Administrator shall
issue a certificate of occupancy for any building premises or use that is in conformity with
the provisions ofthis Zoning Ordinanceor that a legal non -conformity exists as specified in
the certificate.
d) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all stormwater management facilities are
completed and functioning, or bonded for completion in accordance with this Ordinance.
Any ,stormwatermanagement structure which ; creates anembankment of, four. (4) feet or
greater, or any other structure of significant size or impact to downstream drainage shall be
inspected during construction and upon completion by the Soil Conservation Service.
e) A final Certificate of Occupancy permit may be issued for any appropriate complete building
or part ofbuilding located in a part ofthe total area of an approved site plan, such part ofthe
total area to be known as a section provided:
The other on- site construction and improvements included in the approved site plan
for the section have been inspected and accepted by the Zoning Administrator and
other appropriate agencies and a certified "as built" site plan (see Section 406) has
been submitted to the Zoning Administrator two (2) weeks prior to the proposed date
of occupancy.
ii. The off-site improvements related to and necessary to service the section have been
completed and inspected and accepted by the Zoning Administrator, the State
Highway Administration or appropriate agencies; and the developer has submitted a
certified " as built" drawing for the section; or the developer has provided surety
acceptable to the appropriate agencies.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 5
Section 405. Inspection And Supervision During Installation
a) Unless specifically provided in this chapter, the construction standards for all off-site
improvements and on-site improvements required by this article shall conform to the Town
design and construction standards contained in Appendices B, C, and D. Appropriate Town
authorities shall approve the plans and specifications for all required improvements and shall
inspect the construction of such improvements to assure conformity thereto.
b) Inspection during the installation of the off-site improvements shall be made by the
department responsible for monitoring or maintaining such improvements as required to
certify compliance with the approved site plan and applicable standards.
c) The owner shall notify the appropriate Town agencies in writing three (3) days prior to the
beginning of all street, water sewer, or storm sewer work to be performed.
d) The owner shall provide adequate supervision on the site during the installation of all
required improvements and have a responsible superintendent or foreman together with one
1) set of approved plans, profiles, and specifications available at all times when work is
being performed.
e) ``' Upon satisfactory completion of the required improvements and after having received
verification by the appropriate Town approving authorities, the Zoning Administrator shall
recommend to the Town Manager the release ofany bond which mayhave been furnished for
the guarantee ofsatisfactory installation ofsuch improvements ofparts thereof. This release
shall provide for 25 percent of the total bond to be retained for a period of 12 months after
completion of all work. Bond retention period may be extended for an additional 12 months
if major failures or deficiencies occur as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Said
retainer shall be for the protection of the Town to cover failures, discrepancies, etc., in the
previously approved improvements.
1) The installation ofimprovements as required in this article shall in no case serve to bind the
Town to accept such improvement for the maintenance, repair, or operation thereof.
Section 406. As -Built Site Plan
Upon satisfactory completion of required improvements as shown on the approved site plan or a
section thereof, the developer shall submit to the Zoning Administrator four (4) copies of the " as
built" site plan, certified by the project engineer before occupancy ofanybuilding, for the review and
approval for conformity with the approved site plan by the appropriate Town departments ( as
designated in this section). The Zoning Administrator shall not process the occupancy permit until
the appropriate " as built" site plan has been reviewed and approved by the Town Manager and other
appropriate agencies. As -built site plans should indicate any deviations from site improvements
shown on final approved site plan.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4.6
Section 407. No Occupancy, Use, or Sale of Lots Until Requirements Fulfilled
Issuance of a special exception or zoning permit authorizes the recipient to commence the activity
resulting in a change in use ofthe land or (subject to obtaining abuilding permit) to commence work
designed to construct, erect, move, or substantially alter buildings or other substantial structures or to
make necessary improvements to a subdivision. However, except as provided in Sections 412 and
413, the intended use may not be commenced, no building may be occupied, and in the case of
subdivisions, no lots may be sold until all of the requirements of this ordinance and all additional
requirements imposed pursuant to the issuance of a special exception permit have been met.
Section 408. Who May Submit Permit Applications
a) Applications for zoning, special exception, sign permits, other permits, :or.minor subdivision
plat approval will be accepted only from persons having the legal authority to take action in
accordance with the permit or the minor subdivision plat approval. Byway ofillustration, in
general this means that applications should be made by the owners or lessees ofproperty, or
their agents, or persons who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon their
ability to acquire the necessary permits under this chapter, or the agents ofsuch persons (who
may make application in the name of such owners, lessees, or contract purchasers).
b) The Zoning Administrator may require an applicant to submit evidence of his authority to
submit the application in accordance with Subsection (a) whenever there appears to be a
reasonable basis for questioning this authority.
Section 409. Applications To Be Complete
a) All applications for zoning, special exception, sign permits, or other permits must be
complete before the permit -issuing authority is required to consider the application.
b) Subject to Section 400, an application is complete when it contains all ofthe information that
is necessary for the permit -issuing authority to decide whether or not the development, if
completed as proposed, will comply with all of the requirements of this Ordinance.
c) In this Ordinance, detailed or technical design requirements and construction specifications
relating to various types of improvements ( streets, sidewalks, etc.) are set forth in one or
more ofthe appendices to this ordinance. It is not necessary that the application contain the
type of detailed construction drawings that would be necessary to determine compliance with
these appendices, so long as the plans provide sufficient information to allow the permit -
issuing authority to evaluate the application in the light ofthe substantive requirements set
forth in this text of this Ordinance. However, whenever this Ordinance requires a certain
element of a development to be constructed in accordance with the detailed requirements set
forth in one or more ofthese appendices, then no construction work on such element maybe
commenced until detailed construction drawings have been submitted to and approved by the
administrator. Failure to observe this requirement may result in permit revocation, denial of
final subdivision plat approval, or other penalty as provided in Article VII.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4.7
d) The presumption established by this Ordinance is that all of the information set forth in
Appendix A is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this section. However, it is
recognized that each development is unique, and therefore the permit -issuing authority may
allow less information or require more information to be submitted according to the needs of
the particular case. This is particularly true for projects located in those portions ofthe Town
in the Critical Area District. For applications submitted to the Board of Appeals, the
applicant may rely in the first instance on the recommendations of the administrator as to
whether more or less information than that set forth in the Appendix A should be submitted.
e) The administrator shall make every effort to develop application forms, instructional sheets,
checklists, or other techniques or devices to assist applicants in understanding the application
requirements and the form and type of information that must be submitted. In classes of
cases where a minimal amount of information is necessary to enable the administrator to
determine compliance with this Ordinance, such as applications for zoning permits to
construct single-family or two-family houses, or applications for sign permits, the
administrator shall develop standard forms that will expedite the submission ofthe necessary
plans and other required information.
Section 410. Staff Consultation Before Formal Application
a) =- = To minimize development planning costs, avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation, and
ensure compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, a pre -application meeting
between the developer and the Zoning Administrator is encouraged or required as provided
in this section.
b) Before submitting an application for a zoning permit authorizing a development that consists
ofor contains a major subdivision, the developer shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a
pre -application concept plan ofsuch subdivision, drawn approximately to scale (1 inch = 100
feet). The concept plan shall contain the information set forth in Appendix A. The
administrator shall meet with the developer as soon as conveniently possible to review the
sketch plan.
Section 411. Staff Consultation After Application Submitted
a) Upon receipt of a formal application for a zoning, or special exception permit, the
administrator shall review the application and confer with the applicant to ensure that he
understands the Town staffs interpretation ofthe applicable requirements ofthis ordinance,
that he has submitted all ofthe information that he intends to submit, and that the application
represents precisely and completely what he proposes to do.
b) If the application is for a special exception permit, the administrator shall place the
application on the agenda of the appropriate board when the applicant indicates that the
application is as complete as he intends to make it. However, ifthe administrator believes
that the application is incomplete, he shall recommend to the appropriate board that the
application be denied on that basis.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 8
Section 412. Authorizing Use Or Occupancy Before Completion Of Development Under
Zoning Permit
a) In cases when, because of weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the
zoning -permit recipient (exclusive of financial hardship), it would be unreasonable to require
the zoning -permit recipient to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter prior to
commencing the intended use ofthe property or occupying any buildings, the administrator
may authorize the commencement ofthe intended use or the occupancy ofbuildings (insofar
as the requirements of this ordinance are concerned) if the permit recipient provides a
performance bond or other security satisfactory to the administrator to ensure that all of the
requirements ofthis ordinance will be fulfilled within a reasonable period (not to exceed 12
months) determined by the administrator.
b) With respect to subdivisions in which the developer is selling only undeveloped lots, the
planning commission may authorize final plat approval and the sale of lots before all the
requirements of this article are fulfilled if the subdivider provides a performance bond or
other security satisfactory to the Town Manager to ensure that all ofthese requirements will
be fulfilled within not more than 12 months after final approval.
Section 413. Completing Developments In Phases
a) As a prerequisite to taking advantage ofthe provisions of Subsection (a), the developer shall
submit plans that clearly show the various phases or stages ofthe proposed development and
the requirements of this Ordinance that will be satisfied with respect to each phase or stage.
b) If a development is constructed in phases or stages in accordance with this section, then,
subject to Subsection (c), the provisions ofSections 407 and 412 shall apply to each phase as
if it were the entire development.
c) If a development that is to be built in phases or stages includes improvements that are
designed to relate to, benefit, or be used bythe entire development (such as a swimming pool
or tennis courts in a residential development) then, as part ofhis application for development
approval, the developer shall submit a proposed schedule for completion of such
improvements. The schedule shall relate completion of such improvements to completion of
one or more phases or stages ofthe entire development. Once a schedule has been approved
and made part of the permit by the permit -issuing authority, no land may be used, no
buildings may be occupied, and no subdivision lots may be sold except in accordance with
the schedule approved as part of the permit, provided that:
i. If the improvement is one required by this ordinance then the developer may use the
provisions of Subsections 412 ( a) or (b).
ii. If the improvement is an amenity not required by this ordinance or is provided in
response to a condition imposed by the board, then the developer may use the
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4.9
provisions of Subsection 412 (b).
Section 414. Expiration Of Permits
a) Zoning, special exception, sign, and other permits shall expire automatically if, within 180
days after the issuance of such permits:
b)
i. The use authorized by such permits has not commenced, in circumstances where no
substantial construction, erection, alteration, excavation, demolition, or similar work
is necessary before commencement of such use, or
ii. Less than 10 percent of the total cost of all construction, erection, alteration,
excavation, demolition, or similar work on any development authorized by such
permits has been completed on the site. With respect to phased development (see
Section 413), this requirement shall apply only to the first phase.
If, after some physical alteration to land or structures begins to take place, such work is
discontinued for a period of 180 days, then the permit authorizing such work shall
immediately expire. However, expiration of the permit shall not affect the provisions of
Section 415.
c) The Zoning Administrator may extend for a period ofup to 180 days, the date when a permit
would otherwise expire pursuant to Subsections ( a) or (b) if it concludes that (i) the permit
has not yet expired, (ii) the permit recipient has proceeded with due diligence and in good
faith, and (iii) conditions have not changed so substantially as to warrant a new application.
Successive extensions may be granted for periods up to 180 days upon the same findings.
All such extensions may be granted without resort to the formal processes and fees required
for a new permit.
d) For purposes ofthis section, a permit within the jurisdiction ofthe board of appeals is issued
when such board votes to approve the application with or without conditions ( written
minutes of such board action will state conditions in full) and issue the permit. A permit
within thejurisdiction ofthe zoning administrator is issued when the earlier ofthe following
takes place:
i. A copy ofthe fully executed permit is delivered to the permit recipient, and delivery
is accomplished when the permit is hand -delivered or mailed to the permit applicant;
or
ii. The zoning administrator notifies the permit applicant that the applicant has been
approved and that all that remains before a fully executed permit can be delivered is
for the applicant to take certain specified actions, such as having the permit executed
by the property owner so it can be recorded if required.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 10
e) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of Article VIII, this section shall be applicable to
permits issued prior to the date this section becomes effective.
Section 415. Effect Of Permit On Successors And Assigns
a) Zoning, special exception, sign, and other permits authorize the permittee to make use of
land and structures in a particular way. Such permits are transferable. However, so long as
the land or structures or any portion thereofcovered under a permit continues to be used for
the purposes for which the permit was granted, then:
b)
No person (including successors or assigns ofthe person who obtained the permit)
may make use of the land or structures covered under such permit for the purposes
authorized in the permit except in accordance with all the terms and requirements of
that permit, and
ii. The terms and requirements of the permit apply to and restrict the use of land or
structures covered under the permit, not only with respect to all persons having any
interest in the property at the time the permit was obtained, but also with respect to
persons who subsequently obtain any interest in all or part of the covered property
and wish to use it for or in connection with purposes other than those for which the
permit was originally issued, so long as the persons who subsequently obtain an
interest in the property had actual or record notice (as provided in Subsection (b)) of
the existence ofthe permit at the time they acquired their interest.
Whenever a zoning, or special exception permit is issued to authorize development (other
than single-family or two-family residences) ona tract ofland in excess ofone acre, nothing
authorized by the permit may be done until the record owner ofthe property signs a written
acknowledgement that the permit has been issued so that the permit may be recorded in the
Indian Head Town Hall and indexed under the record owner's name as grantor.
Section 416. Amendments To And Modifications Of Permits
a) Insignificant deviations from the permit (including approved plans) issued by the board of
appeals or the administrator are permissible and the administrator may authorize such
insignificant deviations. A deviation is insignificant if it has no discernible impact on
neighboring properties, the general public, or those intended to occupy or use the proposed
development.
b) Minor design modifications or changes in permits (including approved plans) are permissible
with the approval ofthe permit -issuing authority. Such permission maybe obtained without
a formal application, public hearing, or payment of any additional fee. For purposes of this
section, minor design modifications or changes are those that have no substantial impact on
neighboring properties, the general public, or those intended to occupy or use the proposed
development.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 11
c) All other requests for changes in approved plans will be processed as new applications. If
such requests are required to be acted upon by the board of appeals, new conditions maybe
imposed, but the applicant retains the right to reject such additional conditions by
withdrawing his request for an amendment and may then proceed in accordance with the
previously issued permit.
d) The administrator shall determine whether amendments to and modifications ofpermits fall
within the categories set forth above in Subsections ( a), ( b), and (c).
e) A developer requesting approval ofchanges shall submit a written request for such approval
to the administrator, and that request shall identify the changes. Approval of all changes
must be given in writing.
Section 417. Reconsideration Of Board Action
a) Whenever the board ofappeals disapproves an application for a special exception permit or a
variance, on any basis other than the failure ofthe applicant to submit a complete application,
such action may not be reconsidered by the respective board at a later time unless the
applicant clearly demonstrates that:
i. Circumstances affecting the property that is the subject of the application have
substantially changed, or
ii. New information is available that could not with reasonable diligence have been
presented at a previous hearing. A request to be heard on this basis must be filed
with the administrator within the time period for an appeal to the Charles County
Circuit Court (see Section 705). However, such a request does not extend the period
within which an appeal must be taken.
b) Notwithstanding Subsection ( a), the board of appeals may at any time consider a new
application affecting the same property as an application previously denied. A new
application is one that differs in some substantialway from the one previously considered.
Section 418. Maintenance Of Common Areas, And Facilities
The recipient of any zoning, special exception, sign, or other permit, or his successor and all property
owners with an interest therein or benefitted thereby, shall be responsible for maintaining all
common areas, improvements, or facilities required by this ordinance or any permit issued in
accordance with its provisions, except those areas, improvements, or facilities with respect to which
an offer of dedication to the public has been accepted by the Town. As illustrations, and without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, this means that private roads and parking areas, water and
sewer lines, and recreational facilities must be properly maintained so that they can be used in the
manner intended, and required vegetation and trees used for screening, landscaping, or shading must
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 12
April, 2004
be replaced if they die or are destroyed.
Section 419. Records of Zoning Administrators
The Zoning Administrator shall keep records of all zoning permits issued under this Ordinance;
maintain permanent and current records related to the Ordinance, including zoning maps,
amendments, special exceptions, variances, appeals, and planned unit development site plans; and
make annual reports and recommendations to the Planning Commission and Town Council on
matters pertaining to this Ordinance.
Section 420. Structures And Uses To Be As Provided In Building Permits, Plans, And
Certificates of Occupancy
Building permits or certificates ofoccupancy issued on the basis ofplans and applications approved
by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such
permits, plans, and certificates, and no other. The use, arrangement or construction at variance with
that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Ordinance.
Part II Special Exception Permits
Section 450. Intent
a) The development and execution ofthis Ordinance are based upon the division of the Town
into districts within which the use of land and buildings and the bulk and location of
buildings and structuresin relation to the land: are substantially uniform., It is recognized,
however, that there are certain uses which, because oftheir unique characteristics, cannot be
properly classified in any particular district or districts without consideration in each case of
the impact ofthose uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use
at the particular location.
b) The intent of this Article is to establish procedures and minimum standards to be used as
guidelines for the consideration and authorization of those uses classified as special
exceptions under the respective District regulations.
c) The granting of a special exception does not exempt the applicant from complying with all
other requirements of this Ordinance or of the law.
Section 451. Initiation of Special Exceptions
Any property owner or other person with an enforceable legal interest in a property may file an
application to use such land for one or more ofthe special exceptions provided in the zoning district
in which the land is located.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 13
Section 452. Application for Special Exception
Such application for special exception shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on a form
prescribed by the Zoning Administrator. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and/ or
data as necessary, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence
showing that the proposed use will conform to the standards hereinafter set forth. Such application
shall be forwarded from the Zoning Administrator to the Board ofAppeals for review and decision
within 45 days of receipt of the application by the Zoning Administrator. The Board of Appeals
shall, within 60 days ofreceipt of application from the Zoning Administrator, render a decision on
the application.
Section 453. Hearing on Application
The Board ofAppeals shall hold a public hearing on each application for a special exception at such
time and place as shall be established by the Board of Appeals after providing public notice as
provided in Article V. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be
preserved in such a manner as the Board of Appeals shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
Section 454. Authorization
For each application for a special exception, the Board ofAppeals shall normally, within sixty (60)
days of receipt of the application, conduct its public hearing and report its findings and decisions,
including the stipulations or additional conditions and guarantees deemed necessary for the
protection.of the public interest.
Section 455. Standards - General
a) " No special exception shall be approved by the Board of Appeals unless such Board shall
find:
i. That the establishment, maintenance, and operation ofthe special exception will not
be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, convenience, morals, order or
general welfare.
ii. That the special exception will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
iii. That the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of any proposed structure
will not be so at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functional
plan of the structures already constructed or in the course of construction in the
immediate neighborhood or the character of the applicable district, as to cause a
substantial depreciation in the property values within the neighborhood.
iv. That adequate utilities, water, sewer or septic system, access roads, storm drainage
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 14
and/ or other necessary public facilities and improvements have been or are being
provided.
v. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
vi. That the proposed special exception is not contrary to the objectives of the current
Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Indian Head.
vii. That the special exception shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located or to the special requirements
established for the specific use.
ix. Conditions and Guarantees. Prior to the granting ofany special exception, the Board
of Appeals shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special exception as is
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance
with the standards and requirements specified in Article XI. In all cases in which
special exceptions are granted, the Board ofAppeals shall require such evidence and
guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in
connection therewith are being and will be complied with. Such proof shall be filed
with the board on or before March 15 of each year. The first filing shall not be made
unless and until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the grant of the
special exception.
Section 456. Effect of Denial of a Special Exception
No application for a Special Exception which has been denied wholly or in part by the Board of
Appeals shall be resubmitted for a period of two (2) years from the date of said order of denial,
except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the
Board of Appeals.
Section 457. Complaints
Notice of complaints received by any representative of the Town concerning the operation of any
special exceptions shall be transmitted promptly to the Zoning Administrator, who will take
appropriate action as provided by law. The complainant shall be notified of the action taken.
Section 458. Revocation ( See Article VII for enforcement provisions.)
a) Failure to Comply with Conditions. Whenever the Zoning Administrator shall find, in the
case of any permit heretofore or hereafter granted pursuant to the provisions of this Article
that any ofthe terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not
being complied with, the board is authorized, after due notice to all parties concerned and
granting full opportunity for a public hearing, to suspend or revoke such permit or take other
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 15
b)
action as it deems necessary to ensure compliance. The board is authorized to request and
obtain investigations and reports as to compliance from such Town or state agencies or
administrative officers as may be appropriate.
Abandonment, etc. Whenever the Zoning Administrator shall determine that a special
exception appears to have been abandoned, that an appoved special exception is not initiated
within one ( 1) year after the date of approval, that its annual proofreferred to above has not
been filed within 45 days of its due date, or that all of the terms and conditions of its grant
are not being complied with, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the board and the Town
attorney's office. Upon receipts of notice of such determination by the Administrator, the
board shall issue an order to show cause why such special exception should not be revoked.
Notice thereof shall be given to the party to whom the special exception has been granted and
to all parties who would be entitled to receive notice of a new application for special
exception concerning the property. The applicant shall have 60 days from the date ofwritten
notice of expiration to file an appeal ofsaid notice.
Section 459. Standards for Specific Special Exceptions
Certain buildings, structures, and uses of land developed as special exceptions are of such
substantially different character from other special exceptions that they require specific and
additional standards to guide the decision of the Board of Appeals. See Article XI for minimum
standards for special exceptions.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 4. 16
ARTICLE V APPEALS, VARIANCES, INTERPRETATIONS
Section 500. Appeals
a) An appeal from any final order or decision ofthe administrator or planning commissionmay
be taken to the board of appeals by any person aggrieved. An appeal is taken by filing with
the administrator and the board of appeals a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds
therefor. Anotice ofappeal shall be considered filed with the administrator and the board of
appeals when delivered to the Town Hall, and the date and time of filing shall be entered on
the notice by the Zoning Administrator.
b) An appeal must be filed within 30 days after the date ofthe decision or order appealed from.
c) Whenever an appeal if filed, the administrator shall transmit to the board of appeals all the
documents constituting the record relating to the action appealed from.
d) An appeal stays all actions by the administrator seeking enforcement ofor compliance with
the order or decision appealed from, unless the administrator certifies to the board ofappeals
that (because offacts stated in the certification) a staywould, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the
board of appeals or a court, issued on application ofthe party seeking the stay, for due cause
shown, after notice to the administrator.
e) The board of appeals may reverse or affirm (wholly or partly) or may modify the order,
requirement or decision or determination appealed from and shall make any order,
requirement, decision or determination that in its opinion ought to be made in the case before
it. To this end, the board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken.
Section 501. Variances
a) An application for a variance shall be submitted to the board of appeals by filing a copy of
the application with the administrator in the Town Hall. Applications shall be handled in the
same manner as applications for zoning permits and special exceptions in conformity with
the provisions of Sections 408, 409, and 410. When the subject property or structure is
located in the Critical Area, a copy of the application shall be provided to the Critical Area
Commission. When the application for a variance seeks a deviation in applicable setbacks
for a non -conforming lot ofrecord the standards set forth in Section 803.B shall apply in lieu
of the following.
b) A variance may be granted by the board of appeals if it concludes that strict enforcement of
the ordinance would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships for the applicant
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 5. 1
and that, by granting the variance, the spirit ofthe ordinance will be observed, public safety
and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. It may reach these conclusions ifit finds:
i. That if the applicant complies strictly with the provisions of the ordinance, he can
make no reasonable use ofhis property,
ii. That special conditions or circumstances exist that are unique to the subject property
or structure and that a literal enforcement ofthe provisions ofthis Ordinance would
result in unwarranted hardship which is not generally shared by owners ofproperty in
the same land use classification.
A. The hardship of which the applicant complains is one suffered by the
applicant rather than by neighbors or the general public,
B. The hardship relates to the applicant's land, rather than personal
circumstances,
C. The hardship is unique, or nearly so, rather than one shared by many
surrounding properties,
D. The hardship is not the result in the applicant's own actions.
iii. That strict enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the
property owner of rights commonly shared by other owners of property in similar
areas.
iv. That the granting of a variance will not confer upon an applicant any special
privilege that would be denied to other owners of like property and/ or
structures within the Zoning District or Critical Area overlay district.
v. That the variance request in not based upon conditions or circumstances
which are self-created or self-imposed, nor does the request arise from
conditions or circumstances either permitted or non -conforming which are
related to adjacent parcels.
vi. That greater profitability or lack of knowledge of the restrictions shall not be
considered as sufficient cause for a variance.
vii. That the proposed variance is consistent with the Town of Indian Head
Comprehensive Plan.
viii. That the variance will neither result in the extension ofa nonconforming situation in
violation ofArticle VIII nor authorize the initiation of a nonconforming use of land.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 5. 2
April, 2004
ix. That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose
andintent ofthis ordinance and the Town' s Critical Area Program and shall not result
in a use not permitted in the zone in which the property subject to variance is located,
and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public
welfare.
c) In granting variances, the board of appeals may impose such reasonable conditions as will
ensure that the use of the property to which the variance applies will be as compatible as
practicable with the surrounding properties. Violations of such conditions, when made part
of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
Ordinance and punishable under Section 703.
d) A variance may be issued for an indefinite duration or for a specified duration only.
e) The nature ofthe variance and any conditions attached to it shall be entered on the face ofthe
zoning permit, or the zoning permit may simply note the issuance ofthe variance and refer to
the written record of the variance for further information. All such conditions are
enforceable in the same manner as any other applicable requirement of this ordinance.
f) In addition to these general requirements, the following additional provisions shall apply to
requests for a variance in the Critical Area Overlay Zone:
Variance requests shall not be granted unless the granting of a variance will not
adversely affect water quality or adversely impact fish, wildlife, or plant habitat
within the Critical Area Overlay Zone, and that the granting ofthe variance will be
consistent with the spirit and intent of the Town's Critical Area Program and
associated ordinances as well as State law and regulations adopted under Subtitle 18
of the Natural Resource Article and COMAR 14. 15.
ii. A variance will not be granted by the Board of Appeals unless and until:
A. A completed application form for a variance is submitted which demonstrates
the applicability ofthe above criteria. In addition, requests for variance in the
Critical Area Overlay Zones shall not be heard unless the State's Critical Area
Commission has received a copy of the variance request at least two weeks
prior to the scheduled public hearing.
B. The Board of Appeals shall find that the reason set forth in the application
justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum
variance that will make possible the reasonable use of land, building, or
structures. In making this determination for variance requests in the Critical
Area Overlay Zone, the Board of Appeals shall consider the following as
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 5. 3
tantamount to a minimum variance:
1. That the granting of a variance to the yard and/ or Buffer requirements
results in new structures or impervious surfaces being located as far
back from mean high water, tidal wetlands, or tributary streams in the
Critical Area as is feasible; and,
2. That the applicant takes steps to mitigate impacts, insofar as possible,
include:
a. Reforestation on the site to offset disturbed forested or
developed woodlands on at least an equal area basis;
b. Afforestation of areas of the site so that at least fifteen ( 15)
percent of the gross site is forested; and,
c. Implementation of any mitigation measures which relate to
Habitat Protection Areas as delineated in the Town's Critical
Area Plan, as required by State agencies, are included as
conditions of approval.
g) When the property or structure subject to a request for a variance is located in the Critical
Area Overlay District, the Board ofAppeals shall notify the Critical Area Commission ofits
findings and decisions to grant or deny the variance.
Section '5.02. Interpretations
a) The board of appeals is authorized to interpret the zoning map and to pass upon disputed
questions oflot or district boundary lines and similar questions. Ifsuch questions arise in the
context of an appeal from a decision of the zoning administrator, they shall be handled as
provided in Section 500.
b) An application for a map interpretation shallbe submitted to the board ofappeals by filing a
copy of the application with the administrator in the Town Hall. The application shall
contain sufficient information to enable the board to make the necessary interpretation.
c) Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
i. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of alleys, streets,
highways, streams, or railroads shall be construed to follow such centerline,
ii. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines, and Town boundary lines
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofindian Head, Maryland 5.4
shall be construed as following such lines, limits or boundaries,
iii. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such
shorelines, and in the event ofchange in the shoreline shall be construed as following
such shorelines,
iv. Where a district boundary divides a lot or where distances are not specifically
indicated on the Official Zoning Map, the boundary shall be determined by
measurement, using the scale of the Official Zoning Map.
v. Where any street or alley is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations
applicable to each parcel ofabutting property shall apply to that portion ofsuch street
or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment.
d) Interpretations ofthe location offloodway and floodplain boundary lines may be made by the
administrator.
Section 503. Requests To Be Heard Expeditiously
The board of appeals shall hear and decide all appeals, variance requests, and requests for
interpretations as expeditiously as possible, consistent with the need to follow regularly established
agenda procedures, provide notice in accordance with Article VI, and obtain the necessary
information to make sound decisions.
Section 504. Burden of Proof in Appeals and Variances
a) When an appeal is taken to the board of appeals in accordance with Section 500, the
administrator shall have the initial burden ofpresenting tothe board sufficient evidence and.
argument to justify the order or decision appealed from. The burden ofpresenting evidence
and argument to the contrary then shifts to the appellant, who shall also have the burden of
persuasion.
b) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the board of appeals to reach the
conclusions set forth in Subsection 501 ( b), as well as the burden of persuasion on those
issues, remains with the applicant seeking the variance.
Section 505. Board Action on Appeals and Variances
a) With respect to appeals, a motion to reverse, affirm, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from shall include, insofar as practicable, a statement of
the specific reasons or findings of facts that support the motion. If a motion to reverse or
modify is not made or fails to receive the majority vote necessary for adoption, then a motion
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 5. 5
to uphold the decision appealed fromshallbe inorder. This motion is adopted as theboard's
decision ifsupported byamajority ofthe board's membership (excluding vacant seats).
b) Amotion to denyavariancemaybemade onthebasis that anyoneormore ofthe criteria set
forth in Subsection 501 ( b) are not satisfied orthat the application is incomplete. Insofaras
practicable, suchamotionshall include a statement ofthespecific reasons or findings offact
tthheatbsouaprpdo'srt it. This motionis adopted as the board's decision ifsupported by amajority of membership (excluding vacant seats).
honing Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 5.6
April, 2004
TICLE VIHEARING PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS
Section 600. Hearing Required on Appeals and Applications
a) Before making a decision on an appeal or an application for a variance, special exception, or
a petition from the planning staff to revoke a special exception, the board of appeals shall
hold a hearing on the appeal or application.
Subject to Subsection (c), the hearing shall be open to the public and all persons interested in
the outcome of the appeal or application shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
and arguments and ask questions ofpersons who testify.
c) The board ofappeals may place reasonable and equitable limitations on the presentation of
evidence and arguments and the cross-examination of witnesses so that the matter at issue
may be heard and decided without undue delay.
d) The board may continue the hearing until a subsequent meeting and may keep the hearing open to take additional information up to the point a final decision is made. No further
notice ofa continued hearing need be published unless a period ofsix weeks or more elapses
between hearing dates.
b)
Section 601. Notice of Hearing
The administrator shall give notice of any hearing required by Section 600 as follows:
i. Notice shall be given to the appellant or applicant and any other person who makes a
written request for such notice by mailing to such persons a written notice not later
than 10 days before the hearing. When lands subject to application of a variance or
special exception are located in the Critical Area, notice shall also be provided to the
Critical Area Commission.
ii. Notice shall be given to neighboring property owners by mailing a written notice not
later than 10 days before the hearing to those property owners which abut the lot that
is the subject ofthe application or appeal. Notice shall also be given by prominently
posting signs in the vicinity ofthe property that is the subject ofthe proposed action.
Such signs shall be posted not less than seven days prior to the hearing.
iii. In the case ofspecial exceptions, notice shall be given to other potentially interested
persons bypublishing a notice one time in a newspaper having general circulation in
the area not less than seven nor more than fifteen days prior to the hearing.
iv. The notice required by this section shall state the date, time, and place ofthehearing,
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 6. 1
April, 2004
reasonably identify the lot that is the subject of the application or appeal, and give a
brief description of the action requested or proposed.
Section 602. Evidence
a) The provisions ofthis section apply to all hearings for which a notice is required by Section
600.
b) All persons who intend to present evidence to the board, rather than arguments only, shall be
sworn.
c) All findings and conclusions necessary to the issuance or denial of the requested permit or
appeal ( crucial findings) shall be based upon reliable evidence. Competent evidence
evidence admissible in a court oflaw) shall be preferred whenever reasonably available, but
in no case may crucial findings be based solely upon incompetent evidence unless competent
evidence is not reasonably available, the evidence in question appears to be particularly
reliable, and the matter at issue is not seriously disputed.
Section 603. Modification of Application at Hearing
a) In response to questions or comments by persons appearing at the hearing or to suggestions
or recommendations by the board of appeals, the applicant may agree to modify his
application, including the plans and specifications submitted.
Unless such modifications are so substantial or extensive that the board cannotreasonably be
expected to perceive the nature and impact of the proposed changes without revised plans
before it, the board may approve the application with the stipulation that the permit will not
be issued until plans reflecting the agreed upon changes are submitted to the planning staff.
b)
Section 604. Record
a) A tape recording shall be made ofall hearings required by Section 600, and such recordings
shall be kept for at least two years. Accurate minutes shall also be kept of all such
proceedings, but a transcript need not be made.
b) Whenever practicable, all documentary evidence presented at a hearing as well as all other
types ofphysical evidence shall be made a part of the record ofthe proceedings and shall be
kept by the Town for at least two years.
Section 605. Written Decision
a) Any decision made by the board of appeals regarding an appeal or variance or issuance or
revocation of a special exception shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant or
Zoning Ordinance
April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 6.2
b)
appellant and all other persons who make a written request for a copy.
In addition to a statement of the board's ultimate disposition of the case and any other
information deemed appropriate, the written decision shall state the board's findings and
conclusions, as well as supporting reasons or facts, whenever this ordinance requires the
same as a prerequisite to taking action.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 6. 3
April, 2004
ARTICLE VII ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW
Building permits or certificates ofoccupancy issued on the basis ofplans and applications approved
by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such
permits, plans, and certificates, and no other. The use, arrangement, or construction at variance with
that authorized shall be deemed a violation ofthis Zoning Ordinance.
Section 700. Complaints Regarding Violations
Whenever the Zoning Administrator receives awritten, signed compliant alleging a violation ofthis
ordinance, he shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the
complainant in writing what actions have been or will be taken.
Section 701. Persons Liable
The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent, or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any
situation that is contrary to the requirements of this ordinance may be held responsible for the
violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided.
Section 702. Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations
a) If the administrator finds that any provision ofthis ordinance is being violated, he shall send
a written notice to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Additional written notices may be
sent at the administrator's discretion.
b) The final written notice (and the initial written notice maybe the final notice) shall state what
action the administrator intends to take ifthe violation is not corrected and shall advise that
the administrator's decision or order may be appealed to the board of appeals in accordance
with Section 500.
c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases when delay would seriously threaten the effective
enforcement of this ordinance or pose a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the
administrator may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the
penalties or remedies authorized in Section 703.
Section 703. Penalties and Remedies for Violations
a) Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance by
constructing or altering any building not in accordance with a plan approved under the
regulations herein, or defaces, removes, or destroys an official warning, safety, or stop work
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 7. 1
sign, or who interferes with or threatens, in any manner, any person engaged in the
performance of a duty required by the terms of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine not to exceed $ 1, 000 per day that the violations
exist, imprisonment or both fine and imprisonment.
b) All other violations of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
requirements shall constitute a municipal infraction. Anyperson who violates this ordinance
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be subject to the penalties specified in
Article 4, Section 1- 37 of the Code of the Town of Indian Head. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense and shall be subject to a separate citation.
Section 704. Permit Revocation
a) A zoning, sign, or special exception permit may be revoked by the permit -issuing authority
in accordance with the provisions ofthis section) ifthe permit recipient fails to develop or
maintain the property in accordance with the plans submitted, the requirements of this
ordinance, or any additional requirements lawfully imposed by the permit -issuing authority.
Before a special exception permit may be revoked, all of the notice and hearing and other
requirements of Article VI shall be complied with. The notice shall inform the permit
recipient of the alleged grounds for the revocation.
b)
The burden ofpresenting evidence sufficient to authorize the permit -issuing authority
to conclude that a permit should be revoked for any of the reasons set forth in
Subsection ( a) shall be upon the party advocating that position. The burden of
persuasion shall also be upon that party.
ii. A motion to revoke a permit shall include, insofar as practicable, a statement ofthe
specific reasons or findings of fact that support the motion.
c) Before a zoning or sign permit may be revoked, the administrator shall give the permit
recipient 10 days notice ofintent to revoke the permit and shall inform the recipient of the
alleged reasons for the revocation and of his right to obtain an informal hearing on the
allegations. If the permit is revoked, the administrator shall provide to the permittee a
written statement of the decision and the reasons therefor.
d) No persons may continue to make use ofland or buildings in the manner authorized by any
zoning, sign, or special exception use permit after such permit has been revoked in
accordance with this section.
Section 705. Judicial Review
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 7.2
April, 2004
a) Every decision ofthe Zoning Administrator and every decision ofthe board ofappeals may
be appealed to the Circuit Court ofCharles County in accordance with the Maryland Rules of
Procedure.
b) Apetition forjudicial review must be filed with the Charles County Clerk ofCourt within 30
days after the later of the following occurrences:
i. A written copy ofthe board's decision (see Section 605) has been filed in the office of
the Town Manager, and
ii. A written copy of the board's decision ( see Section 605) has been delivered by
personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant.
Zoning Ordinance
April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 7.3
ARTICLE VIII NON -CONFORMING SITUATIONS
Section 800. Intent
This Ordinance establishes separate districts, each ofwhich is an appropriate area for the location of
the uses that are permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of
those districts, that nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses, substantially and adversely
affecting the orderly development and taxable value ofother property in the district be permitted to
continue only with restrictions as herein contained. The purpose ofthis Article is to provide for the
restriction ofnonconforming buildings, structures, and uses, and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses shall be permitted to
continue.
Section 801. Definitions
See Article II for basic definitions and Interpretations. Unless otherwise specifically provided or
unless clearly required by the context, the words and phrases defined in this section shall have the
meaning indicated when used in this article.
Section 802. Continuation ofNonconforming Situations and Completion ofNonconforming
Projects
a) Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter and subject to the restrictions and
qualifications set forth in Sections 803 through 808, nonconforming situations that were
otherwise lawful on the effective date ofthis chapter may be continued.
b) Nonconforming projects maybe completed only in accordance with the provisions of Section
808.
Section 803. Nonconforming Lots
a) When a nonconforming lot can be used in conformity with all ofthe regulations applicable to
the intended use, except that the lot is smaller than the required minimums set forth in
Section 1200, then the lot maybe used as proposed just as if it were conforming. However,
no use that requires a greater lot size than the established minimum lot size for a particular
zone is permissible on a nonconforming lot.
b) When the use proposed for a nonconforming lot is one that is conforming in all other respects
but the applicable setback requirements (Section 1203) cannot reasonably be complied with,
then the board ofappeals may allow deviations from the applicable setback requirements if it
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 8. 1
finds that:
i. The property cannot reasonably be developed for the use proposed without such
deviations.
ii. These deviations are necessitated by the size or shape ofthe nonconforming lot, and
iii. The property can be developed as proposed without any significantly adverse impact
on surrounding properties or the public health or safety.
c) For purposes ofSubsection (b), compliance with applicable building setback requirements is
not reasonably possible ifa building that serves the minimal needs of the use proposed for
the nonconforming lot cannot practicably be constructed and located on the lot in conformity
with such setback requirements. However, mere financial hardship does not constitute
grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible.
d) This section applies only to undeveloped nonconforming lots. A lot is undeveloped ifit has
no principal building upon it or if there is a principle building upon it which is physically
unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by a duly
authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason ofphysical condition. Achange in use
of a developed nonconforming lot may be accomplished in accordance with Section 806.
e) If an undeveloped nonconforming lot adjoins and has continuous frontage with one or more
other undeveloped lots under the same ownership, and such lot was created' prior to
November 22, 1992, then neither the owner of the nonconforming lot nor his successors in
interest maytake advantage ofthe provisions ofthis section. This subsection shall not apply
to a nonconforming lot if a majority ofthe developed lots located on either side of the street
where such lot is located and within 500 feet ofsuch lot are also nonconforming. The intent
ofthis subsection is to require nonconforming lots to be combined with other undeveloped
lots to create conforming lots under the circumstances specified herein, but not to require
such combination when that would be out of character with the way the neighborhood has
previously been developed.
f) A single lot or parcel of land in the Critical Area Overlay District that was legally recorded as
ofAugust 3, 1989, may be developed with a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
building, ifthe dwelling was not already placed there not withstanding that such development
may be inconsistent with the density provisions contained in Article XII provided that:
It is on land where development activity has legally progressed to the point of
pouring foundation footings or installation of structural members, prior to August 3,
1989, will be permitted to complete construction as per existing development
approvals.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 8. 2
ii. It is a legal parcel of land not being part of a recorded or approved subdivision that
was recorded as ofDecember 1, 1985, and land that was subdivided into recorded,
legally buildable lots, where the subdivision received the Town' s final approval prior
to June 1, 1984, if:
A. At the time of development, the land is brought into conformance with the
Critical Area Program insofar as possible, including the consolidation or reconfiguration
of lots not individually owned; or
B. The land has received a building permit subsequent to December 1, 1985, but
prior to local critical area program approval bythe Critical Area Commission.
iii. It is on land that was subdivided into recorded, legally buildable lots, where the
subdivision received the Town's final approval between June 1, 1984, and December
1, 1985.
iv. It is on land that was subdivided into recorded, legally buildable lots, where the
subdivision received the Town's final approval after December 1, 1985, provided that
either any such land conforms to the IDA, LDA or RCA requirements in the Critical
Area Overlay District or the area of land is counted against the growth allocation
permitted under this ordinance, or was approved bythe Critical Area Commission at
the time of local program approval..
Section 804. Extension or Enlargement of Nonconforming Situations
a)" `' Except as specifically provided in this section, no person may engage in any activity that
causes an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming situation. In
particular, physical alteration ofstructures or the placement ofnew structures on open land is
unlawful if such activity results in:
i. An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a nonconforming use, or
ii. Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional restrictions such as setback
requirements, height limitations, or densityrequirements or other requirements such
as parking requirements.
b) Subject to Subsection (d), a nonconforming use maybe extended throughout any portion ofa
completed building that, when the use was made nonconforming by this chapter, was
manifestly designed or arranged to accommodate such use. However, subject to Section 808,
a nonconforming use may not be extended to additional buildings or to land outside the
original building.
c) Subject to Section 808, a nonconforming use of open land may not be extended to cover
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 8. 3
April, 2004
more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming, except that a use
that involves the removal ofnatural materials from the lot shall have one ( 1) year to comply
with all sections of this ordinance.
d) The volume, intensity, or frequency of use of property where a nonconforming situation
exists may be increased and the equipment or processes used at a location where a
nonconforming situation exists may be changed if these or similar changes amount only to
changes in the degree of activity rather than changes in kind and no violations of other
paragraphs of this section occur.
e) Notwithstanding Subsection (a), any structure used for single-family residential purposes and
maintained as a nonconforming use maybe enlarged or replaced with a similar structure ofa
larger size, so long as the enlargement or replacement does not create new nonconformities
or increase the extent ofexisting nonconformities with respect to such matters as setback and
parking requirements. This paragraph is subject to the limitations stated in Section 807.
1)
g)
A nonconforming structure may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
Notwithstanding Subsection (a), whenever: (i) there exists a lot with one or more structures
on it, and (ii) a change in use that does not involve any enlargement ofa structure is proposed
for such lot, and ( iii) the parking or loading requirements. of Article XVII that would be
applicable as a result ofthe proposed change cannot be satisfied on such lot because there is
not sufficient area available on the lot that can practicably be used for parking or loading,
then the proposed use shall not be regarded as resulting in an impermissible extension or
enlargement of a nonconforming situation. However, the applicant shall be required to
comply with all applicable parking and loading requirements that can be satisfied without
acquiring additional land, and shall also be required to obtain satellite parking in accordance
with Section 1707 if: (i) parking requirements cannot be satisfied on the lot with respect to
which the permit is required; and ( ii) such satellite parking is reasonably available. If such
satellite parking is not reasonably available at the time the zoning or specia exception use
permit is granted, then the permit recipient shall be required to obtain it if and when it does
become reasonably available. This requirement shall be a continuing condition ofthe permit.
Section 805. Repair, Maintenance, Reconstruction
a) Minor repairs to and routine maintenance ofproperty where nonconforming situations exist
are permitted and encouraged. Major renovation, i.e., work estimated to cost more than 25%
of the appraised valuation of the structure to be renovated may be done only in accordance
with a zoning permit issued pursuant to this section.
b) If a structure located on a lot where a nonconforming situation exists is damaged to an extent
that the costs of repair or replacement would exceed 25% of the appraised valuation of the
damaged structure, then the damaged structure may be repaired or replaced only in
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 8. 4
accordance with a zoning permit issued pursuant to this section. This subsection does not
apply to structures used for single-family residential purposes, which structures may be
reconstructed pursuant to a zoning permit just as they may be enlarged or replaced as
provided in Subsection 804 ( e).
c) For purposes of Subsections (a) and (b):
i. The "cost" ofrenovation or repair or replacement shall mean the fair market value of
the materials and services necessary to accomplish such renovation, repair, or
replacement.
ii. The "cost" ofrenovation or repair orreplacement shall mean the total cost ofall such
intended work, and no person may seek to avoid the intent of Subsections ( a) or (b)
by doing such work incrementally.
iii. The "appraised valuation" shall mean either the appraised valuation for property tax
purposes, updated by the increase in the consumer price index since the date ofthe
last valuation, or the valuation determined by a professionally recognized property
appraiser.
d) . The zoning administrator shall issue a permit authorized by this section if he finds that, in
completing the renovation, repair or replacement work:
i. No violation of Section 804 will occur, and
The permittee will comply to the extent reasonably possible with all provisions of
this chapter applicable to the existing use (except that the permittee shall not lose his
right to continue a nonconforming use).
Compliance with a requirement of this article is not reasonably possible if compliance
cannot be achieved without adding additional land to the lot where the nonconforming
situation is maintained or moving a substantial structure that is on a permanent foundation.
Mere financial hardship caused by the cost ofmeeting such requirements as paved parking
does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible.
Section 806. Change in Use of Property Where a Nonconforming Situation Exists
a) A change in use of property (where a nonconforming situation exists) that requires a new
zoning or special -use permit in accordance with Section 400 may not be made except in
accordance with Subsections (b) through (d). However, this requirement shall not apply if
only a sign permit is needed.
b) If the intended change in use is to a principal use that is permissible in the district where the
property is located, and all ofthe other requirements ofthis chapter applicable to that use can
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 8. 5
April, 2004
c)
be complied with, permission to make the change must be obtained in the same manner as
permission to make the initial use of a vacant lot. Once conformity with this chapter is
achieved, the property may not revert to its nonconforming status.
Ifthe intended change in use is to a principal use that is permissible in the district where the
property is located, but all ofthe requirements of this chapter applicable to that use cannot
reasonably be complied with, then the change is permissible if the zoning administrator
issues a permit authorizing the change. This permit may be issued if the zoning
administrator finds, in addition to any other findings that may be required by this chapter,
that:
i. The intended change will not result in a violation of Section 804, and
ii. Compliance with a requirement of this chapter is not reasonably possible without
adding additional land to the lot where the nonconforming situation is maintained or
without moving a substantial structure that is on a permanent foundation. Mere
financial hardship caused by the cost ofmeeting such requirements as paved parking
does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible. In
no case may an applicant be given permission pursuant to this subsection to construct
a building oradd to an existing building if additional nonconformities would thereby
created.
d) If the intended change in use is to another principal use that is also nonconforming, then the
change is permissible if the zoning administrator issues a permit authorizing the change. The
zoning administrator may issue the permit ifit finds, in addition to other findings that maybe
required by this chapter, it is found that:
i. The use requested is one that is permissible in some zoning district with a zoning or
special exception use permit, and
ii. All of the conditions applicable to the permit authorized in Subsection (c) of this
section are satisfied, and
iii. The proposed development will have less adverse impact on those most affected by it
and will be more compatible with the surrounding neighborhood than the use in
operation at the time the permit is applied for.
Section 807. Abandonment and Discontinuance of Nonconforming Situation
a) When a nonconforming use is discontinued for a consecutive period of365 days, the property
involved may thereafter be used only for conforming purposes.
b) For purposes of determining whether a right to continue a nonconforming situation is lost
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 8. 6
April, 2004
pursuant to this section, all ofthe buildings, activities, and operations maintained on a lot are
generally to be considered as a whole. For example, the failure to rent one apartment in a
nonconforming apartment building for one year shall not result in a loss of the right to rent
that apartment or space thereafter so long as the apartment building as a whole is
continuously maintained. But if a nonconforming use is maintained in conjunction with a
conforming use, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for the required period shall
terminate the right to maintain it thereafter.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 8. 7
April, 2004
TICLE IX
Z ING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
Part I. Zo ng Districts
Section 900. Di cts Established
The incorporated area
R-1", Single -Family R
Residential; "GC", General
districts. The districts shall b
and buildings erected or altere
buildings hereafter erected or stru
intensity of the use of lot areas; and
open spaces with and surrounding such
the Town of Indian Head shall be divided into
idential; " R-2", Single -Family Residenti
ommercial, "TCMX", Town Center Mix
stablished to regulate and restrict t
for specific uses; to regulate
ally altered; to regulate
regulate and determi
uildings.
Section 901. Residential Districts
a) R-1: Single -Family Residential -- Low e sity
6) zoning districts:
RM", Multiple -Family
Use and "OS" Open Space
location oftrades, industries,
d limit the height and bulk of
d limit population density and the
the areas of yards, courts, and other
The intent ofthis district is to provide for low -d=- si single-family detached residences (other than
mobile homes) and supporting uses. This zo e is loc::. ed in areas of the Town where low-density
single-family development patterns are gen: ' ally establi ed or where services and facilities will be
adequate to serve the anticipated populat; • n. This zone i also intended to provide for minor infilling
ofexisting neighborhoods consis nt with their zonin.... d character at the time ofenactment
of this Ordinance. Such neighborh e s ds are relatively uni • rm in character and stable. The
regulations permit future developme consistent with existing c aracter. In general, re -subdivision
of lots in existing subdivisions to eate additional building lots i not permitted.
b) R-2: Single -Family Re „ dential -- Medium Density
The intent of this district is
special exception for mobi
ofthe Town where mediu
where services and faci
intended to provide fo
character at the time
character and stabl
In general, re -sub
permitted.
o provide for medium -density single -f
homes is provided) and supporting uses. T
density single-family development patterns are
ies will be adequate to serve the anticipated popul
inor in -filling of existing neighborhoods consistent
f enactment ofthis Ordinance. Such neighborhoods are r
The regulations permit future development consistent with
ivision of lots in existing subdivisions to create additional bur
ly detached residences ( a
zone is located in areas
enerally established or
ion. This zone is also
ith their zoning and
atively uniform in
isting character.
ing lots is not
Zoning Ordinan e A. il, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.0
ARTICLE IX ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
Part I. Zoning Districts
Section 900. Districts Established
The incorporated area of the Town of Indian Head shall be divided into six (6) zoning districts: "R-
1", Single -Family Residential; " R-2", Single -Family Residential' "RM", Multiple -Family Residential;
GC", General Commercial; " TCMX", Town Center Mixed -Use; and " OS" Open Space districts.
The districts shall be established to regulate and restrict the location of trades, industries, and
buildings erected or altered for specific uses; to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter erected or structurally altered; to regulate and limit population density and the intensity of
the use of lot areas; and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts, and other open spaces
with and surrounding such buildings.
Section 901. Residential Districts
a) R -I : Single -Family Residential -- Low Density
The intent ofthis district is to provide for low-density single-family detached residences (other than
mobile homes) and supporting uses. This zone is located in areas of the Town where low-density
single- family development patterns are generally established or where services and facilities will be
adequate to serve the anticipated population. This zone is also intended to provide for minor infilling
ofexisting neighborhoods consistent with their zoning and character at the time of enactment
of this Ordinance. Such neighborhoods are relatively uniform in character and stable. The
regulations permit future development consistent with existing character. In general, re -subdivision
of lots in existing subdivisions to create additional building lots is not permitted.
b) R-2: Single -Family Residential -- Medium Density
The intent of this district is to provide for medium -density single- family detached residences ( a
special exception for mobile homes is provided) and supporting uses. This zone is located in areas
ofthe Town where medium -density single-family development patterns are generally established or
where services and facilities will be adequate to serve the anticipated population. This zone is also
intended to provide for minor in -filling of existing neighborhoods consistent with their zoning and
character at the time of enactment ofthis Ordinance. Such neighborhoods are relatively uniform in
character and stable. The regulations permit future development consistent with existing character.
In general, re -subdivision of lots in existing subdivisions to create additional building lots is not
permitted.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.0
c) RM: Multi -Family Residential
This zone is primarily for multi -family dwellings and supporting uses at a higher density than is
provided for in either R- 1 or R-2 zones. Within this zone, a variety of housing -types including
single-family, two- family, townhouse, and garden apartments are encouraged in order to provide for
a mix in housing prices, household sizes, age groups, and lifestyles. Residential cluster is
encouraged for development on minimum lot areas to provide for additional open space for common
use by local residents as well as by the adjacent community. Recreation, health, and community
activity facilities for the elderly and handicapped are also encouraged in this zone.
Section 902. Commercial Districts
a) TCMX: Town Center Mixed Use
The intent of this zone is to provide for a wide variety of commercial development and
redevelopment opportunities in areas adjacent to the town center where commercial activities are
generally established, particularly along Rt. 210. A full range of commercial activities to satisfy
basic needs ofarea residents, as well as ofthe Naval Surface Warfare Center, are encouraged. These
uses generally require automobile accessibility in addition to providing for pedestrian access.
Redevelopment, as well as " infill" development and retro -fitting of existing buildings, to foster a
Town Center image" and better quality pedestrian environment are encouraged within the matrix of
existing commercial development. The development of a unified " streetscape" within this zone is
further encouraged.
b) GC: General Commercial
The intent of this zone is to provide for the location of area -wide -oriented business with a variety of
office and commercial uses that are not suitable for location in other zones. This zone serves higher
volume automobile traffic generation commercial uses and allows for more intensive uses than the
TCMX zone. This zone is adjacent to the easterly portions ofthe Rt. 210 corridor and is in locations
where new development can be grouped with existing compatible development.
Section 903. Planned Development Districts
a) TCMX: Town Center Mixed Use
The intent of this zone is to provide for a mixture ofmulti -family residential and commercial. This
zone is intended to promote and enhance a particularly pedestrian -oriented environment and is
designed to permit a mix of uses that can be generally found located in a traditional town center or
neighborhood setting. The zone is to also accommodate auto oriented businesses, but done in a
manner to compliment pedestrian activities. It should encourage both development and
redevelopment and should, where possible, enhance the identity ofthe town waterfront community.
Design principles to be fostered in this district include:
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 1
i. Dwellings, shops and workplaces generally located in close proximity to each other;
the scale ofwhich accommodates and promotes pedestrian travel for trips within the
Town.
ii. Modestly sized buildings fronting on, and aligned with, streets in a disciplined
manner, uninterrupted by parking lots.
iii. A generally rectilinear pattern of streets, alleys and blocks reflecting the street
network ofthe existing Town which provides for a balanced mix of pedestrians and
automobiles.
iv. Squares, greens landscaped streets and parks woven into the street and block patterns
to provide space for social activity, parks and visual enjoyment.
v. Promotion of civic buildings for assembly or other civic purposes.
vi. A recognizable, functionally diverse, visually unified Town center, focused on a
village green or square.
vii. A development size and scale which accommodates and promotes pedestrian travel
rather than vehicle trips within the Town.
The residential/ commercial mixed -uses allowed in this zone are appropriate to encouraging "infill"
development and renovation adjacent to the existing town center at a pedestrian scale. This zone may
also be used to provide for assisted living facilities for the elderly.
Section 904. Floodplain and Floodway Districts
The floodplain and floodway districts are hereby established as " overlay" districts, which means that
these districts are overlaid upon other districts, and the land so encumbered may be used in a manner
permitted in the underlying district only if, and to the extent, such use is also permitted in the
applicable overlay district. The floodplain and floodway districts are further described in Chapter 65
of the Code of the Town of Indian Head.
Section 905. Open Space District
The intent ofthis district is to identify those open spaces within the Town that have been determined
to be significant features of the landscape. By doing so, open spaces within the Town may be
protected from future development and preserved for the enjoyment of the community.
a) The following principal uses shall be allowed in this zone:
i. Public parks, parkways, greenways, trails, playgrounds, golf courses, and the like.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.2
ii. Public zoos, arboretums, exhibits, and libraries.
iii. Public utility installations, flood control works, and the like.
iv. Public cemeteries.
b) The following accessory uses shall be allowed in this zone: uses and structures that are
necessary and desirable adjuncts to permissible uses and structures and are under the
management or control of the Town.
c) There are no minimum lot area or lot width requirements for this zone.
Part II Special Overlay District -- Highway Corridor
Section 930. Purpose
a) The purpose of establishing this overlay district is to: stimulate private sector investment in
the Town ofIndian Head; preserve, protect and enhance the value ofproperties along the Rt.
210 corridor; improve the quality of development and the image of the Rt. 210 corridor as a
good place to live and work by ensuring high standards of construction in all forms of
development; to continually improve the quality of the neighborhoods, housing and
businesses to make the Rt. 210 corridor a location for quality economic development
projects; to ensure that all structures are maintained in a safe, sanitary condition; to prevent
decay and blight and improve and protect the quality and durability of all structures within
the Rt. 210 corridor; assure sound economic development and the expansion of the tax base
to ensure the continued economic vitality of the Town of Indian Head and Rt. 210 corridor;
and protect and/ or enhance the aesthetic and visual character ofthe Town of Indian Head to
provide for the orderly growth and development of the same. The overlay district regulations
are intended to supplement the regulations ofthe underlying zoning districts and to provide
for the harmony and capability of development along the Rt. 210 corridor. All development
proposed within this District shall be subject to those standards pertaining to the particular
base zoning district in which the development occurs. Additionally, the regulations
applicable within the Special Overlay District are intended to:
i. To provide for the continued safe and efficient use of this roadway.
ii. To maintain natural beauty and scenic, cultural, and historic character ofthe
corridor, particularly distinctive views, vistas, and visual continuity.
iii. To prohibit indiscriminate clearing, excessive grading, and clear cutting along
the corridor.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 3
r
iv. To minimize intersection and site access points.
v. To improve and protect the economic value and vitality of the Town center
by encouraging positive visual experiences, with high quality, durable
construction and development within the corridor.
These purposes will be accomplished through evaluation of proposed developments within
this zoning district by and Architectural Review Board ( ARB) which shall review the
location, character and appearance of new development. It is the purpose of such review to
determine, in a cooperative fashion with the applicant, whether a proposed plan meets the
guidelines and other standards of this zoning district. Unless otherwise provided by action of
the Town Council the Planning Commission shall serve as the Architectural Review Board.
b) The Highway Corridor Overlay Zoning District shall include all lands within 500 feet ofeach
side of the center line of Maryland State Route 210. The approximate boundary of the
overlay district shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map and shall be shown as a surveyed
line by the applicant on each property subject to review.
Section 931. Affected Development
a) All development plan applications for development located in the Special Overlay District
shall be reviewed by the Architectural Review Board ( ARB). All changes subject to
approval by the Committee shall receive such approval before proceeding. Ifa portion ofthe
corridor will not be visible from the road once the project is completed, the Committee may
waive review of that portion. The Committee may also review preliminary development
plans or design development drawings at the request of the Planning Commission or the
applicant so that major redesign of final plans by the applicant shall not be necessary.
b) Development Activity Permitted Within The District.
i. There shall be no alteration of the existing condition of the lands, uses or structures
within the Special Overlay District from the date of enactment of this section
henceforth except as provided for by this section or by other sections of this Article.
ii. The overlay district regulations are supplementary to the permitted uses and
requirements for the appropriate underlying zoning district as contained in Article IX
of this ordinance.
c) Development activity prohibited within the district. Uses prohibited in the underlying zoning
district are also prohibited in the overlay district.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.4
Section 932. Tree Protection
a) Development of land for different uses and intensity of uses will oftentimes necessitate the
removal of trees to accommodate roads, parking, buildings, and facilities. It is the expressed
intent ofthis ordinance that every effort be made through the design, layout, and construction
of development projects to incorporate and save as many trees as possible.
b) No person shall cut, destroy, move, or remove any living, disease- free tree of any species
having a trunk with a diameter of eight (8) inches or larger, measured four and one- half (4.5)
feet from the base, in conjunction with any development of land governed by this ordinance
unless and until such removal or destruction has been approved under the provisions of this
ordinance.
c) No person shall cut or clear land oftrees for the sole purpose of offering land for sale. Land
may be underbrushed ( bushhogged) in preparation for sale or development.
d) The clear -cutting of trees is prohibited. The term " clear -cutting" as used herein shall mean
the cutting ofmore than 75 percent of the trees six inches in trunk diameter or larger. Clear -
cutting pursuant to an approved development plan shall require the planting ofreplacement
trees as indicated in the detailed landscape plan accompanying the development application.
e) A survey of all trees of applicable size shall be made and submitted in conjunction with the
development site layout. All trees proposed for removal shall be clearly noted. The tree
survey shall be certified by either a registered land surveyor, registered engineer, or registered
landscape architect.
I) The requirement for a tree survey is waived in the case of golf course construction or when
preliminary site evaluation reveals the ability to accomplish the proposed project without
removal of any trees eight ( 8) inches in diameter or larger. In the latter case, the applicant
shall submit a written statement that no trees will be removed, and his permit will indicate
No Tree Removal as a condition thereof.
g) Removal of endangered or valued trees will not normally be permitted. Trees included in
this category are:
American Elm (Ulmus americana)
American Holly (Ilex opaca)
Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum)
Live Oak (Quercus virginiana)
Loblolly-bay (Gordonia lasianthus)
Pecan ( Carya illinoensis)
Southern Magnolia (Magnolia Grandflora)
Sweet Bay (Magnolia virginiana)
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 5
Tulip Popular (Liriodendron Tulipifera)
American Chestnut ( Castanea Dentata)
h) Considerable damage to or the death of trees may result if more than six (6) inches of soil is
added around the base ofa tree, more than 30 percent of circumferential bark is removed, or
more than 30 percent of the root system is removed. In addition, asphalt paving, building
construction, and soil compaction too close to trees may cause their destruction.
Accordingly, it shall be the responsibility ofthe developer to institute alternative site designs
to assure the best chance of tree survival whenever these criteria cannot be adhered to.
i)
j)
Those trees designated for preservation in accordance with the provisions ofthis ordinance as
shown on the approved landscape plan shall be marked with bright blue ribbons encircling
the tree trunk at a height of four (4) feet above the ground, and a four (4) -foot high barricade
will be constructed around the tree at the drip line prior to the start of construction.
As a condition of approval under this ordinance, the applicant may be required to plant
replacement trees for trees approved for removal as part of the final plan. In requiring
replacement trees, the following will be considered:
i. the intended use of the property;
ii. the existing or pre -development tree coverage, sizes, and types;
iii. the number, size, type, and location of natural trees proposed for preservation by the
applicant;
iv. the grading, road, building, parking, and drainage requirements.
Section 933. Retention of and/or Creation of a Minimum Visual Buffer along the Rt. 210
Corridor Right -of -Way
a) Each approved application for development shall provide a minimum visual buffer between
the right-of-way line of the subject roadway and all proposed structures and parking areas.
The purpose of the minimum visual buffer is to soften the appearance of structures and
parking lots from the road, to screen vehicular headlight glare on and off site, and to lessen
spillover light from on-site lighting. The buffer shall be continuous, except as set forth in (b)
below, and be no less than the requirements for Bufferyard B contained in Article XVIII and
Appendix F depth across the existing right-of-way line or from the new right-of-way line
should the application under consideration be required to or voluntarily provide a dedication
of or easement for proposed roadway purposes. The minimum Bufferyard depth shall not
occur at the high activity areas of a project. These areas include, but are not limited to,
building entrances, drop- offs, and drive-throughs.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 6
To determine the average depth of the minimum visual buffer, measurements shall be taken
at intervals not greater than 10 feet perpendicular to the property line. Side buffer areas
required by other sections of this chapter and deep, narrow land areas shall not be used when
calculating the minimum visual buffer. Where lagoons and drainage swales occur in the
minimum visual buffer because of natural land forms or drainage patterns, additional buffer
depth and vegetation shall be required to augment the screening effect.
b) The intent of the minimum visual buffer is to leave the naturally occurring buffer vegetation
intact for its softening effect. This buffer may be enhanced or created, where such vegetation
is insufficient or non- existent, with trees and shrubs of a variety of species appropriate to
Town character. Ifthe minimum visual buffer already has trees of protected size and species
as noted in Article XVIII, their preservation is required. Where masses of native shrubs are
present, their preservation with minimum disturbance is strongly encouraged. While
complete screening of a project is not required, sufficient plant material shall be installed to
accomplish the softening effect required in ( a) above. In order to maintain the screening
effect, existing vegetation shall not be limbed -up from the ground more than five feet to the
lowest branches. However, if understory planting is planned, existing vegetation may, with
the approval of the Zoning Administrator, be limbed -up to a height that will provide adequate
sunlight to those plants. Minimum height and caliper of new trees shall be consistent with
provisions of the tree protection requirements in (d, ii) above. Minimum height of new
shrubs used to create the minimum visual buffer shall be three feet.
Section 934. Exemptions From Buffer Requirements
Exemptions, whether partial or total, from the bufferyard provisions may be granted if it can be
sufficiently demonstrated that such bufferyard will have a deleterious visual effect upon an existing
situation. The following outlines those anticipated situations where the bufferyard requirement may
be relaxed or removed.
a) Protection of existing visual environment. In the following cases where the characteristics of
the existing visual environment would be detracted from by the provision of a required
bufferyard:
i. Views and Vistas of existing buildings which exhibit a high degree ofaesthetic value
serving to heighten the visual experience, serve as important points of spatial
identification, contain value as important historical resources.
ii. Views and Vistas of existing natural landscape/topographical features ofa particular
locale which correspond to certain high points affording panoramic views, views to
settlement clusters, views of water, valleys, and other elements of the physical
landscape.
iii. Views and Vistas to existing recreational/ open space areas, whether natural or man -
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 7
made, which serve to contribute to the overall visual environment. Uses such as golf -
courses, local parks, cemeteries.
iv. Views and Vistas to which give the observer an awareness of a locations inherent
character related to views of farmland, pastures, water activities, such as docks or
other maritime activities specific to the area.
b) Protection of proposed visual environment. In the following cases, where a proposed
development intended to further enhance or protect the existing visual environment would be
visually affected by the required bufferyard:
i. A proposed development which by virtue of the characteristics of its structures
indicates innovation of design, a unique relationship with the site, represents a focal
point, establishes a particular identifying element for the locale.
ii. A proposed development which exhibits innovative or unique uses of site
landscaping, or which combines in the use of the site open recreational areas such as
described above.
c) Retention of existing natural attributes of the site. In this case, significant steps must be
taken by a developer to preserve significant tree stands, topographic characteristics, even in
the event that such elements are in locations where they are not wholly visible. The intent is
to provide incentives to retain the features of the existing natural environment rather than
encourage its destruction, and then to remedy the situation with new plantings.
d) Management of existing and proposed resources. In order to encourage management
programs for visual natural resources, so that the continuation of such resource is assured,
bufferyard requirements may be reduced or waived.
Section 935. Permitted Activity in Minimum Visual Buffer Before and After Development
a) No existing vegetation of any type, size, or origin shall be altered or removed unless it
satisfies the tree protection requirements of Section 932.
b) Within the minimum visual buffer there shall be no development, clearing, grading, or
construction activity, except for the following:
i. Roadway and/or driveway access to the portion of the site not in the minimum visual
buffer provided that it is approximately perpendicular to right-of-way.
ii. Provision for water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electrical, telephone, natural gas,
cable, etc. service lines provided they are approximately perpendicular to the right -of -
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 8
way. In the event that utilities must be installed approximately parallel to the road
right-of-way, an equal amount of buffer may be required to substitute for the area of
vegetation removal. Permission for easement and right-of-way disturbance and
clearing for such services shall be more favorably considered when such activity is
consolidated with vehicular access routes.
iii. Pedestrian and bicycle paths designed to provide continuous connection along the
road corridor, provided that they can be constructed without materially reducing the
screening and visual softening capacity of the vegetation buffer.
iv. Lighting fixtures only for approved signs or if, for safety reasons, they cannot be
placed outside the buffer and then only when electric utility lines serving these
fixtures and necessary easements can be established and constructed without reducing
the screening and visual softening capacity of the vegetation buffer.
v. Signs in accordance with the sign regulations in Article XVI, only if such signs
cannot be placed outside the buffer.
vi. Clear sight distances at the permitted entrances and exits to any development as
needed to provide for reasonable traffic safety, in accordance with accepted traffic
engineering practices ( see Appendix C).
vii. The addition ofplantings, earth forms, or other visual buffers that, in the opinion of
the Committee, would better achieve the purpose set out in Appendices E and F than
would otherwise be the case.
Section 936. Architectural Review
a) Guidelines. The compatible relationship of architecture along Rt. 210 is ofpublic concern.
The intent of the architectural review is not to stifle innovative architectural design but to
assure respect for, and reduce incompatible and adverse impacts on, the visual experience
from the roadway. To accomplish this, the Architectural Review Board shall use the
following guidelines in reviewing proposed structures, site improvements, signs, and
streetscape improvements:
i. Proposed development shall avoid excessive or unsightly grading, indiscriminate
earth moving or clearing ofproperty, and removal of trees and vegetation that could
cause disruption of natural water courses or disfigure natural land forms.
ii. Proposed development shall be located and configured in a visually harmonious
manner with the terrain and vegetation of the parcel and surrounding parcels.
Structures shall impede, as little as reasonably practical, scenic views from the main
road or from existing structures and the natural environment. Structures shall not
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.9
dominate, by excessive or inappropriate height or mass, any general development,
adjacent building, or natural landscape in an incompatible manner.
iii. The architectural design of structures and their materials and colors shall be visually
harmonious with the overall appearance, history, and cultural heritage of the Town,
with natural land forms and existing vegetation and with other development plans
approved by the Town. Specific consideration shall be given to compatibility with
adjacent properties where such projects demonstrate the Town's character.
A. Large work area doors or open bays shall not open toward or face the
highway.
B. Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment, duct work, air
compressors, other fixed operating machinery shall be either screened from
view or located so that such items are not visible from the highway. Large
trash receptacles, dumpsters, utility meters, above -ground tanks, satellite
dishes, antennas, etc., shall be similarly treated, as practicably as possible.
C. Modular homes and office -type mobile units shall be screened from view
from the highway and equipped with skirting on all sides.
D. All development, including those in which the principal facade is oriented to
the interior of the lot, shall be designed so that all facades visible from the
roadway or from adjacent sites shall be completed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner.
E. No temporary structures are permitted except those used in conjunction with
and during construction projects.
F. Fencing along the highway right-of-way is discouraged, but, if used, such
fencing shall be of quality materials ( brick, stone, wood) and shall be
landscaped to minimize visibility from the highway.
G. Long monotonous facade designs including, but not limited to, those
characterized by unrelieved repetition of shape or form or by unbroken
extension of line shall be avoided.
H. Materials with similar texture and appearance as appropriate to the Town's
character.
I. Generally, no more than three colors per building should be used. Semitransparent
stains are recommended for application on natural wood finishes.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 10
J. The location and dimensions of wall signs shall be indicated and shall
maintain compatibility with architectural features of the building.
K. Architectural lighting shall be recessed under roof overhangs or generated
from concealed source, low level light fixtures.
L. Building massing should reflect proportion and scale appropriate to the
existing Town design.
iv. The landscape plans for the proposed development shall provide visually harmonious
and compatible setting for structures on the same lot and on adjoining or nearby lots
and shall blend with the surrounding landscape. Natural appearing landscape forms
are strongly encouraged; formal plans and the appearance of straight hedges are
discouraged. Landscaping shall be required between buildings and sidewalks,
parking lots and driveways. The scale of the proposed landscaping shall be in
proportion to the building.
v. Site lighting shall be of low -intensity from a concealed source, shall be of a clear
white light that does not distort colors, and shall not spill over into adjoining
properties, buffers, roadways, or in any way interfere with the vision of on -coming
motorists.
vi. To the extent that they relate to aesthetic considerations, the design and construction
techniques of the proposed development shall respond to energy consumption and
environmental quality considerations such as heat loss, heat gain, air emission, and
runoff water quality.
vii. Streetscape Improvements and External Changes.
A. Streetscape improvements include those architectural or functional facilities
or structures that occur on site but are not part of the building and that
encourage and facilitate human interaction with the environment. Examples
include, but are not limited to the following: decorative light fixtures,
fountains, sculpture, benches and tables, planters, retaining walls, pedestrian
and bicycle paths, bicycle parking structure, trash receptacles and enclosures,
vendor areas, bollards, and fences. These improvements shall be designed to
be consistent with all guidelines listed above, and shall be reviewed for
aesthetic functionality and compatibility with the Town's character.
B. Decorative, low-level intensity, non -concealed source lighting that defines
vehicular and/ or pedestrian ways may be acceptable ifpart of a planned unit
lighting master plan. It is strongly discouraged as general lighting for a
development. The master plan must show the relationship ofthe fixtures and
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 11
the light patterns to each other, to the project site, to unit development, and to
the Rt. 210 corridor.
C. External changes to streetscape improvements and existing structures and
sites subject to review by the Committee shall be consistent with all
guidelines and standards in this section. External changes of a minor nature
include external color and structural material changes, parking lot additions
and alterations, relocation of accessory structures, and similar minor changes
as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Some minor external changes
may also require development plan approval ( see Article IV).
viii. Signs, permanent.
A. Applicants for new or replacement signs in the Special Overlay District shall
apply to the Architectural Review Board for review at the time of full
development review or as a separate application.
B. The ARB is hereby authorized to approve or disapprove the appearance of
features of such proposed signs and the Sign Administrator's approval shall
be given only after the Committee's approval is granted. such approval
authority of signs shall not be delegated to any architectural review board.
C. All signs shall meet all requirements of Article XVI.
D. The amount of information on signs shall be no more than is necessary to
provide reasonable identification ofthe name ofthe business to the passerby.
While corporate logos that are part of a business name or business
identification are authorized within Article XVI, color, size, and subject
matter are reviewed under this subsection.
E. An integrated sign system design shall be required for all new Planned
Developments, commercial and residential subdivisions, office complexes,
and shopping centers within the Highway Corridor District. The
establishment of integrated sign systems for existing developments is strongly
encouraged. These systems shall be reviewed for materials, colors, shapes,
sizes, compatibility with architecture, and establishment of unity ofdesign for
the development. Individual signs shall be reviewed for conformance with
such sign systems, whether newly established or existing.
F. Materials, colors, and shapes of proposed signs shall be compatible with the
related building(s). Size and proportions shall not be a dominant feature of
the site and shall be judged by sizes and proportions of signs on adjacent and
nearby properties that are compatible with the Town's character.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 12
G. Spot -lighting of signs shall be restricted to not more than one 150 -watt light
per side for sign faces up to 40 square feet and nor more than two 15 -watt
lights per sign faces over 40 square feet. the sign base and/ or proposed
landscaping shall be designed to shield the light from on -coming motorists
and to conceal the light fixture.
ix. Signs, temporary.
A. Temporary signs within the Special Overlay District shall comply with the
design guidelines set forth in this section for colors and materials and with
Article XVI and shall be reviewed for such compliance by a committee of
staff members including the Zoning Administrator.
B. In the case of multiple principals (for example, owner, developer, architect,
engineer, contractor, or real estate or leasing agent), all information shall be
contained on a single sign not to exceed the maximum size and height
allowed in Article XVI.
C. Temporary signs within the corridor shall not be lighted.
b) Following Project Completion, all design features required by the Town or shown on
approved plans shall be maintained in good condition by all subsequent owners of the
property. Changes proposed shall require approval by the Committee.
Section 937. Performance Incentives
a) The Zoning Administrator shall, as appropriate, approve any individual or combination ofthe
following development bonuses in order to recognize innovative design beyond that required
to comply with the special overlay district regulations and which are considered to better
further the goals for the Town of Indian Head.
i. Floor -to -area ratio increase of up to 0. 5.
ii. Building height increases not to result in a maximum height exceeding 45 feet in R- 1
and R-2 zones, 60 feet in TCMX zones.
iii. Reduced setbacks of up to 25 percent less than those required.
iv. A density bonus of residential development within the TCMX zoning district ofup to
two ( 2) times the allowable residential density for the underlying zoning district,
provided the following criteria is satisfied.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 13
a. The nature of the development must be redevelopment of blighted areas and be
consistent with the Town' s current Comprehensive Plan and in general
Conformance with the Town' s generalized redevelopment document " Indian
Head — New Horizons — The Plan for Future of Downtown."
b. All other zoning requirements for the underlying zoning district shall apply.
c. The Project shall incorporate water conservation techniques in an effort to reduce
water and sewer demands on the Town' s water supply and infrastructure below
that required by Town ordinances and building codes. The goal should be to limit
water and sewer demand to no more than 25% more than the consumption that
would be expected from the density permitted without the bonus. The applicant
shall provide a written report to the Planning Commission as part of the site plan
submittal, detailing the methods intended to achieve the water conservation goal.
The Planning Commission will then make a determination, based on the
information presented by the Applicant, whether the Applicant' s efforts are
commensurate with receiving all or a portion of the density bonus.
d. The project shall incorporate "Green" Building techniques to reduce the negative
impact of buildings and tenant spaces on occupants and the environment. The
goal of reducing the destruction ofnatural areas, reducing air and water pollution,
reducing the depletion of finite resources, creating a healthier and safer indoor
and outdoor environment can be achieved in a number of ways including such
elements as: site selection; community connectivity; protect or restore tree line
and/ or habitats; controlling storm water runoff; reducing light pollution; water
efficient landscaping; energy performance criteria practices; on- site renewable
energy; reuse ofbuilding materials; use of regional materials and service; use of
natural light indoors; use of renewable materials; controllability of light and
thermal comfort to occupants to name a few. The applicant shall provide a
written report to the Planning Commission as part of the site plan submittal,
detailing the methods intended to achieve the desired goal. The Planning
Commission will then make a determination, based on the information presented
by the Applicant, whether the Applicant' s efforts are commensurate with
receiving all or a portion of the density bonus.
b) Performance criteria to be considered in recommending bonuses shall relate reasonably to
the bonuses being approved and shall include the following:
Preserving scenic vistas, including the provision of public observation points. This
incentive is allowed only where a view can be preserved. ( A map indicating
segments ofcorridor along which scenic vistas are prevalent to be kept by the Zoning
Administrator would be an end product of a visual assessment of the corridor.)
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 14
ii. Limiting access to roadways so as to discourage traffic through residential areas, to
encourage the use of combined access points or to encourage the use of service
drives.
iii. Reducing impervious cover by 15 percent or more beyond the minimum standards
allowed by this or other regulations.
iv. Increasing landscaping or setbacks by more than 50 percent; increasing natural areas.
v. Providing mixed- use development, particularly those that include residential uses and
community facilities.
vi. Reducing building mass by breaking up buildings.
vii. Using "pervious pavers" when not receiving impervious cover credit.
viii. Consolidating small lots to create parcels with a minimum of 300 feet of frontage on
a corridor.
ix. Constructing or dedicating public facilities such as parks, roadways and right-of-way,
police, fire, or EMS sites, regional drainage facilities, or other facilities in excess of
that required by this ordinance.
x. Maintaining the construction of all buildings and parking areas on 0- 15 percent
slopes.
xi. Using energy -conserving or water -conserving devices that reduce consumption
below that required by Town ordinances.
xii. Including workforce housing as a substantial component of the density bonus by
developing and implementing strategies and concepts to encourage and promote
occupancy by this segment ofthe community. Workers that comprise this segment of
the community are generally defined as those having an income band between 80 and
120 percent of the median income for Charles County and whose full-time jobs are
vital to the community' s day-to-day functioning; such as, teachers, engineers, police,
firefighters, hospital workers and others who respond first in an emergency.
c) In order to qualify for bonuses under this section, a development shall demonstrate
compliance with at least 50 percent of the above criteria. The use of bonuses is limited to
unusual circumstances which involve:
i. An undue hardship imposed on a tract by the Special Overlay District Regulations or
the cumulative affect of regulations in this ordinance due to the peculiar
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 15
configuration, topography, or location of the tract; or
ii. Demonstration ofhighly innovative architectural, site planning, and land use design
of a caliber not previously used in the Town, and of such a quality as to set an
excellent example for subsequent developments.
Section 938. Access Standards
The Town hereby incorporates by reference the access standards in the County Road Ordinance.
Section 939. Maintenance and Repair Required
All buildings and structures located within the Highway Corridor Overlay District shall be preserved
against decay and deterioration and maintained free from structural defects to the extent that such
decay, deterioration or defects may, in the opinion of the Architectural Review Board, result in the
irreparable deterioration of any exterior appurtenance or architectural feature or produce a
detrimental effect upon the character of the district as a whole or upon the life and character of the
structure itself, including but not limited to:
a) The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
b) The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
c) The deterioration of exterior chimneys;
d) The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster or mortar;
e) The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations, including broken
windows or doors;
f)
g)
The peeling of paint, rotting, holes and other forms of decay;
The lack of maintenance ofthe surrounding environment including fences, gates, sidewalks,
steps, signs, accessory structures and landscaping;
h) The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or
unsafe condition or conditions.
After notice of violation of these provisions by the Architectural Review Board by certified or
registered mail of specific instances of failure to maintain or repair, the owner or person in charge of
said structure shall have 90 days to remedy such violation. Thereafter, each day during which there
exists any violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
provided in Article 7. In the alternative, if the owner fails to act, the ARB may order the Zoning
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 16
Administrator, after due notice to the owner, to enter the property and make or cause to be made such
repairs as are necessary to preserve the integrity and safety of the structure and reasonable cost
thereof shall be placed as a lien against the property.
Section 940. Waivers of Corridor Requirements
The Planning Commission may waive one or more of the specific requirements of the Special
Overlay District upon a showing by the applicant that these corridor regulations impose an undue
hardship due to the peculiar configuration, topography, or location of the tract, or that the proposed
project demonstrates the use of highly innovative architectural, site planning, or land use techniques.
The (commission) may approve any waiver to the minimum extent necessary to allow the project to
be constructed. The applicant for any such waiver shall have the burden of showing that the
proposed project, with such waiver granted, will be as good as or better than a project developed in
compliance with the District regulations in terms of environmental protection, aesthetic
enhancement, land use compatibility, and traffic considerations. The grant or denial of a waiver by
the Commission pursuant to this section may be appealed to the Town Council.
Section 941. Architectural Review Board
a) Applicability. All development proposed in the Special Overlay District and other applicable
projects shall submit an application to the Zoning Administrator for review by the ARB.
Such application shall be reviewed for consistency with the guidelines and standards found in
this Article and according to the submission and review requirements in this article. When a
project lies within the jurisdiction of a homeowners association review board, the ARB shall
receive written notice of any action which may be taken by such homeowners association
review board prior to their review.
b) Requirement of Complete Application; Minimum Items for Review. All applications for
ARB review shall be complete according to the requirements of this article before being
reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for conformance with all standards and guidelines of
this Article. No application shall be reviewed by the ARB until the minimum items of
submission required by this article have been submitted in a format acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator.
c) Application Content. Applications submitted for review by the ARB shall be considered
complete if they conform to all provisions of Article IV, in addition to the information
directly related to those additional provisions to be addressed as part of the special overlay
district review including:
i. tree survey and protection as described in section 932
ii. the boundaries of the Highway Corridor Overlay Zoning District
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 17
iii. required Bufferyard according to Section 933
iv. signage
v. building elevations
vi. proposed streetscape drawings
vii. any additional information for consideration of performance criteria (Section 937).
d) Filing fee in the amount specified.
e) Prior to review by the ARB, written notice of action by the applicable private (APB) shall be
submitted to the Administrator.
Section 942. Plan Review Procedures of Application for Corridor Review
All applications for special Overlay District review shall be submitted and reviewed according to the
procedures set forth in this section.
a) Complete applications shall be submitted not less that 21 days before the ARB meeting at
which the applicant wishes to be reviewed.
b) The ARB shall act on an application within 60 days of its being found complete by the
Zoning Administrator. Failure of the ARB to act within 60 days will make the Planning
Commission responsible for corridor review.
c) Applicants shall be informed in writing ofthe outcome oftheir review. The ARB shall direct
its determination and findings to the Zoning Administrator and the applicant in writing not
more than five working days after taking action.
d) Upon review ofa project within the jurisdiction of a homeowners association review board
the ARB may accept, modify, or deny the homeowners association action.
e) In addition to those items required elsewhere in this article, an application for development
plan approval shall be considered complete by the Zoning Administrator only when the
ARB' s final approval with written recommendations and findings shall be received by the
Zoning Administrator, except when the 60 day period for action has been exceeded.
Section 943. Appeal
The determination made by the Architectural Review Board pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 18
this Article and the standards set forth in Article V of this Ordinance shall be a final determination.
Any applicant aggrieved by the ARB' s determination may appeal such determination as provided in
Article V. An application for appeal shall be filed ( received by the Zoning Administrator or
postmarked) not later than 10 days after the decision being appealed in order to be considered by the
Board of Appeals.
Part III Special Overlay District— Chesapeake Bay Critical Area
Section 950. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to implement the Indian Head Critical Area Program. The provisions
of this district are adopted to manage and regulate land use and foster more sensitive development
activity to accomplish the following:
Conserve fish, wildlife and plant habitat; and
Establish land use policies for development in the district that accommodate growth as well
as address the environmental impacts that the number, movement, and activities of persons
may have in the Critical Area.
Minimize adverse impacts on water quality that result from pollutants that are discharged
from structures or run off from surrounding lands;
This area includes all tributaries to the Chesapeake Bay to the head of tide, tidal wetlands, and all
land and water within 1, 000 feet beyond the landward boundary of these waters and wetlands.
Section 951. Implementation of the Critical Area Provisions
a) Regulated activities and applicability. Any applicant for a permit or license to pursue
activities within the Critical Area, such as development or redevelopment, grading, sediment
and erosion control, timber harvesting, shoreline erosion control, installation of a septic
system and drain field, operation of a waste collection or disposal facility, operation of a
commercial or private marina or other water -related commercial or industrial operation
whether public or private), mining (whether surface or sub -surface) or quarrying, farming or
other agriculturally -related activities shall only have such permits or licenses issued by the
Administrator after review and approval under this Critical Area Program.
b) Responsible agency. All applications for local permits and licenses that are issued by the
Town shall be made to the Zoning Administrator. The Administrator shall make available to
all agencies involved in overseeing regulated activities a set ofmaps showing the location of
all parcels ofland in the Critical Area so that these agencies may identify affected properties
subject to said referrals. Applications for timber harvesting shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 19
subject to said referrals. Applications for timber harvesting shall be reviewed by the
Department of Natural Resources and the District Forestry Board. Applications for mining
and quarrying shall be reviewed by the County Office of Planning and Growth Management
and appropriate State agencies.
c) Process. Upon receiving the referred application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the
application for compliance ofthe proposed activity with the requirements ofthis part (Article
9, Part III) of this ordinance. Applications which involve activities or disturbances which
require notification to the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Commission shall be forwarded to
the Commission for review and comment. If the activity is in compliance with this part then
it shall be approved provided it is in accordance with the provisions contained in Article IV.
If it is not in compliance it shall be returned to the applicant with the reasons cited for noncompliance.
Section 952. Enforcement.
a) Consistency. The Critical Area provisions of this ordinance, in accordance with the
Maryland Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Act and Criteria, and as set out in any other
applicable Town ordinances, supersedes any inconsistent law, ordinance or plan ofthe Town
of Indian Head.
b) Responsible agencies these provisions shall be implemented and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator. Should an infraction of provisions contained in this Critical Area Overlay
District, or under any law, ordinance or plan related to the Town' s Critical Area Program
provisions or requirements, be brought to the attention of any official of the Town, said
official shall immediately contact the Zoning Administrator who may consult with the Town
Attorney to determine the proper remedial course of action. The Zoning Administrator shall
send a copy of his decision to the Critical Area Commission. The Commission, at its
discretion, may also take such remedial action as given it under State law. Penalties and
Remedies for Violations shall be as set forth in Section 703 of this ordinance.
Section 953. Development in the Critical Area Overlay District.
a) General policies. In order to accommodate already existing land uses and growth in the
Town of Indian Head Critical Area while providing for the conservation of habitat and the
protection ofwater quality, the Town has identified three land use management sub -districts
within the Critical Area. The Town has identified each of the three subdistricts within the
Critical Area based on the following criteria and has developed policies and programs to
achieve the objectives as proposed by the Town Program. The Town recognizes the
following three types of development areas:
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.20
i)
Intensely Developed Areas (IDAs);
Limited Development Areas (LDAs); and
Resource Conservation Areas (RCAs).
Intense development should be directed outside of the Critical Area. Future intense
development activities, when proposed in the Critical Area, shall be directed towards
the Intensely Developed Areas.
ii) Additional low intensity development may be permitted in the Limited Development
areas, but shall be subject to strict regulation to prevent adverse impacts on habitat
and water quality.
iii) Development shall be limited in the Resource Conservation Area, which shall be
chiefly designated to protect open space, forestry, fisheries activities, other resource
utilization activities and for habitat protection.
b) Implementation. For purposes of implementing this regulation the Town has determined,
based on land uses and development in existence on December 1, 1985, which land areas fall
within the three types ofland management and development areas described in this program.
c) Activities not permitted except in IDA. Certain new development, redevelopment or
expanded activities or facilities, because oftheir intrinsic nature or because of their potential
for adversely affecting habitats or water quality, may not be permitted in the Critical Area
except in Intensely Developed Areas under regulations of this section and only after the
activity or facility has demonstrated to all appropriate Town and State permitting agencies
that there will be a net improvement in water quality to the adjacent body of water. These
activities include the following:
i) Non -maritime heavy industry;
ii) Transportation facilities and utility transmission facilities, except those necessary to
serve permitted uses, or where regional or interstate facilities must cross tidal waters
utility transmission facilities do not include power plants); or
iii) Permanent sludge handling, storage and disposal facilities, other than those
associated with wastewater treatment facilities. However, agricultural or
horticultural use of sludge under appropriate approvals when applied by an approved
method at approved application rates may be permitted in the Critical Area, except in
the 100 foot -Buffer;
iv) The Town may preclude additional development activities that it considers
detrimental to water quality or fish, wildlife, or plant habitats within the Critical
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.21
Area.
d) Activities not permitted. Certain new development activities or facilities, or the expansion of
certain existing facilities, because of their intrinsic nature or because of their potential for
adversely affecting habitat and water quality, may not be permitted in the Critical Area unless
no environmentally acceptable alternative exists outside the Critical Area, and these
development activities or facilities are needed in order to correct an existing water quality or
wastewater management problem. These include:
i) Solid or hazardous waste collection or disposal facilities, including transfer stations;
or
ii) Sanitary landfills.
f) Continuation of existing permitted facilities. Existing, permitted facilities ofthe type noted
in Section 953 ( d) ( i) and (ii), above shall be subject to the standards and requirements ofthe
Department of the Environment, under COMAR Title 26.
Section 954 Intensely Developed Areas.
a) Intensely Developed Areas ( IDA' s) are those areas where residential, commercial,
institutional, and/ or industrial developed uses predominate and where relatively little natural
habitat occurs. At the time of the initial mapping, these areas shall have had at least one of
the following features:
i) Housing density equal to or greater than four dwelling units per acre;
ii) Industrial, institutional or commercial uses are concentrated in the area; or
iii) Public sewer and water collection and distribution systems are currently serving the
area and housing density is greater than three dwelling units per acre;
iv) In addition, these features shall be concentrated in an area of at least 20 adjacent
acres or that entire upland portion of the Critical Area within the boundary of a
municipality, whichever is less.
b) General policies. The following policies are applicable for Intensely Developed Areas. New
or expanded development or redevelopment shall take place in such a way as to:
i) Improve the quality ofrunoff from developed areas that enters the Chesapeake Bay or
its tributary streams;
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.22
ii) Accommodate additional development of the type and intensity designated by the
Town in this Program provided that water quality is not impaired;
iii) Minimize the expansion of Intensely Developed Areas into portions of the Critical
Area designated as Habitat Protection Areas and Resource Conservation Areas under
this Program;
iv) Conserve and enhance Habitat Protection Areas to the extent possible within
Intensely Developed Areas; and
v) Encourage the use of retrofitting measures to address existing stormwater
management problems.
c) Development standards. The following development standards are hereby adopted for
intensely developed areas:
i) All plans shall be assessed for their impacts on water quality and other biological
resources.
ii) Alterations in the plans shall be made to mitigate any negative impacts.
iii) Urban best management practices shall be considered and, where appropriate,
implemented as part of all plans for development or redevelopment.
iv) Development and redevelopment shall be subject to the Habitat Protection Area
requirements prescribed in Sections 1- 122 through 1- 126 in this ordinance.
v) Stormwater shall be addressed in accordance with the following provisions:
A. The Town shall require, at the time of development or redevelopment, that
technologies as required by applicable State and local ordinances be applied
by anyone undertaking development activities in order to minimize adverse
impacts to water quality caused by stormwater. The technologies shall be
developed in accordance with the guidelines published by the Chesapeake
Bay Critical Area Commission entitled " 10% Rule Compliance - Urban
Stormwater Quality Guidance for Maryland Chesapeake Bay Critical Area."
B. In the case of redevelopment, if these technologies do not reduce pollutant
loadings measured by use of the keystone pollutant method by at least 10
percent below the level ofpollution on the site prior to redevelopment, then
offsets shall be provided.
C. In the case of new development, offsets as determined appropriate by the
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.23
Town shall be used if they reduce pollutant loadings by at least 10 percent of
the pre -development levels.
D. Offsets may be provided either on or off site, provided that water quality
benefits are equivalent, that the benefits are obtained within the same
watershed, and that the benefits can be determined through the use of
modeling, monitoring or other computation of mitigation measures as
specified in the " 10% Rule Compliance - Urban Stormwater Quality
Guidance for Maryland Chesapeake Bay Critical Area" published by the
Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Commission.
vi) If practicable, permeable areas shall be established in vegetation and whenever
possible, redevelopment shall reduce existing levels of pollution.
vii) Areas of public access to the shoreline, such as foot paths, scenic drives and other
public recreational facilities, should be maintained and, if possible, encouraged to be
established within Intensely Developed Areas.
viii) Ports and industries which use water for transportation and derive economic benefits
from shore access shall be located near existing port facilities. The Town may identify
other sites for planned future port facility development and use if this use will provide
significant economic benefit to the State, County or Town and is consistent with the
provisions for Water Dependent Facilities within this overlay district and other State
and Federal regulations.
ix) The Town shall promote with the assistance of State agencies, participation in
programs and activities for the enhancement of biological resources within the Critical
Area for their positive effects on water quality and urban wildlife habitat. These
programs may include urban forestry, landscaping, gardens, wetland and aquatic habitat
restoration elements.
x) To the extent practicable, future development in the Critical Area shall use cluster
development as a means to reduce impervious areas and to maximize areas of natural
vegetation.
xi) When the cutting or clearing of trees in forests and developed woodland areas is
associated with current or planned development activities, the following shall be
required:
A. Participation in programs established by the Town for the enhancement of
forest and developed woodland resources such as programs for urban forestry
for example, street tree planting, gardens, landscaping, Buffer planting);
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.24
B. Development activities shall be designed and implemented to minimize
destruction of forest and woodland vegetation; and
C. Development activities shall address the protection of existing forests and
developed woodlands identified as Habitat Protection Areas in the Habitat
Protection Sections of this ordinance.
d) Public education program. The Town shall use a public education program to alert developers
and property owners to potential impacts, mitigation measures and urban best management
practices that should be considered as part of all intense development activity from individual
dwellings through major development projects.
Section 955. Limited Development Areas.
a) Limited Development Areas are those areas which are currently developed in low or moderate
intensity uses. They also contain areas of natural plant and animal habitats. The quality of
runoff from these areas has not been substantially altered or impaired. At the time ofthe initial
mapping, these areas shall have had at least one of the following features:
i) Housing density ranging from one dwelling unit per 5 acres up to four dwelling units
per acre;
ii) Areas not dominated by agricultural, wetland, forest, barren land, surface water, or
open space;
iii) Areas meeting the conditions of Intensely Developed Area but comprising less than 20
acres;
iv) Areas having public sewer or public water, or both.
b) General policies. The following policies are established within Limited. Development Areas.
New or expanded development or redevelopment shall take place in such a way as to:
i} Maintain, or, if possible, improve the quality of runoff and groundwater entering the
Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries;
ii) Maintain, to the extent practicable, existing areas of natural habitat; and
iii) Accommodate additional low or moderate intensity development if:
A. This development conforms to the development standards in paragraph ( c)
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 25
below; and;
B. The overall intensity of development within the Limited Development Area is
not increased beyond the level established in a particular area so as to change
its prevailing character as identified by density and land use currently
established in the area.
c) Development standards. The following performance standards are hereby adopted for Limited
Development Areas:
i) For all development activities in the Limited Development Areas, the Town shall
require that the applicant identify any environmental or natural feature described
below, and shall meet all of the following standards of environmental protection:
A. Adherence to the provisions of Sections 970 through 974 in this ordinance for
habitat protection in the Critical Area.
B. All roads, bridges, and utilities that must cross a Habitat Protection Area shall
be located, designed, constructed, and maintained so as to provide maximum
erosion protection and minimize negative impacts to wildlife, aquatic life and
their habitats and maintain hydrologic processes and water quality. Roads,
bridges, or utilities may not be located in any Habitat Protection Area unless no
feasible alternative exists.
C. All development activities that must cross or affect streams shall be designed
to:
1. Reduce increases in flood frequency and severity that are attributable to
development;
2. Retain tree canopy so as to maintain stream water temperature within
normal variation;
3. Provide a natural substrate for stream beds; and
4. Minimize adverse water quality and quantity impacts of stormwater.
D. For development activities in RCA and LDA, wildlife corridors shall be
established and used to connect the area left in forest cover with any large
forest tracts which are located outside of the area or property being developed
or subdivided. Forest left in its natural state should be adjacent to larger
forested areas and not left as an isolated island of trees. Planting required as a
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.26
mitigation measure should be adjacent to other habitat. Tree planting which
serves as visual screening or landscaping should not be considered to meet
these requirements.
ii) For the cutting or clearing of trees in forests and developed woodland areas which are
associated with current or planned development activities in a Limited Development
Area, the Town shall:
A. Implement development in accordance with Section , Forest and Woodland
Protection.
B. Require that the applicant consider the recommendations of the Maryland
Department ofNatural Resources when planning development on forested land;
C. Design and implement development activities to minimize the destruction of
woodland vegetation; and
D. Provide protection for forests and developed woodlands identified as Habitat
Protection Areas.
iii) For the alteration offorest and developed woodland in the Limited Development Area,
the Town shall apply all of the following requirements:
A. The total acreage in forest coverage within the Town in the Critical Area shall
be maintained or preferably increased;
B. All forests that are allowed to be cleared or developed shall be replaced in the
Critical Area on not less than an equal area basis;
C. No more than 20 percent of any forest or developed woodland may be removed
from forest use, except as provided in paragraph (c)( iv) below. The remaining
80 percent shall be maintained through recorded, restrictive covenants or
similar instruments approved by the Town Attorney; and
D. Developed woodland vegetation shall be conserved to the greatest extent
practicable.
iv) For replacement of forest and developed woodland, if more than 20 percent is to be
removed from forest use, an applicant may clear or develop not more than 30 percent of
the total forest area provided that the afforested area shall consist of 1. 5 times the total
surface acreage of the disturbed forest or developed woodland area, or both.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.27
v) In addition, applicants shall adhere to the following criteria for forest and woodland
development:
A. A performance bond in an amount determined by the Town to assure
satisfactory replacement as required by paragraphs (c)( iii) and ( c)( iv) above;
B. Grading permits shall be required before forest or developed woodland is
cleared;
C. Forests which have been cleared before obtaining a grading permit or that
exceed the maximum area allowed in (c)( iv) above shall be replanted at three
times the area extent of the cleared forest;
D. If the area extent ofthe site limits the application of the reforestation guidelines
in paragraphs ( c)( iii), ( c)( iv) and ( c)( v) above, alternative provisions or
reforestation guidelines may be permitted by the Town if they are consistent
with the intent of the Forest and Woodland Section of this overlay district to
conserve the forest and developed woodland resources of the Critical Area.
Alternative provisions may include fees -in -lieu provisions or use of a forest
mitigation bank if the provisions are adequate to ensure the restoration or
establishment of an equivalent forest area;
E. If no forest is established on proposed development sites, these sites shall be
planted to provide a forest or developed woodland cover of at least 15 percent
of the site area;
F. All forests designated on development plans shall be maintained to the extent
practicable, through conservation easements, restrictive covenants or other
protective instruments approved by the Town Attorney;
G. The applicant shall designate, subject to the approval ofthe town, a new forest
area on a part of the site not forested; and
H. The afforested area shall be maintained as forest cover through easements,
restrictive covenants or other protective instruments approved by the Town
Attorney.
vi) Development on slopes greater than 15 percent, as measured before development, shall
be prohibited unless the project is the only effective way to maintain or improve the
stability of the slope and is consistent with the policies in paragraph (b) above.
vii) Except as otherwise provided in this sub -section, for stormwater runoff, man -caused
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.28
impervious areas shall be limited to 15 percent of the site.
A. If a parcel or lot of one- half acre or less in size existed on or before December
1, 1985, then man-made impervious surfaces are limited to twenty-five (25%)
of the parcel or lot.
B. If a parcel or lot greater than one- half acre and less than one acre in size existed
on or before December 1, 1985, then man-made impervious surfaces are limited
to fifteen percent ( 15%) of the parcel or lot.
C. If an individual lot one acre or less in size is part of a subdivision approved
after December 1, 1985, then man-made impervious surfaces ofthe lot may not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot, and the total impervious surfaces
of the entire subdivision may not exceed fifteen percent ( 15%).
D. This section does not apply to mobile home parks that were in residential use
on or before December 1, 1985.
E. Impervious surface limits provided in sub -sections A through C above may be
exceeded, upon findings by the Zoning Administrator or his designee that the
following conditions exist:
1. New impervious surfaces on the property have been minimized;
2. For a lot or parcel one- half acre or less in size, total impervious surface
area does not exceed impervious surface limits in Section 955( c)( vii)A
above by more than twenty-five percent (25%) or five hundred square
feet ( 500 square feet), whichever is greater;
3. For a lot or parcel greater than one-half acre and less than one acre in
size, total impervious surface area does not exceed impervious surface
limits in paragraph (c)( vii)B or 5, 445 square feet, whichever is greater;
4. Water quality impacts associated with runoff from new impervious
surfaces can be and have been minimized through site design
considerations or the use of best management practices to improve
water quality; and
5. The property owner performs on-site mitigation to offset potential
adverse water quality impacts from the new impervious surfaces, or the
property owner pays a fee to the Town in lieu of performing the on- site
mitigation. The amount of the fee shall be $ 1. 00 per square foot ofnew
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.29
impervious surface area on the property. The Town shall use all fees
collected under this provision to fund projects that improve water
quality within the Critical Area, consistent with the Town' s Critical
Area Program and Zoning Ordinance.
viii) The Town may allow for modifications in road standards on a case- by-case basis to
reduce potential impacts to the site and Critical Area resources, where the reduced
standards do not significantly affect safety.
ix) To reduce the extent of impervious areas and maximize areas of natural vegetation,
cluster development shall be considered when planning for future development.
x) Development may be allowed on soils having development constraints if the
development includes mitigation measures that adequately address the identified
constraints and that will not have significant adverse impacts on water quality or plant,
fish or wildlife habitat.
d) Complementary State laws and regulations. In applying this Critical Area Program, the Town
refers to all of the following complementary existing State laws and regulations:
i) For soil erosion and sediment control (COMAR 26. 17. 01)
A. In order to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation, a Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan shall be required whenever a development within
the Critical Area will involve any clearing, grading, transporting, or other form
of disturbance to land by the movement of earth. This plan shall be consistent
with the requirements of Natural Resources Article §§8- 1101 - 8- 1108 and
Environment Article §§4- 103 - 4- 108 and 4- 116, Annotated Code ofMaryland
and local ordinances. Sediment control practices shall be appropriately
designed to reduce adverse water quality impacts.
B. The Town requires erosion control as the basis ofsediment control plans within
the Critical Area.
ii) For stormwater runoff (COMAR 26. 17.02)
A. Limitation on Stormwater Runoff - Development may not cause downstream
property, watercourses, channels or conduits to receive stormwater runoff at a
higher volume or rate than would have resulted from a 10 -year storm where the
land is in its pre -development state.
B. Storage Capacity - All stormwater storage facilities shall be designed with
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 30
sufficient capacity to achieve water quality goals of this Section and to
eliminate all runoff caused by the development in excess of that which would
have come from the site if it were in its pre -development state.
C. Stormwater management measures shall be consistent with the requirements of
Environment Article 4- 201 et. seq., Annotated Code of Maryland.
Section 956. Resource Conservation Areas.
a) Description. Areas characterized by nature -dominated environments (that is wetlands, forests,
abandoned fields) and resource -utilization activities ( that is agriculture, forestry, fisheries
activities or aquaculture). At the time ofthe initial mapping, these areas had at least one ofthe
following features:
i) Existing density was less than one dwelling unit per five acres; or
ii) Dominant land use was in agriculture, wetland, forest, barren land, surface water or
open space.
b) Policies. The Towns Critical Area Program hereby incorporates the following policies for
Resource Conservation Areas. New or expanded development or redevelopment in these areas
shall take place in such a way as to:
i) Conserve, protect and enhance the overall ecological values of the Critical Area, its
biological productivity and its diversity;
ii) Provide adequate breeding, feeding and wintering habitats for those wildlife
populations that require the Chesapeake Bay, its tributaries or coastal habitats in order
to sustain populations of those species.
iii) Conserve the land and water resource base that is necessary to maintain and support
land uses such as agriculture, forestry, fisheries activities and aquaculture.
iv) Conserve the existing developed woodlands and forests for the water quality benefits
that they provide.
c) Development standards. The following development standards shall apply in Resource
Conservation Areas:
i) Land use management practices shall be consistent with the policies and criteria for the
Habitat Protection Area Section, the Agriculture Section, and the Forest and
Woodlands Protection Section of this ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 31
ii) Agricultural and conservation easements shall be promoted in Resource Conservation
Areas.
iii) Land within the Resource Conservation Area may be developed for residential uses at a
density not to exceed one dwelling unit per 20 acres. Within this limit of overall
density, minimum lot sizes may be determined by the Town. Such mechanisms as
cluster development, maximum lot size provisions and/ or additional means to maintain
the land area necessary to support the protective uses will be encouraged by the Town
and implemented as necessary.
iv) Existing industrial and commercial facilities, including those that directly support
agriculture, forestry, aquaculture or residential development not exceeding the density
specified in Section 956(c)( iii) above, shall be allowed in Resource Conservation
Areas. Additional land may not be zoned, used or developed for industrial,
commercial, or institutional development, except as provided by the Town' s Growth
Allocation provisions. Non -industrial activities which support surface mining,
agriculture and forestry may be established or expanded provided they conform with
the other requirements of this ordinance.
v) The Town shall ensure that the overall acreage of forest and woodland within the RCA
does not decrease.
vi) Development activity within the Resource Conservation Areas shall be consistent with
the requirements for Limited Development Areas in this chapter as specified in Section
1- 107.
vii) Nothing in this section shall limit the ability of a participant in the Agricultural
Easement Program to convey real property impressed with such an easement to family
members provided that no such conveyance will result in a density greater than one
dwelling unit per 20 acres.
viii) In calculating the 1 - in -20 acre density of development that is permitted on a parcel
located within the resource conservation area, the County may permit the area of any
private wetlands located on the property to be included under the following conditions:
A. The density ofdevelopment on the upland portion of the parcel may not exceed
one dwelling unit per eight acres; and
B. The area of private wetlands shall be estimated on the basis of vegetative
information as designated on the State wetlands maps or by private survey
approved by the Town.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 32
d) Land use in the RCA. In addition to the uses specified above, certain nonresidential uses may
be permitted in Resource Conservation Areas if it is determined by the Zoning Administrator
that the proposed use is one of the following:
i) A home occupation as an accessory use on a residential property and as provided for in
this ordinance;
ii) A golf course, excluding main buildings and/ or structures such as the clubhouse, pro -
shop, parking lot, etc.;
iii) A cemetery that is an accessory use to an existing church;
iv) A bed and breakfast facility located in an existing residential structure and where meals
are prepared only for guests staying at the facility;
v) A gun club or skeet shooting range or similar use, excluding main buildings and/ or
structures, such as a clubhouse, snack bar, etc.;
vi) A day care facility in a dwelling where the operators live on the premises and there are
no more than eight children;
vii) A group home or assisted living facility with no more than eight residents;
viii) Other uses determined by the Town and the Critical Area Commission to be similar to
those listed above.
Section 957. Growth Allocation
a) Description. The upland area of the Town of Indian Head within the Critical Area comprises
about 165 acres. Within the Critical Area, some 141 acres of land were initially classified as
IDA or LDA. The remaining 23 acres were classified as RCA. 9 acres within the Town have
been used for growth allocation since 1985. The State Critical Area Act permits the County to
allocate five ( 5) percent of the County RCA acreage ( approximately 1130 acres) for use for
future growth as either IDA or LDA. This allocation to the County is shared with the Town.
This acreage shall be used for the expansion of existing, or the creation of new, LDAs and
IDAs under the following general guidelines:
i) The total area of expansion ofIntensely Developed or Limited Development Areas, or
both, shall be coordinated with the County but shall not exceed 22 acres or 2% of the
County growth allocation unless the County and Town shall agree to permit additional
lands in the town to be used for growth allocation.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 33
ii) When locating new Intensely Developed or Limited Development Areas the Town shall
use these guidelines:
A. New Intensely Developed Areas should be located in Limited Development
Areas or adjacent to existing Intensely Developed Areas;
B. New Limited Development Areas should be located adjacent to existing
Limited Development Areas or Intensely Developed Areas:
C. No more than one- half of the allocated expansion may be located in Resource
Conservation Areas except as provided in paragraph H below;
D. New Intensely Developed Areas and Limited Development Areas should be
located in order to minimize impacts to Habitat Protection Areas as specified in
this ordinance and in an area and in a manner that optimizes benefits to water
quality;
E. New Intensely Developed Areas should be located where they minimize their
impacts to the defined land uses of the Resource Conservation Area;
F. New Intensely Developed Areas and Limited Development Areas in the
Resource Conservation Area should be located at least 300 feet beyond the
landward edge of tidal wetlands or tidal waters;
G. New Intensely Developed or Limited Development Areas to be located in
Resource Conservation Areas shall conform to all criteria ofthe Town for such
areas, shall be so designated on the Town Zoning Map and shall constitute an
amendment to this program subject to review and approval by the Town
Planning Commission, the Town Council and the Critical Area Commission.
H. If the Town is unable to utilize a portion of its growth allocation as set out in
paragraphs A and B above within or adjacent to existing Intensely Developed
or Limited Development Areas, then that portion of the allocated expansion
which cannot be so located may be located in the Resource Conservation Areas
in addition to the expansion allowed in C above. An applicant shall be required
to cluster any development in an area of expansion authorized under this
paragraph.
Application procedures for requests for growth allocation shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator. Changes within the Critical Area Overlay District
due to use of growth allocation shall be treated as zoning amendments for
floating zones consistent with the provisions of Article XX, Section 2005.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 34
b) Process. Applicants for growth allocation shall submit a request for growth allocation
accompanied by appropriate plans and environmental reports in accordance with the following
process:
i) All applications for growth allocation shall be submitted to the Town Office. Requests
shall be accompanied by a concept plan and appropriate environmental reports and/ or
studies so as to provide sufficient information to permit the Planning Commission to
review the application for consistency with the Towns' Critical Area regulations. The
subdivision history of parcels designated as RCA must be provided as part of the
growth allocation request. The date of December 1, 1985, is the date used for the
original Critical Area mapping and shall be used as a beginning point of analysis.
ii) All applications shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for review and shall
include comments and recommendations from the Town staff. The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the growth allocation request prior to
making a recommendation on the proposal to the Mayor and Council.
iii) The applicant shall address the Planning Commissions comments and
recommendations and may revise the concept plan accordingly. The growth allocation
request shall then be forwarded to the Mayor and Council with a recommendation for
approval or denial from the Planning Commission.
iv) The Mayor and Council shall hold a public hearing prior to approving or denying the
application.
v) The Mayor and Council may establish conditions of approval that are consistent with
the intent of the Town' s Critical Area Program.
vi) Upon approval ofthe growth allocation request by the Town Commissioners, the Town
shall send a request to the Critical Area Commission to award a portion oftheir growth
allocation to the application. Upon receipt of the request from the town, the Critical
Area Commission shall notify the town regarding the processing of the request as an
amendment or refinement to the Town' s Critical Area Program. Refinements shall be
acted on within 30 days of the Commission' s notification to the Town of a complete
submission. Amendments shall be acted on within 90 days of the Commission' s
notification to the Town of a complete submission.
vii) Following approval ofthe growth allocation request by the Critical Area Commission
the Town Commissioners may implement the change, and the applicant may proceed to
the preparation of the final site plan or subdivision plat for recordation. The Town
shall also notify the County in writing.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 35
viii) Prior to approving the final site plan or subdivision plat, thje Planning Commission or
their designee shall ensure that all conditions of approval are incorporate into the final
plan, public works agreement( s) or other instruments as appropriate.
ix) The Town' s official Critical Area maps shall be amended to reflect the new land
classification and a copy of the new map shall be provided to the Critical Area
Commission.
x) A condition ofapproval shall be that Growth Allocation shall be awarded to a specific
project and the projects approved for Growth Allocation be substantially completed
within three ( 3) years of the date of approval. Substantially completed shall be3
determined by the Mayor and Council and is defined as projects in which all public
improvements, such as roads, sewer and/ or water facilities, etc. have been built, as
required by the Town or State.
Section 958. Grandfathering.
a) Continuation of existing uses. The Town shall permit the continuation, but not necessarily the
intensification or expansion, of any use in existence on the date of Program approval, unless
the use has been abandoned for more than one year or is otherwise restricted by the provisions
of Article VIII of this ordinance. If any existing use does not conform with the provisions of
the Program, its intensification or expansion may be permitted only in accordance with the
Variance Procedures outlined in Article V of this ordinance.
b) Residential density. Except as otherwise provided, the Town shall permit the types of land
described in the following subsections to be developed in accordance with density
requirements in effect prior to the adoption of the Critical Area Program notwithstanding the
density provisions of the Program. The Town shall permit a single -lot or parcel of land that
was legally of record on the date of Program approval to be developed with a single-family
dwelling if a dwelling is not already placed there (not withstanding that such development may
be inconsistent with the density provisions of this ordinance) provided that:
i) It is on land where development activity has progressed to the point of the pouring of
foundation footings or the installation of structural members.
ii) It is a legal parcel of land, not being part of a recorded or approved subdivision, that
was recorded as of December 1, 1985 and land that was subdivided into recorded,
legally buildable lots, where the subdivision received the Town' s final approval prior to
June 1, 1984 if:
A. At the time of development, the land is brought into conformance with the
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 36
Critical Area Program insofar as possible, including the consolidation or
configuration of lots not individually owned; or.
B. The land has received a building permit subsequent to December 1, 1985, but
prior to local Program approval.
iii) It is on land that was subdivided into recorded, legally buildable lots, where the
subdivision received the town' s final approval between June 1, 1984 and December 1,
1985; and
iv) It is on land that was subdivided into recorded, legally buildable lots, where the
subdivision received the final approval after December 1, 1985 and provided that either
development of any such land conforms to the IDA, LDA or RCA requirements in this
chapter or the area of the land is counted against the Growth Allocation permitted
under this ordinance, or was approved by the Critical Area Commission at the time of
local Program approval.
c) Consistency. Nothing in this section may be interpreted as altering any requirements for
development activities set out in the Water -Dependent Facilities Section or the Habitat
Protection Section of this ordinance.
Section 959 Intrafamily Transfers
a) Definitions. In this section the following words have the meanings indicated:
i) Bona Fide Intrafamily Transfer" means a transfer to a member of the owner's
immediate family of a portion ofthe owner's property for the purpose ofestablishing a
residence for that family member.
ii) " Immediate Family" means a father, mother, son, daughter, grandfather, grandmother,
grandson or granddaughter.
b) Applicability. The Town shall permit bona fide intrafamily transfers to be made only from
parcels of land that:
c)
i) Were of Record on March 1, 1986; and
ii) Are 7 acres or more and less than 60 acres in size.
Required subdivision. A bona fide intrafamily transfer from a parcel of land shall be a
subdivision ofthe parcel of land that is subject to approval under the Subdivision Regulations
of the Town.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.37
d) Approval of subdivision of parcels. The Town may approve the subdivision ofa parcel ofland
into the number of lots indicated in this subsection by means of a bona fide intrafamily transfer
and may not approve any greater subdivision of the parcel of land or any portion of it as
follows:
i) A parcel that is seven acres or more and less than 12 acres in size may be subdivided
into two lots.
ii) A parcel that is 12 acres or more and less than 60 acres in size may be subdivided into
three lots. The lots may be created at different times.
e) Conditions of approval. As a condition of approval the Town shall require that:
i) Any deed for a lot that is created by a bona fide intrafamily transfer shall contain a
covenant approved by the Town Attorney stating that the lot is created subject to the
provisions ofNatural Resources Article Section 8- 1801, Annotated Code ofMaryland,
and
ii) A lot created by a bona fide intrafamily transfer may not be conveyed subsequently to
any person other than a member of the owner's immediate family, except under
provisions set forth in (f) of this section.
iii) This subsection does not prevent the conveyance of the lot to a third party as security
for a mortgage or deed of trust.
f) Standards and procedures for subsequent conveyance of lots. The following standards and
procedures are established as part ofthis Program to permit the subsequent conveyance of lots
to persons other than immediate family members under certain circumstances. The applicant
shall demonstrate to the Planning Commission that:
i) The lot was created as part ofa bona fide intrafamily transfer and not with the intent of
subdividing the original parcel of land for purposes ofultimate commercial sale; and
ii) A change in circumstances has occurred since the original transfer was made that is not
inconsistent with this subtitle and that warrants an exception; or there, are other
circumstances that are consistent with this Program to maintain land areas necessary to
support the protective uses of agriculture, forestry, open space and natural habitats in
Resource Conservation Areas and thus warrant an exception.
Section 960 Variances.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.38
When implementation of the provisions of Article 9 Part III of this ordinance (Critical Area Overlay
District) would result in an unwarranted hardship to an applicant a variance may be granted. The
provisions, process and standards applicable to granting a Variance within the Critical Area District are
defined in Article 5 of this Ordinance.
Section 961 Critical Area Program Amendments
a) Program amendments. The Town Council may from time to time amend the Town Critical
Area Program. All such amendments shall also be approved by the Critical Area Commission
as established in Section 8- 1809 of the Critical Area Act. No such amendment shall be
implemented without approval ofthe Critical Area Commission. Standards and procedures for
Critical Area Commission approval of proposed amendments are as set forth in the Critical
Area Act Section 8- 1809( i) and Section 8- 1809( d), respectively. In addition, the Planning
Commission and Town Council shall review the entire program and propose any necessary
amendments as required at least every four (4) years.
b) Process. The procedure for amendment ofthe Critical Area Program or provisions applicable
within the Critical Area Overlay District is defined in Article XX of this ordinance. In the case
of any proposed amendment to the Critical Area Program requirements contained within this
ordinance the Town Council shall forward the amendment request to the Critical Area
Commission for final approval.
c) Zoning map amendments. Except for program amendments or program refinements developed
during a four year comprehensive review, a zoning map amendment may only be granted by
the Town Council upon proof of a mistake in the existing zoning. This requirement does not
apply to proposed changes to a zoning map that meet the following criteria:
i) Are wholly consistent with the land classifications in the adopted Program; or
ii) Propose the use of growth allocation in accordance with Section 957 of this ordinance.
Section 962. Water Dependent Facilities.
a) Definition. " Water -dependent facilities" means those structures or works associated with
industrial, maritime, recreational, educational or fisheries activities that require location at or
near the shoreline within the Buffer specified in Section 971 ofthis ordinance. An activity is
water -dependent if it cannot exist outside the Buffer and is dependent on the water by reason of
the intrinsic nature of its operation.
b) Identification. Water dependent facilities include, but are not limited to, ports, the intake and
outfall structures of power plants, water -use industries, marinas and other boat docking
structures, public beaches and other public water -oriented recreation areas, and fisheries
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.39
activities. Excluded from this regulation are individual private piers installed or maintained by
riparian landowners, and which are not part ofa subdivision which provides community piers.
c) Policies. The policies of the Town with regard to water -dependent facilities shall be to limit
development activities in the Buffer to those that are water -dependent and to provide by design
and location criteria that these activities or facilities will have minimal individual and
cumulative impacts on water quality and fish, wildlife, and plant habitat in the Critical Area.
d) Criteria. The following criteria shall apply to new or expanded development activities
associated with water -dependent facilities:
i) New or expanded development activities may be permitted in the Buffer in the
Intensely Developed and Limited Development Areas provided that it can be shown:
A. That they are water -dependent;
B. That the project meets a recognized private right or public need;
C. That adverse effects on water quality, fish, plant and wildlife habitat are
minimized;
D. That, insofar as possible, non -water -dependent structures or operations
associated with water -dependent projects or activities are located outside the
buffer; and
E. That the facilities are consistent with an approved local plan as set forth below.
ii) Except as otherwise provided in this program, new or expanded development activities
may not be permitted in those portions of the Buffer which occur in Resource
Conservation Areas.
e) Implementation. Applicants for new or expanded water -dependent facilities in Intensely
Developed Areas or Limited Development Areas shall set out in the application how the above
requirements are met.
f) Evaluating new and expanded water -dependent facilities. The Town shall evaluate on a case
by case basis all proposals for expansion of existing or new water -dependent facilities. The
Town shall work with appropriate State and federal agencies to ensure compliance with
applicable regulations. The following factors shall be considered when evaluating proposals for
new or expanded water dependent facilities:
i) That the activities will not significantly alter existing water circulation patterns or
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.40
g)
salinity regimes;
ii) That the water body upon which these activities are proposed has adequate flushing
characteristics in the area;
iii) That disturbance to wetlands, submerged aquatic plant beds, or other areas of important
aquatic habitats will be minimized;
iv) That adverse impacts to water quality that may occur as a result ofthese activities, such
as non -point source run-off, sewage discharge from land activities or vessels, or from
boat cleaning and maintenance operations, is minimized;
v) That shellfish beds will not be disturbed or be made subject to discharge that will
render them unsuitable for harvesting;
vi) That dredging shall be conducted in a manner, and using a method which causes the
least disturbance to water quality and aquatic and terrestrial habitats in the area
immediately surrounding the dredging operation or within the critical area, generally;
vii) That dredged spoil will not be placed within the Buffer or elsewhere in that portion of
the Critical Area which has been designated as a Habitat Protection Area except as
necessary for:
A. Backfill for permitted shore erosion protection measures;
B. Use in approved vegetated shore erosion projects;
C. Placement on previously approved channel maintenance spoil disposal areas;
and
D. Beach nourishment.
viii) That interference with the natural transport of sand will be minimized; and
ix) That disturbance will be avoided to historic areas of waterfowl staging and
concentration.
Availability ofinformation. The information necessary for evaluating the above factors, ifnot
available locally, shall be obtained from appropriate State and Federal agencies.
h) Industrial and port -related facilities. New, expanded or redeveloped industrial or port -related
facilities and the replacement of these facilities may be permitted only in those portions of
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 41
i)
Intensely Developed Areas designated as Buffer Exemption Areas in accordance with Section
971 of this ordinance and are subject to the factors set forth in this section.
Marinas and other commercial maritime facilities. New, expanded or redeveloped marinas
may be permitted in the Buffer within Intensely Developed Areas and Limited Development
Areas subject to the requirements set forth in this section. New marinas or related maritime
facilities may not be permitted in the Buffer within Resource Conservation Areas except as
provided in this section. Expansion ofexisting marinas may be permitted by the Town within
Resource Conservation Areas provided that it is sufficiently demonstrated that the expansion
will not adversely affect water quality, and that it will result in an overall net improvement in
water quality at or leaving the site of the marina. New and existing marinas shall meet the
sanitary requirements of the State Department of the Environment as required in COMAR
26.04.02. New marinas shall establish a means of minimizing the discharge of bottom wash
waters into tidal waters.
j) Community piers. New or expanded community marinas and other non-commercial boat -
docking and storage facilities may be permitted in the Buffer subject to the requirements in this
section of the zoning ordinance provided that:
i) These facilities may not offer food, fuel, or other goods and services for sale and shall
provide adequate and clean sanitary facilities;
ii) The facilities are community -owned and established and operated for the benefit of the
residents of a platted and recorded riparian subdivision;
iii) The facilities are associated with a residential development approved by the Town for
the Critical Area and consistent with all State requirements and program requirements
for the Critical Area;
iv) Disturbance to the Buffer is the minimum necessary to provide a single point ofaccess
to the facilities; and
v) If community piers, slips, or moorings are provided as part of the new development,
private piers in the development are not allowed.
k) Number of slips or piers permitted. The number of slips, or piers permitted at the facility shall
be the lesser of (i) or (ii) below:
i) One slip for each 50 feet ofshoreline in the subdivision in the Intensely Developed and
Limited Development Areas and one slip for each 300 feet of shoreline in the
subdivision in the Resource Conservation Area; or
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 42
1)
m)
ii) A density of slips, or piers to platted lots or dwellings within the subdivision in the
Critical Area according to the following schedule:
Platted Lots or Dwellings in the
Critical Area
Slips
up to 15 1 for each lot
16 - 40 15 or 75% whichever is greater
41 - 100 30 or 50% whichever is greater
101 - 300 50 or 25% whichever is greater
over 300 75 or 15% whichever is greater
Public beaches, recreation or education areas. Public beaches or other public water -oriented
recreation or education areas including, but not limited to, publicly owned boat launching and
docking facilities and fishing piers may be permitted in the Buffer in Intensely Developed
Areas. These facilities may be permitted within the Buffer in Limited Development Areas and
Resource Conservation Areas provided that:
i) Adequate sanitary facilities exist;
ii) Service facilities are, to the extent possible, located outside the buffer;
iii) Permeable surfaces are used to the extent practicable, if no degradation ofgroundwater
would result;
iv) Disturbance to natural vegetation is minimized; and
v) Areas for passive recreation, such as nature study, and hunting and trapping, and for
education, may be permitted in the Buffer within Resource Conservation Areas if
service facilities for these uses are located outside of the Buffer.
Research areas. Water -dependent research facilities or activities operated by State, Federal, or
local agencies or educational institutions may be permitted in the Buffer, if non -water -
dependent structures or facilities associated with these project are, to the extent possible,
located outside of the Buffer.
n) Fisheries activities. Lands and water areas with high aquacultural potential will be identified
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.43
by the Town in cooperation with the State when applications for new or expanded fisheries or
aquaculture facilities in these areas are submitted to the Town. These areas are encouraged for
that use and if so used, should be protected from degradation by other types of land and water
use or by adjacent land and water uses. Commercial water -dependent fisheries including, but
not limited to structures for crab shedding, fish off-loading docks, shellfish culture operations
and shore -based facilities necessary for aquaculture operations and fisheries activities may be
permitted in the Buffer in Intensely Developed, Limited Development and Resource
Conservation Areas.
Section 963. Structures on Piers
a) Definition. " Pier" means any pier, wharf, dock, walkway, bulkhead, breakwater, piles or other
similar structure. " Pier" does not include any structure on pilings or stilts that was originally
constructed beyond the landward boundaries of State or private wetlands.
b) Standards. Except as provided in paragraphs (i), ( ii), and ( iii) below, the Town may not issue
a building permit for any project involving the construction of a dwelling unit or other non -
water -dependent structure on a pier located on State or private tidal wetlands within the
Critical Area.
i) The Town may issue a building permit for a project involving the construction of a
dwelling unit or other non -water -dependent- structure on a pier located on State or
private wetlands within the Critical Area that was issued a permit by the Department of
Natural Resources on or before January 1, 1989.
ii) The Town may issue a building permit for a project involving the construction of a
dwelling unit or other non -water -dependent -structure on a pier located on State or
private wetlands within the Critical Area if the following conditions exist:
A. The project is constructed on a pier that existed as of December 1, 1985 that
can be verified by a Department ofNatural Resources aerial photograph dated
1985, accompanied by a map of the area;
B. The project does not require an expansion of the pier greater than 25% of the
area of piers or dry docks removed on the same property; however, additional
expansion may be allowed in the amount of 10% of the water coverage
eliminated by removing complete piers from the same or other properties. If
the horizontal surface of a pier to be removed is not intact, but pilings identify
its previous size, then that area may be used in determining the additional
expansion permitted. The project expansion based on water coverage
eliminated can be considered only if all nonfunctional piers on the property are
removed except for the project pier. The total expansion may not exceed 35%
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.44
of the original size of the piers and dry docks removed;
C. The project is approved by the Zoning Administrator;
D. The project is located in an Intensely Developed Area (IDA) as designated in
programs approved by the Critical Area Commission.
iii) The Town may issue a building permit for the repair of an existing dwelling unit or
other non -water -dependent- structure on a pier located on State or private wetlands
within the Critical Area.
iv) If a structure that is not water -dependent is to be permitted by the Town under the
exceptions included in this Section, an applicant is required to demonstrate that the
project will meet the following environmental objectives using the standards
established under the Town' s Critical Area Program:
A. The construction and operation ofthe project will not have a long term adverse
effect on the water quality of the adjacent body of water;
B. The quality of stormwater runoff from the project will be improved; and
C. Sewer lines or other utility lines extended for the pier will not affect the water
quality of adjoining waters.
Section 964. Shore Erosion Protection Works.
a) Definition. " Shore erosion protection works" means those structures or measures constructed
or installed to prevent or minimize erosion of the shoreline in the Critical Area. The use of
structural devices to protect the shoreline from erosion can result in a significant disturbance to
the aquatic environment and increase erosion downstream. This section sets forth a plan for
limiting the use of structural erosion control devices to only those areas where major erosion
problems exist. As an alternative to structural erosion controls, the Town encourages the use
of non-structural controls such as marsh creation, maintenance of buffer zones, and the
establishment of natural barriers to prevent intrusion on fragile vegetative shoreline. The
criteria set forth in this chapter are not intended to apply to those structures necessarily
associated with water -dependent facilities as discussed in Section 962 of this ordinance.
b) General policies. In protecting shore areas from erosion the Town shall follow these policies:
i) Encourage the protection of rapidly eroding portions of the shoreline in the Critical
Area by public and private landowners;
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.45
ii) Where such measures can effectively and practically reduce or prevent shore erosion,
encourage the use ofnon-structural shore protection measures in order to conserve and
protect plant, fish and wildlife habitat.
iii) Identification. Shoreline areas of the County were surveyed to identify those areas
where erosion was occurring and where erosion control would or would not be needed.
Areas where non- structural erosion control devices could be effectively used were
identified as well as areas where erosion was so severe that only structural measures
could be effectively used to control the erosion. The study considered the following
criteria and shoreline characteristics:
A. Areas where no appreciable erosion appeared;
B. Areas where appreciable erosion appeared and where non-structural measures
would be practical and effective; and
C. Areas where appreciable erosion appeared and where non-structural measures
would not be practical in controlling erosion.
iv) Standards for erosion protection. The Town shall consider the following standards
when evaluating shore erosion control projects:
A. Structural control measures shall only be used in areas where appreciable
erosion occurs and where non-structural measures would not be practical or
effective in controlling erosion.
B. Where structural erosion control is required, the measure that best provides for
conservation offish and plant habitat, and which is practical and effective shall
be used;
C. Non-structural measures shall be utilized in areas of erosion where they would
be a practical and effective method of erosion control;
D. Structural erosion measures shall not be encouraged in areas where no
significant erosion occurs;
E. If significant alterations in the characteristics ofa shoreline occur, the measure
that best fits the change may be used for sites in that area.
F. Any clearing of forest associated with erosion control measures taken shall be
mitigated.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.46
v) Implementation. The Town shall require that each application for shore erosion
protection demonstrate how it complies with the preceding standards.
vi) Shoreline changes. The Town recognizes that storms and other natural events may
change current shoreline erosion patterns. As such, an individual may request the use
of a structural erosion control device in an area currently designated for non- structural
controls. This request must be accompanied by documentation which identifies the
specific location of the site to be protected, and a description of the event or events
which led to the change in the erosion pattern.
vii) Process. The Town, in reviewing any application for a permit for structural erosion
control devices, shall refer the application to the Soil Conservation District and to the
Maryland Department of the Environment for field verification of the need for the
structural erosion control as well as for recommendations on proposed erosion control
mechanisms.
A. Any application made to the Town for the installation of an erosion control
device must, at a minimum, include the following information:
1. Photograph of erosion problem;
2. The specific location of the site on a USGS 7. 5 topographic map;
3. Soil type and erodibility;
4. Proposed and existing land use.
B. Applications must include appropriate authorization from the Maryland
Department of the Environment and the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Section 965. Forest and Woodland Protection.
a) General Policies. The following policies for forest and woodland protection recognize the
value of forested land for its water quality benefits and for habitat protection while
accommodating the utilization of forest resources:
i) Maintain and increase the forested vegetation in the Critical Area;
ii) Conserve forests and developed woodlands and provide for expansion of forested
areas;
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.47
iii) Provide that the removal of trees associated with development activities shall be
minimized and, where appropriate, shall be mitigated; and
iv) Recognize that forests are a protective land use and should be managed in such a
manner so that maximum values for wildlife, water quality, timber, recreation, and
other resources can be maintained, even when they are mutually exclusive.
b) Identification. The Town has identified and mapped forests and developed woodlands within
the Critical Area and has identified and mapped habitat protection areas. More detailed
evaluation of forest resources on specific sites shall be accomplished as part of the
environmental analysis required prior to site plan and subdivision approval.
c) Policies for the Protection of Riparian Forest Habitat. The protection ofriparian habitat shall
be accomplished through the following policies:
i) Vegetation shall be maintained in its natural condition along all streams to provide
wildlife corridors.
ii) A minimum 100 -foot Buffer shall extend landward from the mean high water line of
tidal water, tributary streams and tidal wetlands. This area is to be conserved for
wildlife protection.
iii) Non -tidal wetland forests should be left in a natural state for wildlife and water quality
protection.
iv) Forest areas utilized as breeding areas by forest interior dwelling birds and other
wildlife species ( for example relatively mature forested areas within the Critical Area
of 100 acres or more, or forest connected with these areas) shall be conserved.
iv) Existing riparian forests (for example, those relatively mature forest ofat least 300 feet
in width which occur adjacent to streams, wetlands, or the Bay shoreline and which are
documented breeding areas shall be conserved.
d) Process. If a forest is to be developed, a site- specific field investigation shall be conducted to
determine important sensitive species present and to make sure that appropriate protection
measures are incorporated into the development plan. The Department ofNatural Resources
will make specific recommendations based on an evaluation of the site and the proposed
development. In general, the following measures are recommended:
i) Minimize forest and woodlands disturbance from May through August of each year;
ii) Focus all development on the periphery of the forest or woodlands;
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.48
e)
f)
iii) Retain the forest canopy as well as shrub understory;
iv) Retain snag and mature seed trees as dens for woodpeckers and as nests for bald eagles;
v) Discourage the creation of small clearings and expansion of forest edge habitats; and
vi) Encourage re- establishment of native forests and woodlands.
Policies for the establishment or replacement of forest. The following policies should be used
for afforestation and reforestation:
i) The replacement or establishment of forests or developed woodlands should ensure a
diversified plant community and should include canopy trees, understory trees, shrub
scrub and herbaceous plants;
ii) Native species should be used for all reforestation and afforestation;
Tree cutting in the Buffer. The Buffer shall be managed to achieve or enhance the policies
stated in Section 971. Individual trees may be cut for personal use provided the cutting does
not impair the water quality or existing habitat value or other functions of the Buffer set forth
in Section 971. Cutting or clearing of trees within the Buffer shall be prohibited except that:
i) Cutting of trees or removal of natural vegetation may be permitted where necessary to
provide access to private piers, or to install or construct a shore erosion protection
device or measure, or a water -dependent facility, providing the device, measure or
facility has received all necessary State and Federal permits.
ii) Individual trees may be cut for personal use providing that this cutting does not impair
the water quality or existing habitat value or other functions ofthe buffer as set forth in
the policies of this plan and provided that the trees are replaced on an equal basis for
each tree cut.
iii) Individual trees may be removed which are in danger of falling and causing damage to
dwellings or other structures, or which are in danger offalling and therefore causing the
blockage of streams, or resulting in accelerated shore erosion.
iv) Horticultural practices may be used to maintain the health of individual trees.
v) Other cutting techniques may be undertaken within the Buffer and under the advice and
guidance of the State Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources, if necessary
to preserve the forest from extensive pest or disease infestation or threat from fire.
g) Enforcement. Unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal ofvegetation; unauthorized clearing,
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.49
cutting, or removal of vegetation in the Buffer; and clearing, cutting or removal of vegetation
in excess of the area permitted to be cleared by this ordinance is considered a civil violation of
this ordinance and shall result in fines and mandatory planting. The Zoning Administrator, or
his designee, shall have the authority to issue a citation and is charged with the duty of
enforcing these provisions.
i) For unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal of vegetation that does not exceed the
area that could be authorized in accordance with this ordinance, fines shall be assessed
in the amount of $500 for each occurrence and reforestation shall be required on an
equal area basis if less than 20 percent of the forest cover is removed. For clearing
between 20 percent and 30 percent of the existing forest cover, reforestation shall be
required at 1. 5 times the total surface acreage of forest cleared.
ii) For unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal of vegetation that exceeds the area that
could be authorized in accordance with this ordinance, fines shall be assessed at $500
for each occurrence and reforestation shall be required at 3 times the total surface
acreage of forest cleared.
iii) For unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal of vegetation in the Buffer or another
Habitat Protection Area, fines shall be assessed at $ 1000 for each occurrence and
reforestation shall be required at 3 times the total surface acreage of forest cleared.
iv) When trees or vegetative cover can not be fully replaced on site because of existing
vegetation, existing development, or the size ofthe parcel, then fees -in -lieu ofplanting
may be collected. Fees shall be assessed at $.40 per square foot of required mitigation
or $ 120 per tree.
v) Fines collected from enforcement actions in the Critical Area shall be maintained in a
separate account to be used by the Town for reforestation or other habitat enhancing
efforts.
Section 966. Commercial Timber Harvesting.
a) Policies. A goal of the Critical Area program is to maintain or increase the lands in forest
cover, because forests provide protection of the water quality and habitat values of the
Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries.
b) Procedures. Landowners proposing to harvest timber within any one year interval and
affecting one or more acres in the Critical Area shall submit a " Timber Harvest Plan". This
plan shall be prepared by a registered professional forester. The Timber Harvest Plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 50
c) Timber Harvest Plan contents. Plans shall include measures to protect surface and
groundwater quality and identify whether the activities will disturb or affect Habitat Protection
Areas and shall incorporate protection measures for these areas as specified in later sections of
this ordinance. To provide for the continuity of habitat, the plans shall address mitigation
through forest management techniques which shall include scheduling size, timing and
intensity of harvest cuts, afforestation and reforestation.
d) Sediment Control Plan. Any landowner, who plans to harvest timber on an area which will
disturb 5, 000 square feet or more within the Critical Area Overlay district, including harvesting
on agricultural lands, shall submit a Sediment Control Plan. This plan shall be developed
according to the State guidelines entitled: " Standard Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for
Harvest Operations". The operations shall be implemented in accordance with specifications
set out by the Department of Natural Resources and enforced by the Department of the
Environment.
e) Buffer protection standards for timber harvests. The Buffer shall be managed to achieve the
water quality and habitat functions set forth in Section 971 of this ordinance. Cutting or
clearing of trees within the Buffer shall be prohibited except that:
i) Commercial harvesting oftrees by selection or by the clear cutting ofloblolly pine and
tulip poplar may be permitted to within 50 feet of the landward edge of the mean high
water line oftidal waters and perennial tributary streams, or the edge oftidal wetlands,
provided that this cutting is conducted in conformity with Section 1- 117 of this
ordinance and in conformance with a Buffer Management Plan prepared by a
registered, professional forester and approved by the Maryland Department ofNatural
Resources.
ii) A Buffer Management Plan shall be required for all commercial harvests within the
Buffer, regardless ofthe size ofthe area to be cut, and shall comply with the following
minimum requirements:
A. Disturbance to stream banks and shorelines shall be avoided;
B. Areas disturbed or cut shall be replanted or allowed to regenerate in a manner
that assures the availability of cover and breeding sites for wildlife and reestablishes
the wildlife corridor function of the Buffer;
C. The cutting may not involve the creation of logging roads and skid trails within
the Buffer; and
D. Commercial harvesting practices shall be conducted to protect and conserve the
Habitat Protection Areas in accordance with Sections 971 through Section 975
of this ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 51
iii) Commercial harvesting of trees, by any method, may be permitted to the edge of
intermittent streams provided that the cutting is conducted pursuant to the requirements
of paragraph (e) above.
f) Other requirements. Forest and timbering operations within the Critical Area shall conform to
all other requirements of this ordinance.
Section 967. Agriculture.
a) General policies. The Town shall follow all ofthe following policies with regard to agriculture
in the Critical Area:
i) Assure that agricultural lands are identified and that programs are established for the
Critical Area to maintain, where appropriate, agricultural lands in agricultural use, to
the greatest extent possible.
ii) Recognize that agriculture is a protective land use that should be properly managed so
that it minimizes its contribution to pollutant loadings to the Bay and its tributaries.
iii) Assure that the creation of new agricultural lands is not accomplished:
A. By digging, draining or filling of any nontidal wetlands unless mitigation is
accomplished in accordance with as applicable State and County regulations;
B. By clearing of forests or woodlands on soils with a slope greater than 15
percent; or on soils with a "K" value greater than .35 and slope greater than 5
percent;
C. If the clearing will adversely affect water quality or will destroy plant and
wildlife habitat as defined in this ordinance; or
D. By the clearing of existing natural vegetation within the Buffer as defined in
this ordinance.
iv) Assure that the drainage of non -tidal wetlands for the purpose ofagriculture be done in
accordance with a Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plan, approved by the County
Soil Conservation District.
v) Assure that Best Management Practices for the control of nutrients, animal wastes,
pesticides and sediment runoff be used to protect the productivity of the land base and
enhance water quality. These practices shall minimize contamination of surface and
groundwater and further, shall minimize adverse effects on plants, fish and wildlife
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 52
resources.
vi) Assure that animal feeding operations, including retention and storage ponds, feed lot
waste storage and manure storage minimize the contamination of water bodies.
vii) Assure that agricultural activity permitted within the Critical Area use Best
Management Practices in accordance with a Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plan
approved by the County Soil Conservation District.
b) Identification. The Town' s intent is to maintain agriculture and forestry as viable and
productive land uses. The Town has not developed an Agricultural Protection Plan as part of
the Critical Area Program since no farmland presently exists within the Town. However, if
such plans need to be developed due to annexation of farmland in the future, such a protection
plan will be developed in cooperation with the Soil Conservation Districts, the County
Agricultural Land Preservation Advisory Boards and other appropriate agencies.
c) Standards. The following performance standards shall be adopted for all land in agricultural
use or to be converted to agricultural use within the Critical Area:
i) The Town hereby incorporates the agricultural components ofthe Clean Water Act and
other State and local water quality programs into this ordinance. These components
shall be applicable to any future agricultural activities in the Critical Area.
ii) Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plans and Best Management Practices shall be
developed and implemented for those portions of farms which lie within the Critical
Area. Local farmers shall cooperate with the Charles County Soil Conservation
District for approval of their proposed plans. Landowners who have signed up as
Conservation District operators but who do not have a Conservation Plan prepared for
them by the local Conservation District shall be allowed to continue to farm until a
Conservation Plan is developed provided that the goals ofthis program are being met.
iii) A landowner shall select and implement, with the assistance of a technically trained
soil conservation planner or technician, from among the several best management
practices that minimize impacts to water quality, conserve fish, wildlife, and plant
habitat, and integrate best with the farming operation.
iv) Until such time as the farm plans are developed and implemented, farmers shall as a
part of the program be encouraged to use the following practices:
A. Cover crops shall be planted to reduce erosion.
B. Nutrients shall be applied at the appropriate time and appropriate methods shall
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 53
be used.
C. Reduced tillage (e. g. " no -till) practices shall be utilized where practical.
D. Crop rotations shall be implemented.
d) Agriculture in the Buffer. Agricultural activities are permitted in the Buffer, if, as a minimum
best management practice, a 25 -foot vegetated filter strip measured landward from the mean
high water line of tidal waters or tributary streams ( excluding drainage ditches), or from the
edge of tidal wetlands, whichever is further inland, is established and further provided that:
i) The filter strip shall be composed of either trees with a dense ground cover or a thick
sod of grass and shall be so managed as to provide water quality benefits and habitat
protection consistent with the policies stated above. Noxious weeds, including Johnson
grass, Canada thistle, and multiflora rose, which occur in the filter strip, may be
controlled by authorized means;
ii) The filter strip shall be expanded by a distance of 4 feet for every 1 percent of slope, for
slopes greater than 6 percent;
iii) The 25 -foot vegetated filter strip shall be maintained until such time as the landowner
is implementing, under an approved Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plan, a
program of best management practices for the specific purposes of improving water
quality and protecting plant and wildlife habitat; and provided that the portion of the
Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plan being implemented achieves the water
quality and habitat protection objectives of the 25 -foot vegetated filter strip;
iv) The best management practices shall include a requirement for the implementation of a
grassland and manure management program where appropriate and that the feeding or
watering of livestock, may not be permitted within 50 feet ofthe mean high water line
of tidal water and the edge of the bank of tributary streams and the landward edge of
tidal wetlands within the Critical Area:
v) Clearing of existing natural vegetation in the Buffer is not allowed; and
vi) Farming activities, including the grazing of livestock, shall not disturb stream banks,
tidal shorelines or other Habitat Protection Areas as described in this ordinance.
vii) Where agricultural use of lands within the Buffer ceases and the lands are proposed to
be converted to other uses, the Buffer shall be established. In establishing the Buffer,
management measures shall be undertaken to provide forest vegetation that assures the
Buffer functions set forth in this section of the ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.54
Section 968. Surface Mining in the Critical Area
a) Definition. Surface mining is defined as the breaking of the surface soil in order to extract or
remove minerals in the Critical Area. Surface mining includes any activity or process
constituting all or part of a process for the extraction or removal of minerals from their original
location in the Critical Area and the extraction of sand, gravel, rock, stone, earth or fill from
borrow pits for highway construction purposes or for other facilities. For the purpose of this
section, surface mining is also defined as operations engaged in processing minerals at the site
ofextraction; removal ofoverburden and mining of limited amounts ofany mineral when done
for the purpose of prospecting and to the extent necessary to determine the location, quantity or
quality of any natural deposit; and mining operations, if the affected land exceeds one acre or
more in area.
b) General policies. The Town shall assure that all available measures are taken to protect the
Critical Area from all sources of pollution from surface mining operations including, but not
limited to sedimentation, siltation, chemical and petrochemical use and spillage, and storage
and disposal of waste, dusts and spoils. The Town shall further assure that surface mining is
conducted in a way to permit the reclamation of surface mining sites as soon as possible and to
the extent possible.
c) Mineral Resource Plan and Program. The Town has developed a Mineral Resource Plan and
Program for Management set out below. The following plan and program were developed in
conjunction with the Water Resource Administration ofthe Maryland Department of Natural
Resources and other appropriate agencies.
d) Standards. Surface mining operation permits are issued by the Maryland Department of the
Environment (MDE) and periodic site inspections of permitted areas are made to determine
whether the conditions of the permit and the accompanying Reclamation Plan are being
fulfilled. Permits for surface mining operations in the Town of Indian Head in the Critical
Area shall only be granted if the following conditions are met:
i) A Reclamation Plan shall be submitted as part ofthe permit application which specifies
the use which is proposed to be made of the site following reclamation, the manner in
which that soil and subsoil are to be conserved and restored, the specifications for
surface gradient restoration suitable for the subsequent use, the proposed manner and
type of re -vegetation or other surface treatment of affected areas and an acceptable
schedule to the Town for the implementation ofreclamation measures. Reclamation is
to occur as mining on each segment of a site is completed.
ii) The operation will not have an unduly adverse effect on wildlife, forests, or fresh
water, estuarine or marine fisheries.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 55
iii) The operator has provided applicable permits from all federal, State and local
regulatory agencies responsible for air and water pollution and sediment control.
iv) Adequate consideration shall be given to:
A. The effects of the proposed action on the environment, including adverse and
beneficial environmental effects that are reasonably likely if the proposal is
implemented or if it is not implemented.
B. Measures that might be taken to minimize potential adverse environmental
effects and maximize potential beneficial environmental effects, including
monitoring maintenance, replacement, operation and other follow-up activities.
C. An applicant' s previous experience with similar operations which indicates that
the operation will not result in substantial deposits of sediment in stream beds
or lakes, landslides, or other causes of water pollution.
e) Location of future sites. Presently, no surface mining activities exist in the Town and there are
presently no indications ofdeposits within the corporate limits that suggest their may be future
mining operations. However, the following guidelines will be used to guide the location of any
future proposals for surface mining.
i) New surface mining operations are permitted within the Critical Area provided that
identification of appropriate post -excavation uses for this land such as recreation,
habitat restoration, open space use, or development are accomplished according to the
appropriate land management classification (IDA, LDA or RCA) and other applicable
Town and State codes and ordinances.
ii) Areas such as the following shall not be used for surface mining:
A. Habitat Protection Areas and other important natural resource areas such as
those of scientific value or areas where assemblages of rare species occur;
B. Areas where highly erodible soils exist;
C. Areas where the use ofrenewable resource lands would result in the substantial
loss of long range (25 years or more) productivity of forest and agriculture, or
would result in a degrading of water quality or a loss of vital habitat;
D. Lands that are within 100 feet of the mean high water line of tidal waters, tidal
wetlands, or the edge of streams.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 56
iii) Surface mining operations shall operate under the following conditions:
A. Future wash plants including ponds, spoil piles and equipment may not be
located within the Buffer as defined in this ordinance.
B. Existing wash ponds shall be reclaimed as soon as possible after the cessation
of a sand and gravel operation.
C. To the fullest extent possible, existing sand and gravel operations shall conduct
their extraction activities so as to provide, at a minimum, a 100 -foot Buffer of
natural vegetation between the operation and the mean high water line oftidal
waters or the edges ofstreams and tidal wetlands, whichever is further inland.
Section 969. Natural Parks.
a) Definition. Natural parks are areas of natural habitat that provide opportunities for those
recreational activities that are compatible with the maintenance of natural conditions.
b) Identification. The Town has identified areas within the Critical Area that are appropriate for
natural parks. These areas were not chosen to preserve only natural curiosities, but include
coastal ecosystems that are within the jurisdiction, each with its geological and biological
resources intact.
c) General policies. The Town shall encourage the creation of opportunities for interaction
between people and natural environments without destroying the fragile components ofnatural
habitats. Any plans developed for the use ofparks should recognize that all natural terrain has a
finite capacity to tolerate human disturbances, and, therefore, attention should be given to
limiting the number of park visitors in any park at any one time or in the course of a season.
i) Limit park activities to passive recreation such as hiking , picnicking, fishing, bird
watching, etc. Consider limited hours or park closure, ifnecessary, during the breeding
season of certain species.
ii) Limit development in the park to reduce impacts to sensitive resources. Structures
should be limited to trails, observation blinds, walkways, rest stops, instructional
pavilions, maintenance offices and maintenance equipment storage sheds.
iii) Limit park use during times when plant or wildlife species may be especially sensitive
to disturbance ( i.e. after a heavy rain, a flood, during a drought period or at the
beginning of the growing season).
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 57
Section 970. Habitat Protection.
a) Description. The Habitat Protection Section of the Town of Indian Head Critical Area
Program addresses protection of the following four habitats:
i) The 100 -foot Buffer (Buffer)
ii) Threatened and Endangered Species and Species in Need of Conservation;
iii) Plant and Wildlife Habitat Protection Areas including non -tidal wetlands; and
iv) Anadromous Fish Propagation Waters
b) Identification. Maps illustrating the general location, extent and configuration of Habitat
Protection Areas in the Town are on file at the Town Hall. They will be used to assist property
owners, developers, any person proposing development activity. They will also be used by the
Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission and other agents of the Town government when
reviewing development plans. While these maps give a general indication ofthe area, they do
not excuse any property owner or operator from establishing to the satisfaction ofthe Zoning
Administrator, whether or not the property or activity will affect the element of habitat to be
protected. At the time of development the applicant will be responsible for providing a more
detailed site analysis and inventory.
Section 971. The 100 -foot Buffer.
a) Definition. The Buffer is an existing, naturally vegetated area or an area established in native
vegetation and managed to protect aquatic, wetlands, shoreline and terrestrial environments
from man-made disturbances.
b) Identification ofthe Buffer. The establishment of a minimum 100 -foot Buffer from the mean
high water line of tidal waters, the edge of the bank of tributary streams, and the landward
extent of tidal wetlands shall be required on a site by site basis as part of the environmental
review and site analysis process.
c) General policies. The Town adopts the following policies with regard to the functions of the
Buffer:
i) Provide for the removal or reduction of sediments, nutrients and potentially harmful or
toxic substances in runoff entering the Bay and its tributaries;
ii) Minimize the adverse effects ofhuman activities on wetlands, shoreline, stream banks,
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 58
tidal waters and aquatic resources;
iii) Maintain an area of transitional habitat between aquatic and upland communities;
iv) Maintain the natural environment of streams; and
v) Protect riparian wildlife habitat.
d) Standards. The following criteria apply to land use activities within the Buffer:
i) The Buffer shall be established at a minimum distance of 100 feet landward from the
mean high water line of tidal waters, the edge of the bank of tributary streams and the
landward edge of tidal wetlands within the Critical Area.
ii) The Buffer shall be expanded beyond 100 feet to include areas of steep slopes, hydric
soils or highly erodible soils whose development or disturbance may impact streams,
wetlands or other aquatic environments. In the case ofcontiguous slopes of 15 percent
or greater the Buffer shall be expanded four feet for every one percent of slope or to the
top of the slope, whichever is greater in extent.
iii) New development activities including structures, roads, parking areas and other
impervious surfaces, grading and land disturbance, mining and related facilities or
septic tanks may not be allowed in the Buffer except for those necessarily associated
with Water -Dependent Facilities approved under Sections 962 and 963 of this
ordinance.
iv) The Buffer shall be maintained in natural vegetation, but may include planted
vegetation where necessary to protect, stabilize, or enhance the shoreline. When lands
are proposed to be developed or converted to new uses, the Buffer shall be established.
In establishing the Buffer, management measures shall be undertaken to provide forest
vegetation that assures the Buffer functions set forth in this section.
v) Where site features include cliffs or bluffs within the 100 foot buffer, the minimum
buffer shall be adjusted to 100 feet as measured from the top edge ofsuch cliff or bluff.
e) Agriculture in the Buffer. Agricultural activities are permitted in the Buffer, if, as a minimum
best management practice, a 25 -foot vegetated filter strip measured landward from the mean
high water line of tidal waters or tributary streams ( excluding drainage ditches), or from the
edge of tidal wetlands, whichever is further inland, is established and further provided that:
i) The filter strip shall be composed of either trees with a dense ground cover or a thick
sod of grass and shall be so managed as to provide water quality benefits and habitat
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 59
f)
protection consistent with the policies stated above. Noxious weeds which occur in the
filter strip may be controlled by authorized means;
ii) The filter strip shall be expanded by a distance of four feet for every one percent of
slope, for slopes greater than six percent;
iii) The 25 -foot vegetated filter strip shall be maintained until such time as the landowner
is implementing, under an approved Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plan, a
program of best management practices for the specific purposes of improving water
quality and protecting plant and wildlife habitat; and provided that the portion of the
Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plan being implemented achieves the water
quality and habitat protection objectives of the 25 -foot vegetated filter strip;
iv) The best management practices shall include a requirement for the implementation of a
grassland and manure management program where appropriate and that the feeding or
watering of livestock, may not be permitted within 50 feet of the mean high water line
of tidal water and the edge of the bank of tributary streams and the landward edge of
tidal wetlands within the Critical Area:
v) Clearing of existing natural vegetation in the Buffer is not allowed; and
vi) Farming activities, including the grazing of livestock, shall not disturb stream banks,
tidal shorelines or other Habitat Protection Areas as described in this ordinance.
vii) Where agricultural use of lands within the Buffer ceases and the lands are proposed to
be converted to other uses, the Buffer shall be established. In establishing the Buffer,
management measures shall be undertaken to provide forest vegetation that assures the
Buffer functions set forth in this section of the ordinance.
Timber harvests in the Buffer. The Buffer shall be managed to achieve or enhance the policies
stated in Section 971 ( c). Cutting or clearing of trees within the Buffer shall be prohibited
except that:
i) Commercial harvesting oftrees by selection or by the clearcutting of loblolly pine and
tulip poplar may be allowed to within 50 feet of the landward edge of the mean high
water line oftidal waters and perennial tributary streams, or the edge of tidal wetlands,
provided that this cutting is conducted in conformity with Section 965 ofthis ordinance
and in conformance with a Buffer Management Plan prepared by a registered,
professional forester and approved by the Maryland Department ofNatural Resources.
ii) A Buffer Management Plan shall be required for all commercial harvests within the
Buffer, regardless of the size of the area to be cut, and shall comply with the following
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 60
g)
minimum requirements:
A. Disturbance to stream banks and shorelines shall be avoided;
B. Areas disturbed or cut shall be replanted or allowed to regenerate in a manner
that assures the availability of cover and breeding sites for wildlife and reestablishes
the wildlife corridor function of the Buffer;
C. The cutting may not involve the creation of logging roads and skid trails within
the Buffer; and
D. Commercial harvesting practices shall be conducted to protect and conserve the
Habitat Protection Areas within the Critical Area.
iii) Commercial harvesting of trees, by any method, may be permitted to the edge of
intermittent streams provided that the cutting is conducted pursuant to the requirements
of paragraph (f) above.
Tree cutting in the Buffer. Individual trees may be cut for personal provided the cutting does
not impair the water quality or existing habitat value or other functions ofthe Buffer set forth
in this Section. Cutting or clearing of trees within the Buffer shall be prohibited except that:
i) Cutting oftrees or removal of natural vegetation may be permitted where necessary to
provide access to private piers, or to install or construct a shore erosion protection
device or measure, or a water -dependent facility, providing the device, measure or
facility has received all necessary State and Federal permits.
ii) Individual trees may be cut for personal use providing that this cutting does not impair
the water quality or existing habitat value or other functions ofthe buffer as set forth in
the policies of this plan and provided that the trees are replaced on an equal basis for
each tree cut.
iii) Individual trees may be removed which are in danger of falling and causing damage to
dwellings or other structures, or which are in danger offalling and therefore causing the
blockage of streams, or resulting in accelerated shore erosion.
iv) Horticultural practices may be used to maintain the health of individual trees.
v) Other cutting techniques may be undertaken within the Buffer and under the advice and
guidance of the State Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources, if necessary
to preserve the forest from extensive pest or disease infestation or threat from fire.
h) Buffer Exemption Areas. The Town has not designated and mapped any areas as " Buffer
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.61
i)
Exemption Areas" to date. However, the Town may request Buffer Exemption Area
designation for certain areas by applying to the Critical Area Commission for an amendment to
the Town' s Critical Area Program. Generally, it must be sufficiently demonstrated that the
existing pattern of development in the proposed Buffer Exemption Area prevents the Buffer
from fulfilling the functions set forth in the Section. If a Buffer Exemption Area designation is
requested, the Town will propose other measures for achieving the water quality and habitat
protection objectives of the Buffer policies. The measures must be approved by the
Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Commission.
Enforcement. Unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal ofvegetation; unauthorized clearing,
cutting, or removal of vegetation in the Buffer; and clearing, cutting or removal of vegetation
in excess ofthe area permitted to be cleared by this ordinance is considered a civil violation of
this ordinance and shall result in fines and mandatory planting. The Zoning Administrator, or
his designee, shall have the authority to issue a citation and is charged with the duty of
enforcing these provisions.
i) For unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal of vegetation that does not exceed the
area that could be authorized in accordance with this ordinance, fines shall be assessed
in the amount of $500 for each occurrence and reforestation shall be required on an
equal area basis if less than 20 percent of the forest cover is removed. For clearing
between 20 percent and 30 percent of the existing forest cover, reforestation shall be
required at 1. 5 times the total surface acreage of forest cleared.
ii) For unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal ofvegetation that exceeds the area that
could be authorized in accordance with this ordinance, fines shall be assessed at $500
for each occurrence and reforestation shall be required at 3 times the total surface
acreage of forest cleared.
iii) For unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal of vegetation in the Buffer or another
Habitat Protection Area, fines shall be assessed at $ 1000 for each occurrence and
reforestation shall be required at 3 times the total surface acreage of forest cleared.
iv) When trees or vegetative cover can not be fully replaced on site because of existing
vegetation, existing development, or the size of the parcel, then fees -in. l-ieu ofplanting
may be collected. Fees shall be assessed at $. 40 per square foot ofrequired mitigation
or $120 per tree.
v) Fines collected from enforcement actions in the Critical Area shall be maintained in a
separate account to be used by the Town for reforestation or other habitat enhancing
efforts.
Section 972. Threatened and Endangered Species and Species in Need of Conservation.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 62
a) Definitions. Areas of threatened and endangered species and areas with species in need of
conservation are those areas where these species, as designated by the Secretary of the
Department of Natural Resources, are found or have historically been found and their
surrounding habitats. In this section, the following words have the meanings indicated:
i) " Threatened species" means any species of fish, wildlife, or plants designated as such
by regulation by the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources which appear
likely, within the foreseeable future, to become endangered, including any species of
wildlife or plant determined to be a " threatened" species pursuant to the Federal
Endangered Species Act, 16 USC § 1531 et seq., as amended.
ii) " Endangered species" means any species of fish, wildlife, or plants which have been
designated as such by regulation by the Secretary of the Department of Natural
Resources. Designation occurs when the continued existence ofthese species as viable
components of the State' s resources are determined to be in jeopardy. This includes
any species determined to be an " endangered" species pursuant to the Federal
Endangered Species Act, cited above.
iii) " Species in need of conservation" means those fish and wildlife whose continued
existence as a part ofthe State's resources are in question and which may be designated
by regulation by the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources as in need of
conservation pursuant to the requirements ofNatural Resources Articles, §§10-2A-903
and 4-2A-03, Annotated Code of Maryland.
b) Identification. The approximate location ofthreatened and endangered species and species in
need of conservation are shown on the Town Critical Area program maps filed in the Town
Hall. These maps will be used to assist in the identification of general areas where threatened
and endangered species are located.
c) General policies. The Town shall provide protection for threatened and endangered species,
those species in need of conservation and their habitats which occur in the Critical Area.
d) Standards. The Town shall provide for the protection ofthe known habitats of species in need
of conservation and threatened and endangered species and also habitats of these species that
may be identified in the future. If a development activity is proposed for a site within the
Critical Area, then the Town shall review the proposed activities on a case-by-case basis and
seek technical advice from the Department of Natural Resources. Based on the Departments'
recommendations, additional research and site analysis may be required to identify the location
of threatened and endangered species on a site. If any habitats are identified on a project site,
the applicant shall develop a Habitat Protection Plan to protect and conserve the habitats
identified. This information concerning habitats will be incorporated into the Town' s
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.63
Resource Inventory Maps for future reference.
e) Standards for bald eagle nests. A three zone protection area of 1/ 4 mile ( 1320') in radius
around each Bald Eagle nest shall be established and within the zones the Town shall comply
with the following recommended protection measures:
f)
i) Zone 1 shall include the area extending from the nest out to a radius of 330 feet from
the nest. In this zone timber cutting, land clearing, and development activities are
prohibited. Hiking, fishing, and agricultural activities may be permitted from June 16
to December 14. These activities and human activity in general should not be
permitted in this zone from December 15 to June 15.
ii) Zone 2 extends from the outer limit of Zone 1 to a radius of 660 feet from the nest. In
this zone, major habitat changes should be avoided including clear -cutting, land
clearing, and development activity. Hunting, hiking, fishing, and agricultural activities
may be permitted from June 16 to December 14. These activities and human activity
in general should not be permitted in this zone from December 15 to June 15.
Agricultural activities may be permitted if Department of Natural Resources data
indicate that the nesting eagles are tolerant of these activities. From August 16 to
November 14, selective thinning and maintenance of timber stands and building and
road maintenance may be permitted.
iii) Zone 3 extends from the outer limit of Zone 2 to a radius of 1320 feet from the nest.
Timber cutting, land clearing, and development activities should be restricted from
December 15 to June 15. Other activities in this zone that are within sight ofthe eagles
on the nest may need to be restricted during this time period in accordance with
Department of Natural resources recommendations.
iv) If a Bald Eagle nest has not been used for three successive nesting seasons, then any
protective regulations applied to the specific site may be removed after verification by
the Department of Natural Resources that the nest has been abandoned.
Implementation. The owner of any property containing a portion of, or adjacent to, a habitat of a
threatened or endangered species or a species in need ofconservation, on which a land altering or
land development activity, is proposed shall prepare a Habitat Protection Plan, identifying
appropriate protection measures, and submit this Plan with other project documents to the
Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission prior to approval of the project. The Planning
Commission will request review and comments from the Department of Natural Resources. A
land altering activity shall include, but is not be limited to, such activities as subdivision,
timbering, sand and gravel mining, clearing new farmlands, the construction of homes or
commercial structures.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 64
g) Public notice. The determination of the existence and extent of these habitats and
protection areas shall result from a cooperative effort between the Town and public agencies
or private organizations. Designation of habitat and protective measures may not be
accomplished unless the affected public is given an adequate opportunity to be heard. If
additional habitat areas are designated in the future, as desired by the local government or if
the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources designates additional species and/or
habitat areas, a public hearing, as appropriate, shall be held to consider comments on these
areas and the protection measures proposed. The protection measures shall be adopted
within 12 months of the date of the Secretary' s designation.
i) The establishment of Habitat Protection Areas shall not be intended to restrict or
affect, beyond any existing local, State or Federal laws or regulations or on private
land, any private restrictions, such activities as non-commercial passive recreation
for example, hiking and nature photography), educational pursuits, scientific
observation, or non-commercial hunting, trapping or fishing.
ii) Development activities in areas of threatened or endangered species in need of
conservation may be subject to other provisions and requirements of this program.
Section 973. Plant and Wildlife Habitat and Nontidal Wetlands Protection.
a) Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings indicated:
i) " Plant habitat" means a community of plants commonly identifiable by the
composition of its vegetation and its physiographic characteristics.
ii) " Wildlife habitat" means those plant communities and physiographic features that
provide food, water and cover, nesting, and foraging or feeding conditions necessary
to maintain populations of animals in the Critical Area.
b) Description. The following plant and wildlife habitats shall be identified and protected in the
Critical Area:
i) Colonial water bird nesting sites;
ii) Historic waterfowl staging and concentration areas in tidal waters, tributary streams
or tidal and non -tidal wetlands;
iii) Existing riparian forests (for example: relatively mature forests of at least 300 feet in
width which occur adjacent to streams, wetlands, or the bay shoreline and which are
documented breeding areas);
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 65
iv) Forest areas utilized as breeding areas by forest interior dwelling birds and other
wildlife species ( for example: relatively mature forested areas within the Critical
Area of 100 acres or more, or forest connected with such areas);
v) Other areas which may, in the future, be identified by the State and Federal agencies
as important plant and wildlife habitat areas;
vi) Other plant and wildlife habitats determined to be of local significance; and
vii) Natural Heritage Areas which have been designated;
viii) Non -tidal wetlands.
c) General policies. Town policies regarding plant and wildlife habitat in the Critical Area are
to:
i) Conserve wildlife habitat in the Critical Area;
ii) Protect those wildlife habitats that tend to be least abundant or which may become so
in the future if current land -use trends continue;
iii) Protect those wildlife habitat types which are required to support the continued
presence of various species;
iv) Protect those wildlife habitat types and plant communities which are determined by
the Town to be of local significance; and
v) Protect Natural Heritage Areas;
vi) Protect and conserve non -tidal wetlands.
d) Standards. The Town' s Critical Area Program and ordinance will serve to accomplish the
goals ofthe Critical Area Program to protect water quality and wildlife habitat. In addition to
the standards set forth for the protection ofthe Buffer, the following standards shall apply to
new development or land disturbance in the Critical Area:
i) Any development or significant land use change of a property located within the
Critical Area of Indian Head will require the Town review the proposed activities on
a case- by-case basis and seek technical advice from the Department of Natural
Resources. Based on the Departments' recommendations, additional research and
site analysis may be required to identify the location of threatened and endangered
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 66
species on a site. If any habitats are identified on a project site, the applicant shall
develop a Habitat Protection Plan to protect and conserve the habitats identified.
This information concerning habitats will be incorporated into the Town' s Resource
Inventory Maps for future reference.
ii) The Town may seek additional information and comments from The Department of
Natural Resources and other appropriate agencies and adjacent jurisdictions.
iii) Rough areas, e. g., depressions, swales, non -tidal wetlands or other areas unsuitable
for development or agriculture shall be conserved as wildlife cover. Using cluster
development, the developer shall leave these areas in natural vegetation or where this
is not feasible, replant with native vegetation.
iv) For development activities in RCA and LDA, wildlife corridors shall be established
and used to connect the are left in forest cover with any large forest tracts which are
located outside of the area or property being developed or subdivided. Forest left in
its natural state should be adjacent to larger forested areas and not left as an isolated
island oftrees. Planting required as a mitigation measure should be adjacent to other
habitat. Tree planting which serves as visual screening or landscaping should not be
considered to meet these requirements.
v) Buffer areas for colonial water bird (heron, egret, tern, and glossy ibis) nesting sites
shall be established (ifsuch birds are found to exist in the Critical Area) so that these
sites are protected from the adverse impacts of development activities and from
disturbance during the breeding season.
vi) New water -dependent facilities shall be located to prevent disturbance to sites of
significance to wildlife such as historic, aquatic staging and concentration areas for
waterfowl.
vii) Protection measures, including a buffer area, shall be established where appropriate,
for other plant and wildlife habitat sites identified in this ordinance.
viii) Forested areas required to support wildlife species shall be protected and conserved
by developing management programs which have as their objective, conserving the
wildlife that inhabit or use the areas. Development activities, or the clearing or
cutting of trees which might occur in the areas, shall be conducted so as to conserve
riparian habitat, forest interior wildlife species and their habitat. Management
measures may include incorporating appropriate wildlife protection elements into
Forest Management Plans, cluster zoning or other site design criteria which provide
for the conservation of wildlife habitat. Measures may also include Soil
Conservation Plans which have wildlife habitat protection provisions appropriate to
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.67
the areas defined above, and incentive programs which use the acquisition of
easements and other similar techniques.
ix) When development activities, or the cutting or clearing of trees, occurs in forested
areas, corridors of existing forest or woodland vegetation shall be maintained to
provide effective connections between wildlife habitat areas.
x) Plant and wildlife habitats considered to be of local significance by the Town shall be
protected. Examples of these are those whose habitat values may not be ofstatewide
significance, but are of importance locally or regionally because they contain species
uncommon or of limited occurrence in the jurisdiction, or because the species are
found in unusually high concentrations.
xi) Natural Heritage Areas shall be protected from alterations due to development
activities or cutting or clearing so that the structure and species composition of the
areas are maintained.
A. Development activities or cutting and clearing in Natural Heritage Areas shall
be prohibited unless an analysis is performed and measures proposed to
mitigate any adverse impacts of the proposed activities. The analysis and
mitigation measures shall be prepared by qualified professionals ( e. g.,
ornithologists, zoologists, environmental engineers and planners) at the
expense ofthe applicant and shall address the expected effects on the natural
environment within the Natural Heritage Area.
B. The analysis shall be submitted to the Planning Commission who shall then
submit it to the State Department of Natural Resources for review and
comment. Upon receiving said comment and, if appropriate, upon seeking
the advice ofexpert consultants, the Planning Commission shall find against
or in favor ofthe activities or may make suggestions for changing the analysis
and ask the applicant to resubmit the analysis. The initial analysis review
between the Planning Commission and State Department of Natural
Resources should be completed within sixty (60) days from submission.
e) Standards for non -tidal wetlands. In addition to the standards set forth in Section 971 for the
protection of the Buffer, the following standards shall apply to new development or land
disturbance in the Critical Area:
i) Maintain at least a 25 -foot buffer around identified non -tidal wetlands where
development activities or other activities that may disturb the wetlands or the wildlife
contained therein, shall be prohibited unless it can be shown that these activities will
not adversely affect the wetland. This requirement is not intended to restrict the
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 68
grazing of livestock in these wetlands.
ii) Protect the hydrologic regime and water quality of identified non -tidal wetlands by
providing that development activities or other land disturbances in the drainage area
of the wetlands shall minimize alterations to the surface or subsurface flow of water
into and from the wetlands and not cause impairment ofthe water quality or the plant
and wildlife and habitat value of the wetland.
iii) If an applicant demonstrates that activities or operations that impact non -tidal
wetlands are water -dependent or of substantial economic benefit, but will cause
unavoidable and necessary impacts to the wetlands, a Mitigation Plan shall be
required. The Plan shall specify mitigation measures that will provide water quality
benefits and plant and wildlife habitat equivalent to those of the wetland destroyed or
altered and shall be accomplished, to the extent possible, onsite or near the affected
wetland. If the Town of Indian Head Planning Commission finds that the proposed
activity is not water -dependent, or of substantial economic benefit, or the wetland
impacts are avoidable or unnecessary, then the activity may not be allowed to occur.
In evaluating a proposal involving wetland impacts, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following:
A. Avoidance ofthe impacts by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
B. Minimization of the impacts by limiting the degree of magnitude of action
and its implementation;
C. Re -mediating the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected
environments;
D. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and
maintenance operations during the life of the action; and
E. Compensation for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources
or environments.
iv) For all activities or operations proposed that may impact a non -tidal wetland, the
proposer shall seek comments and/ or required permits from the Maryland
Departments of the Environment, the local Soil Conservation Districts and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service. Upon finding that the plan as proposed, or as may be
modified to address the comments of these agencies, provides mitigation sufficient to
accomplish the objectives ofthis section, then the proposer shall implement the plan.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9. 69
Section 974. Anadromous Fish Propagation Waters
a) Definition. Anadromous fish propagation waters are those streams that are tributary to the
Chesapeake Bay where spawning of anadromous species ( e.g., rockfish or striped bass,
yellow perch, white perch, shad and river herring) occurs or has occurred. Under this
definition, the entire Potomac River System in the Critical Area is classified as anadromous
fish propagation waters.
b) Identification. The Town has identified and mapped anadromous fish propagation waters as
defined in this section, and these maps are available at the Town Hall.
c) General policies. The policies of the Town with regard to anadromous fish propagation
waters shall be to:
i)
ii)
Protect the instream and streambank habitat of anadromous fish propagation waters;
Promote land use policies and practices in the watershed of spawning streams within
the Critical Area which will minimize the adverse impacts of development on the
water quality of the streams; and
iii) Provide for the unobstructed movement ofspawning and larval forms ofanadromous
fish in streams.
d) Standards. Within anadromous fish propagation watersheds, the following measures are
required:
i) The installation or introduction of concrete riprap or other artificial surfaces onto the
bottom ofnatural streams shall be prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that water
quality and fisheries habitat can be improved.
ii) Channelization or other physical alterations which may change the course or
circulation of a stream and thereby interfere with the movement of fish, shall be
prohibited.
iii) The Town shall require each development activity that occurs within a watershed
draining to anadromous fish propagation waters to fulfill the following objectives:
A. Minimize development activities or land disturbances within the watershed;
B. Maintain, or if practicable, improve water quality in affected streams or other
water bodies;
C. Minimize to the extent possible the discharge of sediments into affected
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.70
streams or other water bodies;
D. Maintain, or if practicable, increase the natural or native vegetation of the
watershed and tree canopy over the streams;
iv) The Town shall ensure coordination and compliance with complementary State laws
and regulations:
A. Prohibit the construction or placement ofdams or other structures that would
interfere with or prevent the movement of spawning fish or larval forms in
streams or other designated water bodies. If practical, existing structures that
block streams or other water bodies shall be removed; and
B. Ensure that the construction, repair or maintenance activities associated with
bridges, or other stream crossing, or with utilities and roads, which involve
disturbance within the Buffer or which occur instream, as described in
COMAR 08. 05. 03. 11B( 5), shall be prohibited between March 1 and June 15
of each year.
Part IV. Zoning Map
Section 975. Official Zoning Map
The official Zoning Map shall accompany and be part ofthis Zoning Ordinance. This map shall be
dated and signed by the Zoning Administrator and attested to upon adoption by the Town Council. It
shall be known as the " Zoning Map of the Town of Indian Head, Maryland". It shall be filed by the
Clerk as part of this Ordinance.
This map, together with subsequent applicable amendments, which shall be duly recorded on the
map, shall reflect the current zoning status of all land in Indian Head.
Section 976. Interpretation of District Boundaries
a) A district is represented by name in this Ordinance and by letter or letter -number
combination or name -and -number combinations on the Zoning Map. Where an area on the
map is designated as a certain district, the zoning regulations pertaining to that district shall
prevail.
b) Where the boundaries of the various districts, as shown on the map, are uncertain:
i) Where a boundary line is given a position within a street, alley, navigable or non -
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.71
navigable stream, it shall be deemed to be in the center ofthe street, alley, or stream;
if the actual location of such street, alley, or stream varies slightly from the location
as shown on the Zoning Map, then the actual locations shall control.
ii) Where a boundary line is shown as being located a specific distance from a street line
or other physical feature, this distance shall control.
iii) Where a boundary line is shown adjoining or coincident with a railroad, it shall be
deemed to be in the center ofthe railroad right-of-way. Distances shown as measure
from a railroad track shall be measured from the center of the designated track.
iv) Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the property has
been, or may hereafter be, divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall
be construed to be the lot lines; where the districts designated on the map are
bounded approximately by lot lines, said lot lines shall be construed to be the
boundary of such districts, unless said boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map
or by ordinance.
v) In unsubdivided property, unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary line on
the maps shall be determined by the use of the scale contained on such map.
Section 977. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map
a) Amendments to the Official Zoning Map are accomplished using the same procedures that
apply to other amendments to this Ordinance, as set forth in Article XX.
b) The administrator shall update the Official Zoning Map as soon as possible after amendments
to it are adopted by the council. Upon entering any such amendment on the map, the
administrator shall change the date of the map to indicate its latest revision. New prints of
the updated map may then be issued.
c) No unauthorized person may alter or modify the Official Zoning Map.
d) The Zoning Administrator shall keep copies of superseded prints of the zoning map for
historical reference.
Zoning Ordinance March, 2008
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 9.72
THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY
ARTICLE X PERMISSIBLE USES
Section 1000. Use of the Designations P and SE in the Table of Permissible Uses
When used in connection with a particular use in the Table of Permissible Uses, the letter "P"
means that the use is permissible in the indicated zone with a zoning permit issued by the
administrator. The letters " SE" mean a special exception permit must be obtained from the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
Section 1001. Reserved
Section 1002. Permissible Uses and Specific Exclusions
a) The presumption established by this zoning ordinance is that all legitimate uses of land in
the Town are provided for within at least one zoning district in the Town's planning
jurisdiction. Because the list ofpermissible uses set forth in the Table of Permissible
Uses cannot be all inclusive, those uses that are listed shall be interpreted liberally to
include other uses that have similar impacts to the listed uses.
vIr„„ ( b) Notwithstanding Subsection (a), all uses that are not listed in the Table ofPermissible
Uses, even given the liberal interpretation mandated by Subsection (a), are prohibited.
Nor shall the Table of Permissible Uses be interpreted to allow a use in one zoning
district when the use in question is more closely related to another specified use that is
permissible in another district or districts.
c) The following uses are specifically prohibited in all districts:
i. Any use that involves the manufacture, handling, sale, distribution, or storage of
any highly combustible or explosive materials.
ii. Stockyards, slaughterhouses, rendering plants.
iii. Use of a travel/mobile trailer as a temporary or permanent residence.
iv. Use of a motor vehicle parked on a lot as a structure in which, out ofwhich, or
from which any goods are sold or stored, any services are performed, or other
business is conducted.
Zoning Ordinance May, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 10. 1
Section 1003. Accessory Uses
a) The Table of Permissible Uses classifies different principal uses according to their different
impacts. Whenever an activity (which may or may not be separately listed as a principal use in
this table) is conducted in conjunction with another principal use and the former use (i)
constitutes only an incidental or insubstantial part of the total activity that takes place on a lot, or
ii) is commonly associated with the principal use and integrally related to it, then the former use
may be regarded as accessory to the principal use and may be carried on underneath the umbrella
of the permit issued for the principal use. For example, a swimming pool/tennis court complex is
customarily associated with and integrally related to a residential subdivision or multi -family
development and would be regarded as accessory to such principal uses, even though such
facilities, if developed apart from a residential development, would require a special -exception
permit (use classification 6.210).
b) The following activities, so long as they satisfy the general criteria set forth above, are
specifically regarded as accessory to residential principal uses:
i. Offices or studios within an enclosed building and used by an occupant of a residence
located on the same lot as such building to carry on administrative or artistic activities, so
long as such activities do not fall within the definition of a home occupation.
ii. Hobbies or recreational activities of a noncommercial nature.
iii. The renting out ofone or two rooms within a single- family residence (which one or two
rooms do not themselves constitute a separate dwelling unit) to not more than two
persons who are not part of the family that resides in the single-family dwelling.
iv. Yard sales or garage sales, so long as such sales are not conducted on the same lot for
more than three days (whether consecutive or not) during any 90 -day period.
c) Storage outside of a substantially enclosed structure of any motor vehicle that is neither licensed
nor operational shall not be regarded as accessory to a residential principal use and is prohibited
in residential districts.
Section 1004. Permissible Uses Not Requiring Permits
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no zoning or special -exception permit is necessary
for the following uses:
i. Streets.
ii. Electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television, gas, water, and sewer lines, wires
or pipes, together with supporting poles or structures, located within a public right-ofway.
Zoning Ordinance
Town of Indian Head 10.2
iii. Neighborhood utility facilities located within a public right-of-way with the permission
of the owner (state or town) of the right-of-way.
Section 1005. Change in Use
a) A substantial change in use ofproperty occurs whenever the essential character or nature of the
activity conducted on a lot changes. This occurs whenever:
i. The change involves a change from one principal use category to another.
ii. The original use is a combination use or planned development, and the relative proportion
of space devoted to the individual principal uses that comprise the combination use or
planned development use, changes to such an extent that the parking requirements for the
overall use are altered.
iii. The original use is a combination use or planned development use, and the mixture of
types of individual principal uses that comprise the combination use or planned
development use changes.
iv The original use is a planned residential development, and the relative proportions of
different types of dwelling units change.
v. There is only one business or enterprise conducted on the lot (regardless of whether that
business or enterprise consists of one individual principal use or a combination ofuses),
and that business or enterprise moves out and a different type of enterprise moves in
even though the new business or enterprise may be classified under the same principal
use or combination use category as the previous type ofbusiness). For example, if there
is only one building on a lot and a florist shop that is the sole tenant of that building
moves out and is replaced by a clothing store, that constitutes a change in use even
though both tenants fall within principal use classification 2. 111. However, if the florist
shop were replaced by another florist shop, that would not constitute a change in use
since the type of business or enterprise would not have changed. Moreover, if the florist
shop moved out of a rented space in a shopping center and was replaced by a clothing
store, that would not constitute a change in use since there is more than one business on
the lot and the essential character of the activity conducted on that lot (shopping center -
combination use) has not changed.
b) A mere change in the status ofproperty from unoccupied to occupied or vice versa does not
constitute a change in use. Whether a change in use occurs shall be determined by comparing
the two active uses of the property without regard to any intervening period during which the
property may have been unoccupied, unless the property has remained unoccupied for more than
180 consecutive days or has been abandoned.
c) A mere change in ownership of a business or enterprise or a change in the name shall not be
regarded as a change in use.
Zoning Ordinance
Town of Indian Head 10.3
Section 1006. Combination Uses
a) When a combination use comprises two or more principal uses that require different types of
permits (zoning or special -exception), then the permit authorizing the combination use shall be:
i. A special -exception permit if any of the principal uses combined requires a special -
exception permit.
ii. A zoning permit in all other cases.
b) When a combination use consists of a single-family detached, architecturally integrated
subdivision and two-family or multi -family uses, then the total density permissible on the entire
tract shall be determined by dividing the area of the tract by the minimum square footage per
dwelling unit specified in Section 1201.
Section 1007. More Specific Use Controls
Whenever a development could fall within more than one use classification in the Table of Permissible
Uses, the classification that most closely and most specifically describes the development controls. For
example, a small doctor's office or clinic clearly falls within the 3. 110 classification (office and service
operations conducted entirely indoors and designed to attract customers or clients to the premises).
However, classification 3. 130, " office or clinics of physicians or dentists with not more than 10,000
square feet of gross floor area" more specifically covers this use and therefore is controlling.
Section 1008. Table of Permissible Uses byZoning Districts
The following table lists the permitted uses in each general zoning district, the type of review and
approvals required, and additional regulations. The Open Space Zone (OS) is not included in the Table
of Permissible Uses. Additional regulations pertaining to certain uses and activities are listed in Article
11, Supplementary Use Regulations.
Zoning Ordinance
Town of Indian Head 10.4
OFFICIAL TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS BY GENERAL ZONING DISTRICTS
KEY TO TABLE
P - Permitted Use within Zoning District
SE - Use Subject to Special Exception from the Board of Appeals
Site Plan Review and Approval and Planning Commission Recommendation Required)
Blank - Not Permitted
1) Permitted only as part of an approved Cluster Plan in accordance with Section 1159
and the Schedule of Zone Regulations
2) Not Permitted in residential dwellings within the TCMX Zoning District. SE in the
TCMX Zoning District only applies to non- residential development.
P = Permitted
Zoning Ordinance
Town of Indian Head
SE = Special Exception
10. 5
Blank = Not Permitted
June, to
1. 100 Single -Family Residence
1. 110 Single Family Detached
1. 111 Site Built and Modular Structures P P P P
1. 112 Mobile Home Park/Subdivisions
1. 120 Single Family Attached P ( 1)
1. 200 Two -Family Residence
1. 210 Primary Residence with Accessory Apartment SE SE SE
1. 220 Duplex P P
1. 230 Two -Family Apartment P P
1. 300 Multi -Family Residence
I • u ti- ami y own ouses muni,m i
1. 320 Multi -Family Apartments P P
1. 330 Commercial Apartments P
1. 400 Homes Emphasizing Special Services, Treatment, or Supervision
1. 410 Assisted Living Facilities, Private SE SE SE SE
1. 420 Child Care
1. 421 Family Day Care Having 8 or Fewer Children SE SE SE SE
1. 422 Child or Adult Day Care Center or Nursery
Having 9 or more Children
SE( 2) SE
1. 423 Day Care Home SE SE SE SE
1. 430 Assisted Living Facility, Halfway House SE SE SE SE
1. 500 Miscellaneous Rooms for Rent Situations
e• an. : re. ast, ourst ' omes, an. of er emporary
Residences Rented by the Day or Week SE SE SE
1. 520 Hotels, Motels, Convention Centers, and Similar Businesses
Institutions Providing Overnight Accommodations P
1. 530 Rooms for Rent by Month SE SE SE SE
1. 600 Temporary Emergency Construction and Repair of Residences P P P P
1. 700 Home Occupations SE SE SE
xeya" xx.. k. i`. is \ aif:,: t`...,$... A. F
k3f ' sx
x . a. ., Y...,. .-. s' e3. .-" , h. .. •. n. hu,£ d?x,, 9b'. a. i..
2. 100 No Storage or Display of Goods Outside Fully Enclosed Building
1.
S
y` Cx s'... FA ,
P
2. 110 Retail Sale
2. 111 High -Volume Traffic Generation
2. 111. 1 Automobile Parts, Supplies, and Tire Stores SE
2. 111. 2 Drug Stores and Grocery and Beverage P SE
2. 111. 3 Convenience Stores and Delicatessens P P
2. 111. 4 Department Stores P P
1) Permitted only as part of an approved Cluster Plan in accordance with Section 1159
and the Schedule of Zone Regulations
2) Not Permitted in residential dwellings within the TCMX Zoning District. SE in the
TCMX Zoning District only applies to non- residential development.
P = Permitted
Zoning Ordinance
Town of Indian Head
SE = Special Exception
10. 5
Blank = Not Permitted
2007
OFFICIAL TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS BY GENERAL ZONING DISTRICTS
2. 120 Wholesale Sales
2.200 Storage and Display of Goods Outside
2. 210 Retail Sales
2.211 High -Volume Traffic Generation ( Building Material and Supply,
Boat Sales, Farm Implements Storage and Sales, Feed and Grain
Storage and Sales Heavy Equipment Sales)
2.212 Low -Volume Traffic Generation
2. 210 Wholesale Sales
3. 100 All Operations Conducted within Fully Enclosed Building
3. 110 Operations Designed to Attract and Serve Customers
3. 111 The Offices of Attorneys, Architects, Engineers, Other Similar
Professions, Insurance and Stock Brokers, Travel Agents,
Government Office Buildings, etc.
3. 112 Banks and Financial Institutions, Barber and Beauty Shops,
Dry Cleaning/Laundry, Laundromats
3. 120 Operations Designed to Attract Little or No Customers or Client Traffic
Other Than Employees of the Entity Operating the Principal Use
3. 130 Office or Clinics of Physicians or Dentists with Not More Than
10,000 sq ft of Gross Floor Area
3. 200 Operations Conducted within and/ or Outside Fully Enclosed
3.210 Operations Designed to Attract and Serve Customers or Clients on
the Premises ( Plumbing, Mechanical Contractors)
3. 220 Operations Designed to Attract Little or No Customer or Client
Traffic Other than the Employees of the Entity Operating the Principal
Use (Furniture Repair Shops, Sign Painting)
J Yar s t3Y°^
a`K ir,'L
1 RoeE+S Sl , REP
ANT G, , ' E_ i_G, , ASSEMB INN O GOODS;
1 IP
4. 100 All Operations Conducted Entirely Within Fully Enclosed Building
4. 110 High Volume Traffic Business Done with Walk-in Trade
4. 120 Low -Volume Business Not Done with Walk-in Trade (Printing and
Publishing, Dry Cleaning Plants, Electronics Assembly
4.200 Operations Conducted Within or Outside Fully Enclosed Building
4.210 Welding Shops, Ornamental Iron works, Machine Shops (Excluding
Drop Hammers and Punch Presses Over 20 Tons Rated Capacity,
Sheet Metal)
SE
5.100 Schools
5. 110 Public and Private Elementary and Secondary ( Includes Pre -School, SE SE SE P P
Associated Grounds and Athletic and Other Facilities)
5. 120 Trade or Vocational Schools SE SE SE P
P = Permitted
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head
SE = Special Exception Blank = Not Permitted
10. 6 June, 2007
OFFICIAL TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS BY GENERAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Zoning Ordinance
Town of Indian Head
SE = Special Exception
10. 7
Blank = Not Permitted
June, 2007
@
SE P
j.
5. 130 Colleges, Universities, Community Colleges (Including Associated SE SE P
Facilities Such As Dormitories, Office Buildings
5.200 Churches, Synagogues and Temples (Including Residential Structures
for Religious Personnel and Associated Buildings but not Including
Elementary or Secondary School (Buildings)
SE SE SE P P
5.300 Libraries, Museums, Art Galleries, Art Centers and Similar Uses
Including Associated Educational and Instructional Activities)
SE SE P SE
5.400 Social, Fraternal Clubs and Lodges, Union Halls and Similar SE SE SE P P
5.500 Conference Centers and Related Facilities P
A
CS °
4 c, a, a.. e ' +•,+ 1" ..+" y. 1 R :
s . 5.. a xi 4m5;..:: b
6. 100 Activity Conducted Entirely Within Building or Substantial
6. 110 Bowling Alleys, Skating Rinks, Indoor Tennis and Squash Courts
Billiard and Pool Halls, Rifle and Pistol ranges, Indoor Athletic and
Exercise Facilities and Similar Uses
SE P
6. 120 Movie Theaters
6. 122 Seating Capacity up to 1000 P SE
6. 200 Activity Conducted Primarily Outside Enclosed Buildings
6.210 Privately Owned Outdoor Recreational Facilities Such as Golf
and Country Clubs, Swimming or Tennis Clubs, etc. Not Constructed
Pursuant to a Permit Authorizing the Construction of Some
Residential Development.
SE SE SE P
6.220 Publicly Owned and Operated Outdoor recreational Facilities Such As
Athletic Fields, Golf Courses, Tennis Courts, Swimming Pools
Parks, etc. Not Constructed Pursuant to a Permit Authorizing the
Construction of Another Use Such as a School
P P P P
r,'. e.... "_, x
t Y ..
z,>F1i
I ,, yy,,, Fj" t, p z z:_. ,. ., .,... F .. arm e. a", . F g,'}
ri ro,' max b? tcc.''...
SE SE
Cgs;
qq 1! s ` "' 3`'.
A`kkre` M
7.100 Hospitals, Clinics, Other Medical (Including Mental Health) Treatment
Facilities in Excess of 10,000 Sq ft of Floor Area
7.200 Nursing Facility, Handicapped or Infirm Institutions SE SE SE SE
7.300 Assisted Living Facilities (Other Than Halfway Houses) Where Mentally Ill
People are Confined
SE SE SE P SE
V0(0o{nll.
8. 100 Restaurant, Standard P P
8.200 Restaurant, Fast Food SE
sv r
P
U, YEI3I ; S € 1 RVIE QtEiAT©k'
9. 100 Motor Vehicle Sales or Rental SE
9.200 Sales with Installation of Motor Vehicle Parts or Accessories (Tires,
Mufflers, Etc.)
SE P
9.300 Motor Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Not Including Body Work SE P
9.400 Motor Vehicle Painting and Body Work SE SE
9. 500 Motor Vehicle Fuel Sales SE
9. 600 Car Wash SE P
Zoning Ordinance
Town of Indian Head
SE = Special Exception
10. 7
Blank = Not Permitted
June, 2007
OFFICIAL TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS BY GENERAL ZONING DISTRICTS
10.100 Automobile Parking Garages or Parking Lots Not Located on a Lot
On Which There is Another Principal Use to Which the Parking is Used For
10.200 Storage of Goods Not Related to Sale of Use of Those Goods on the Same
Lot Where They Are Stored
SE SE
10.210 All Storage Within Completely Enclosed Structures
10. 220 Storage Inside or Outside Completely Enclosed Structures
Contractors Yard)
SE SE
10.300 Parking of Vehicles or Storage of Equipment Outside Enclosed Structures
Where (1) Vehicles or Equipment are Owned and Used by the Person
Making Use of Lot and (2) Parking or Storage Occupies More
More than 75% of the Developed Area
1 S
12. 100 Veterinarian, Veterinary Hospital
12.200 Kennel
SE
SE
13. 100 Police Stations
13. 200 Fire Stations
13. 300 Rescue Squad, Ambulance Service
13. 400 Civil Defense Operation
VP
P
SE
SE
SE
SE SE SE
P
SE
P
15.100 Post Office, Local
15.200 Transfer Stations and Recycling Centers
16. 100 Marine Including Boat Sales and Repair and Boat Rental, Including
Sailboards and Jet Skis
16.200 Pier Related Port Facilities when Ancillary to a Permitted Use of Both
the Permitted Use and the Pier or Port Facilities are Shown on the
General Development Plan
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
P
P
P
P
P P
SE SE
SE
7
17.100 Neighborhood Services
17.200 Community or Regional Service
17. 210 Water or Sewerage Treatment Facilities for more than 200 Homes
17. 220 Electric Substations Electric Transmission Overhead >69KW
P
P P P P P
P P P P P
SE SE SE SE SE
18.100 TV and Radio Antennas 40 Feet Tall or Less P P P P P
P = Permitted
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head
SE = Special Exception
10. 8
Blank = Not Permitted
June, 2007
OFFICIAL TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS BY GENERAL ZONING DISTRICTS
18.200 Towers and Antennas More Than 400 Feet Tall SE SE SE SE SE
18.300 Satellite Dishes - Roof P P P P
18.400 Satellite Dishes - Free Standing SE SE SE SE
c' z c.:, ; _,._ .. r, 4 . t. ..... , \., c. ...` fix.-,
r9
tiw.. d
ti . u. w ... r.$ s.:
t
i,. . P.\c, o-.•, o-.,.:
P
d,.':
19. 100 Open -Air Markets (Farm and Craft Markets, Flea Markets, Produce
Markets, Non -Municipal
SE
19.200 Horticultural Sales with Outdoor Display P
19.300 Roadside Stand for Products Raised on the Premises SE
f..uw "N ; i94.."•:, s.., ..' a £ 10 es q ,. ..:>.
N v..,. a. m. d. Y \ a\`Sa
LS ,ws t'
v.
R;.....
20. 100 Funeral Home P
21. 100 Cementary SE SE SE SE SE
21. 200 Crematorium SE P
x _ *1358., e _ ,__
n
fig` 1rK (, ' xS
23. 100 Temporary Structures Used in Connection with the Construction of a
Permanent Building (Time Limit and With Permit)
S" `
P
Y'
P P
Yt' i
P P
23. 200 Events of Public Interest P P P P P
23.300 Special Events P P P P P
23.400 Christmas Tree Sales P P
23.500 Real Estate Sales Office P P;
y
P P P
ike1i. .:a i
24. 100 Bus Stations, Train Stations, Park & Ride Facility P
s'
y'
k ?
j
4'-.. w Y ' 25b0 t'.
25. 100 No On -Premises Sale SE SE
25.200 On Premise Sales Permitted SES SE
y ' a$, h' y? ni>k xx , . uy 4.
P' 6 1VOl"Zei", d ,: F -' fl' 4^.: Y
ix x C `:<_.
arF., s?. «. J,><.. a_ .,>.!'. kW,.,gC, t"„ . s,. fL.-. l'P«.. nx. .."', n,:>'`... 3 r._' ,>` i
i E*
4, .` s x,- cE.:. 1" E.., na..
SE
a` R,— e^IIf?
26. 100 Off Premises Signs
P = Permitted SE = Special Exception Blank = Not Permitted
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head
10. 9
June, 2007
ARTICLE XI SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS
This Article contains regulations to specific uses that supplement the requirements found in other
articles of this ordinance.
Part I General Provision -- Miscellaneous Uses
Section 1100. Town Center Mixed Use Development (TCMX)
a) Town Center Mixed Use Development in General
It is the intent of this zone to control the placement, design, use, and density ofwell
planned, residential and commercial developments which will offer a variety of
building types and a more efficient overall use ofland, and within these limits, permit
the optimum amount of freedom and variety in the design and management of such
varying types of residential structures including one and two- family units,
townhouses and garden apartments. Within the intention of these regulations, the
following objectives are sought to provide for the Residential Mixed Use
Development:
A. To provide a more attractive and varied living environment.
B. To encourage a more intimate, efficient and aesthetic use of open space.
C. To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development
of land.
D. To encourage variety in the physical development pattern ofresidential areas.
E. To foster forms of development which exhibit the characteristics of
Traditional Neighborhoods within the Town.
b) TCMX Requirements
i. Permitted uses
A. Town Center Mixed Use Developments are contemplated to provide a
compatible mixture of residential and commercial development.
B. The Town Council may approve and/or require land and places for public
assembly, recreational buildings, public buildings and accessory buildings, or
may require the reservation of lands for such uses if it is deemed they are
advantageous or necessary for the purpose ofserving the Town Center Mixed
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
Use Development and the local community.
ii. A TCMX shall be an architecturally integrated development meeting the following
criteria:
A. Within individual parcels, no specific architectural style or character is mandated;
however, some identifiable, coherent character should be established at the scale
ofindividual streets or clusters without necessarily being the same throughout the
entire parcel.
B. Hybrid " styling" should be avoided; there should be consistency between the
overall composition of individual houses — their massing, roofs, fenestration -and
their materials, colors and details.
C. Adjacent houses should not be exactly identical, nor should they be totally
unrelated in character, scale, material, color, and details — for example, they may
have proches, roof slopes, window types, and siding materials in common — so
that the overall streetscape appears to have a clear and coherent architectural
character.
iii. To the extent practicable, the two-family and multi -family portions of a TCMX shall
be developed more toward the interior rather than the periphery ofthe tract so that the
single-family detached residences border adjacent single-family residential
properties.
iv. Administrative Procedures
A. Preliminary Application shall be made to the Town Council and referred to
the Planning Commission for stage one consideration ofthe TCMX zone and
shall include, but not be limited to:
1. A general diagram showing the TCMX's relation to the Town of
Indian Head and major public access to the TCMX (10 copies).
2. The General Development Plan setting forth preliminary information
as identified in Appendix A ( 10 copies). In addition to such
information, the Town Planning Commission may include, but not be
limited to the following:
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
a. Elevations of each building type.
b. Proposed open spaces, their size, their location, their uses, and
June, 2007
11. 2
their proposed ownership (Town and/ or association).
c. General statement concerning provision of utilities.
d. Statement of expected Town responsibilities.
e. Cost -Revenue ratio of the proposed TCMX for the Town.
f. Tentative time table and staging of development. ( Schedule
of construction)
g. Applicant shall pay an application fee as previously
established by the Town.
3. After the Planning Commission makes its findings, the application
will be forwarded to the Town Council for consideration. If the
Council finds that the proposal has merit, it will be given conceptual
approval.
B. Preliminary Site Plan. The developer shall submit the following to the
Planning Commission for its review after receiving conceptual approval from
the Town Council.
1. Ten ( 10) copies of a preliminary site plan shall be filed with the
Town. The preliminary site plan shall comply with the requirements
of this Article and be accompanied by such other written or graphic
material as may be necessary or desirable in aiding the decisions of
the Town Council and the Planning Commission.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall review the site plan for compliance
with the requirements of this Ordinance. Before returning the
preliminary site plan to the Planning Commission and Town Council,
the Zoning Administrator shall consult with such Town officials as
may be appropriate, and may offer such comments as may be
appropriate.
3. A Preliminary Site Plan shall include but not be limited to the
requirements set forth in Appendix A.
4. A schedule of construction or timetable ( acceptable to the Town
Council and Planning Commission).
5. The developer shall provide a statement detailing the means by which
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 3
the TCMX and all its various aspects shall be managed. This shall
include deed restrictions and covenants designed to ensure perpetuity
of agreements.
6. The preliminary site plan shall also include a management statement
governing the construction, operation, and maintenance of:
a. Sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other
underground structures.
b. Streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits,
parking and loading area, and outdoor lighting systems.
c. Parks, parkways, bikeways, playgrounds, open spaces, fences,
walls, screen planting, and landscaping and signs.
7. The Planning Commission and/ or Town Council may establish
additional requirements for preliminary site plans for the TCMX
District.
8. After review and a public hearing on the proposed zoning, the
Planning Commission shall return the site plan, together with
comments and recommendations to the Town Council for appropriate
action.
C. Final Review and Approval Procedure
1. The Town Council shall review the final preliminary site plan and
other documents.
2. The Town Council shall hold a public hearing in the manner required
in Article XX of this Ordinance.
3. The Town Council may approve or disapprove the proposed TCMX
zoning. In granting approval, the Council shall secure:
a. A surety bond or equivalent to be filed for/or deposited in
escrow with the Town Council in an amount sufficient to
ensure completion of all requirements established by the
Town Council. Such surety to be reviewed annually and
adjusted to reflect current costs.
b. A final site plan in the form of a final plat shall be prepared,
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 4
filed, and recorded. The final plat shall comply with the
specifications set forth in Appendix A, and applicable State,
County and Town laws, regulations, and ordinances
governing the subdivision of land.
c. Permits for building shall be issued in accordance with the
schedule for construction approved by the Town Council as
part of the final approval.
d. When a TCMX is to be developed in stages, each stage shall
be processed as a separate development after first submitting
and receiving approval of the TCMX zone for the entire
project.
e. As part ofthe final approval, the Town Council shall approve
dates for initiation and completion of the TCMX and/ or its
phases. Any departure from these dates shall constitute
material breach of contract and outstanding bonds can be
called in. The Town Council can waive completions dates for
cause.
4. Conflict with other Articles
a. Provisions of the TCMX zone when found to be in conflict
with other provisions of the Indian Head Zoning Ordinance
shall supercede those other provisions with which they
conflict.
b. Provisions of the TCMX zone when found to be in conflict
with other provisions of the Indian Head Subdivision
Ordinance shall supercede those other provisions with which
they conflict.
Section 1101. Waterside Mixed Use District
a) Location within Parent Zoning District. The Waterside Mixed -Use (WMX) District maybe
permitted in any zoning district or it may be premapped consistent with the intent of the
Comprehencive Plan for the Town of Indian Head.
Section 1102. Reserved
Section 1103. Temporary Emergency Construction, or Repair Residences
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 5
a) Temporary residences used on construction sites of non-residential premises shall be
removed immediately upon the completion ofthe project.
b) Permits for temporary residences to be occupied pending the construction, repair, or
renovation ofthe permanent residential building on a site shall expire within six months after
the date of issuance, except that the administrator may renew such permit for one additional
period not to exceed three months ifhe determines that such renewal is reasonably necessary
to allow the proposed occupants of the permanent residential building to complete the
construction, repair, renovation, or restoration work necessary to make such building
habitable.
Section 1104. Special Events
a) In deciding whether a permit for a special event should be denied for any reason specified in
Article IV, Part II, or in deciding what additional conditions to impose under Article IV, Part
II, the Zoning Administrator shall ensure that, ( if the special event is conducted at all):
i. The hours of operation allowed shall be compatible with the uses adjacent to the
activity.
ii. The amount of noise generated shall not disrupt the activities of adjacent land uses.
iii. All litter generated by the special event will be removed by the applicant at no
expense to the Town.
iv. That the parking generated by the event can be accommodated without undue
disruption to or interference with the normal flow of traffic.
In cases where it is deemed necessary, the Zoning Administrator mayrequire the applicant to
post a bond to ensure compliance with the conditions of the conditional -use permit.
Ifthe permit applicant requests the Town to provide extraordinary services or equipment or it
is otherwise determined that extraordinary services or equipment should be provided to
protect the public health or safety, the applicant shall be required to pay to the Town a fee
sufficient to reimburse the Town for the costs of these services. This requirement shall not
apply if the event has been anticipated in the budget process and sufficient funds have been
included in the budget to cover the costs incurred.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 6
Part II Specific Supplementary Use and Design Regulations
The following specific supplementary use regulations are applicable to both specific uses permitted
by right and to uses permitted by special exception as indicated in Article X and in the Table of
Permissible Uses.
Section 1130. Accessory Apartments
a) Accessory apartments in the residential zones. It is the specific purpose and intent of this
Zoning Ordinance to allow accessory apartments through conversion of existing larger
residential structures located in those zones permitting residential uses and to provide the
opportunity and encouragement to meet the special housing needs of single persons and
couples of low and moderate income, both young and old, as well as relatives of families
currently residing in the Town of Indian Head. It is furthermore the intent and purpose of
this provision to allow the more efficient use of the Town's existing housing stock. The
following specific standards are set forth as condition for such accessory uses:
i. The owner ofthe residential dwelling unit in which the accessory apartment is to be
located shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises.
ii. An accessory apartment may be located either in the principal dwelling unit or in an
accessory building.
iii. Apartment size. The minimum floor area for an accessory apartment within a
principal dwelling shall be three hundred ( 300) square feet but in no case shall it
exceed thirty percent ( 30%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling in which it is
located. For accessory apartments located in accessory buildings, the minimum floor
area shall also be three hundred (300) square feet, there shall be no more than two (2)
bedrooms in the apartment and the apartment shall not occupy more than 50% ofthe
main structure.
iv. Number of accessory apartments per lot. There shall be no more than one ( 1)
accessory apartment permitted per existing single family dwelling.
v. Exterior appearance. When an accessory apartment is located in the principal
dwelling building, the entry to such unit and its design shall be such that, to the
degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the building will remain as a singlefamily
residential structure and that no external entrance that faces a road or street
will be added.
vi. Water and sewer service. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
establishment of an accessory apartment in an existing residential structure, or the
conversion of an existing accessory building to an accessory apartment use, approval
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 7
of the proposed method of water supply and sewage disposal shall be obtained.
vii. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
standards and requirements ofArticle XVII.
Section 1131. Animal boarding facilities and veterinary hospitals
A veterinary hospital or animal boarding facility may be allowed, provided that an animal boarding
place shall be located only on a lot having an area of two acres or more and that no part of any
building or area used for such purposes shall be located within 150 feet of any street or road or the
nearest property line, or, in the alternative, that the animals be kept in a sound -proofed building from
8 pm to 8 am and that it shall be located only on a lot having an area oftwo acres or more and that no
part ofany building or any area used for such purposes shall be located within 50 feet ofany street or
road or the nearest property line or within 150 feet from any dwelling other than the house of the
owner or person in control of the boarding place. The Board of Appeals is hereby empowered to
increase the restrictions herein provided and to add others when it is deemed necessary in order to
protect the health and safety of residents and workers on adjoining properties and in the general
neighborhood. Such a use shall be for a period of two years, subject to renewal.
Section 1132. Antenna or tower greater than 50 feet in height and associated substation
An antenna or tower greater than 50 feet in height and associated substations ( radio, television,
microwave broadcasting, etc.) may be permitted, provided:
i. All structures shall be located at least 200 feet from an existing dwelling.
ii. A minimum 10 -foot landscape strip shall be required and maintained around all
property lines exterior to any fence or wall.
iii. Any proposed broadcasting tower shall have a setback of one foot from all property
lines for every foot of height of the tower, provided that any broadcasting tower
lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be exempt from
the setback limitations imposed by this subsection and maybe continued, structurally
altered, reconstructed, or enlarged provided that no structural change, repair,
addition, alteration, or reconstruction shall result in increasing the height of such
tower above the then existing structurally designed height.
Section 1133. Antique shops
An antique shop maybe allowed in an existing building or part of an existing building provided that
the original character of the building be maintained; that such use shall not constitute a nuisance
because oftraffic, noise, type ofphysical activity, or any other element that is incompatible with the
character ofthe surrounding neighborhoods; and that signs shall be limited to identification signs --
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 8
the location and design of the signs shall be subject to the provisions contained in Article XVI.
Section 1134. Art or cultural centers
Public Art or Cultural Centers are permitted.
Section 1135. Automobile filling stations
a) An automobile filling station may be permitted, upon a finding, that:
i. The use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, fumes, odors, or physical
activity in the location proposed.
ii. The use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard or traffic nuisance
because ofits location in relation to similar uses, necessity ofturning movements in
relation to its access to public roads or intersections, or its location in relation to
other buildings or proposed buildings on or near the site and the traffic pattern from
such buildings, or by reason ofits location near a vehicular or pedestrian entrance or
crossing to a public or private school, park, playground or hospital, or other public
use or place of public assembly.
iii. The use at the proposed location will not adversely affect nor retard the logical
development ofthe general neighborhood or ofthe industrial or commercial zone in
which the station is proposed, considering service required, population, character,
density, and number of similar uses.
b) In addition, the following requirements shall be complied with:
i. Signs, product displays, parked vehicles, and other obstructions that adversely affect
visibility at intersections or to station driveways shall be prohibited.
ii. Lighting, including permitted illuminated signs, shall be arranged so as not to reflect
or cause glare into any residential zone.
iii. When such use occupies a corner lot, the ingress or egress driveways shall be located
at least 20 feet from the intersection of the front and side street lines of the lot as
defined in Article XII, and such driveways shall not exceed 45 feet in width, provided
that in areas where no master plan ofhighways has been adopted the street line shall
be considered to be at least 40 feet from the center line of any abutting street or
highway.
iv. Gasoline pumps or other service appliances shall be located on the lot at least 10 feet
behind the building line, and all service storage or similar activities in connection
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 9
with such use shall be conducted entirely within the building. There shall be at least
20 feet between driveways on each street, and all driveways shall be perpendicular to
the curb or street line.
v. Light automobile repair work may be done at an automobile filling station, provided
that no major repairs, spray paint operation, or body or fender repair is permitted.
vi. Vehicles shall not be parked so as to overhang the public right-of-way.
Section 1136. Automobile and light truck storage lots
An automobile and light truck storage lot may be permitted for use in connection with a towing
operating, but not for the storage ofjunked cars.
Section 1137. Automobile, truck, and trailer rentals, outdoors
a) A lot for the storage and rental of only the following rental vehicles: automobiles, light
trailers of such limited size and capacity so as to be capable of being safely towed by a
passenger motor vehicle designed for carrying less than 10 passengers, and light and medium
duty trucks may be allowed, upon a finding by the Board that:
i. The use will not constitute a nuisance because ofnoise, fumes or odors, or physical
activity in the location proposed.
ii. The use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard to traffic nuisance
because of its location in relation to similar uses, necessity ofturning movements in
relation to its access to public roads or intersections, or its location in relation t other
buildings or proposed buildings on or near the site, and the traffic pattern from such
buildings, or by reason of its location near a vehicular or pedestrian entrance or
crossing to a public or private school, park, playground, hospital, or other public use
or place of public assembly.
iii. The use at the proposed location will neither adversely affect nor retard the logical
development ofthe general neighborhood or ofthe commercial zone in which the lot
is proposed considering service required, population, character, density, and number
of similar uses.
b) In addition, the following requirements shall be complied with:
Unless the use is accessory to motor vehicle -related fuel sales, gasoline pumps and
other service appliances shall not be permitted, except that not more than one
gasoline pump shall be permitted, but only for the fueling of rental vehicles. No
major repairs, spray paint operation, or body or fender repair shall be permitted.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 10
ii. Vehicles shall be stored or parked only on a surface area constructed ofmaterial that
will assure a surface resistant to erosion and adequately treated to prevent dust
emission, surround by a raised curb. The curb shall be located so that no vehicle can
be parked or stored within 15 feet of any street line, nor within 15 feet of any
property line adjoining land in a residential zone, nor with three feet of any property
line. In a CG zone, the entire lot shall be on or near grade with the most traveled
abutting street or highway.
iii. There shall be at least 20 feet between access driveways on each street, and all
driveways shall be perpendicular to the curb or street line.
iv. When such a use occupies a corner lot, no access driveway shall be located less than
20 feet from the intersection of the front and side street lines of the lot, as defined in
Article XII, and no such driveway shall exceed 45 feet in width. In areas where no
master plan ofhighways has been adopted, the street line shall be considered to be at
least 40 feet from the centerline of any abutting street or highway.
v. Signs, product displays, parked vehicles, and other obstructions that would adversely
affect visibility at intersection or to driveways shall be prohibited.
vi. Lighting shall be low level and so arranged as not to reflect or to cause glare into any
residential zone.
vii. When such use abuts a residential zone or institutional premises not recommended
for reclassification to commercial or industrial zone on the adopted comprehensive
plan, and is not effectively screened by a natural terrain feature, the use shall be
screened by a solid wall or a substantial, slightly, solid fence, not less than five feet in
height, together with a three- foot planting strip on the outside of such wall or fence,
planted in shrubs and evergreens. The failure of the owner and/ or operator to
maintain any required planting so that they exist in a flourishing and healthy
condition is grounds for revocation ofthe occupancy permit. Location, maintenance,
vehicle sight distance provisions, and advertising pertaining to screening shall be as
provided for in Articles XVII and XVIII. Screening shall not be required on street
frontage.
Section 1138. Boardinghouses, Bed & Breakfasts, Country Inns
a) The use of a one -family dwelling for a boardinghouse, bed & breakfast, or country inn may
be allowed by special exception, upon a finding by the board that such use will not constitute
a nuisance because of sidewalk or street traffic, noise, or type of physical activity, and that
such use will not tend to affect adversely the use and development of adjoining properties in
the immediate neighborhood. Such establishments are subject to the following criteria:
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
i. The establishment shall be located on a state -maintained road with direct access to
the state -maintained road. Direct access shall mean an entrance located on the same
property as the Country Inn.
ii. The driveway entrance onto the state -maintained road shall meet MDOT standards.
iii. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest room and shall be
located at the rear of the site. Further parking area shall be 50 feet from any adjacent
residentially zoned property or shall be adequately screened.
iv. Applicable requirements of the Health Department, the Fire Marshal's Office, the
Town Building Code, and the Annotated Code of Maryland shall be met.
v. The establishment shall be owner/manager occupied and managed
vi. Accessory commercial activities such as weddings, graduation, and similar parties are
allowed only if included as part of the special exception application.
vii. No separate kitchen facilities shall be provided.
b) Site Development Criteria.
i. Off-street parking:
A. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest room.
B. Parking may be provided off-site in a public lot or with certification of
permission of off-site owner. Such parking to be located a convenient
distance from the bed and breakfast.
C. The parking area shall not be located within the setbacks of the required
yards.
Section 1139. Childcare Centers, Day Care Centers, Day Nursery, Day Care Home, Family
Day Care or Adult Day Care Centers
a) A site plan must be submitted for Childcare Centers, Day Care Centers, Day Nurseries, Day
Care Homes and Family Day Care Facilities showing existing or proposed building, play
area, fencing, parking, ingress and egress, and with the following:
i. Applicant shall meet requirements of state and local health departments for
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 12
b)
family/group care.
ii. The board may prescribe specific conditions determined necessary to minimize
effects ofuse on neighboring properties given identifications ofconcerns specific to a
particular site.
iii. The applicant shall provide 100 square feet ofusable outdoor recreation area for each
child that may use this space at any one time. Such usable outdoor recreation area
shall be identified on the site plan and shall be sufficiently buffered from adjacent
residential area. Usable outdoor recreation areas shall be limited to the side and rear
yard of the property. Recreational areas shall not include the required front yard of
the property or any off-street parking areas.
iv. The child care provider shall comply with Article 88A of the Annotated Code of
Maryland and the State Department of Human Resources Regulations regarding
group day care centers. Applicant must be able to present a childcare licensing
certificate and inspection report from the Child Care Administration of the State of
Maryland.
v. The applicant must provide guarantees as maybe deemed necessarybythe Board that
the proposed child daycare center will not constitute a nuisance nor be disruptive to
the neighborhood due to the number ofchildren being cared for, noise, traffic, or any
other activity associated with the use. The Board will specifically consider existing
daycares within a five hundred foot (55) radius of the proposed daycare in order to
determine the extent ofneighborhood impact. Said radius shall be measured from the
center point of the front building setback line.
vi. The applicant must demonstrate to the Board' s satisfaction that sufficient pickup and
drop- off areas are available.
A site plan must be submitted for Adult Day Care Centers showing existing or proposed
building, fencing, parking, ingress and egress, and with the following:
i. The applicant shall meet the requirements of federal, state, and local regulations
including, but not limited to; building, zoning, fire, food, safety, health, and
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and latest amendments thereto.
ii. The board may prescribe specific conditions necessary to minimize effects ofuse on
neighboring properties given identifications ofconcerns specific to a particular site.
iii. The provider shall comply with subtitles 2 and 3 as defined in Health -General
Article, Title 14 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The applicant must be able to
present a licensing certificate and inspection report from the State of Maryland.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 13
iv. The applicant must provide guarantees as maybe deemed necessary bythe Board that
the proposed elderly daycare center will not constitute a nuisance nor be disruptive to
the neighborhood due to the number of elderly being cared for, noise, traffic, or any
other activity associated with the use. The Board will specifically consider existing
daycares within a five hundred foot (500) radius ofthe proposed daycare in order to
determine the extent ofneighborhood impact. Said radius shall be measured from the
center point of the front building setback line.
v. The applicant must demonstrate to the Board' s satisfaction that sufficient pickup and
drop- off areas are available.
Section 1140. Clinics
a) A medical or dental clinic shall be subject to the following specific conditions:
i. Minimum lot area, 40,000 square feet.
ii. Minimum frontage, 200 feet.
iii. Minimum setback, 40 feet from all property lines.
iv. Maximum building height, as specified in zone.
v. Maximum building coverage, 15 percent.
vi. Location of access, on business district street, arterial, or major highways.
vii. Disposal of waste shall be through approved, safe means and shall be separate from
regular trash disposal.
b) Accessory services, including laboratories and pharmacies for the use of patients visiting
medical practitioners in the clinic, shall be permitted as part of the clinic facility, subject to
the following specific conditions:
i. All entrances to parts ofthe building in which these accessory services are provided
shall be from within the building and any direct access from the street is prohibited.
ii. The hours during which these services are provided shall be the same as those during
which medical practitioners are receiving patients.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 14
Section 1141. Drive-in/ fast food restaurants, banks
a) A drive-in restaurant may be allowed upon a finding, in addition to findings required in
Article X, that:
i. The use will not constitute a nuisance because ofnoise, illumination, fumes, odors, or
physical activity in the location proposed.
ii. The use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard or traffic nuisance
because ofits location in relation to similar uses, necessity of turning movements in
relation to its access to public roads and intersections, or its location in relation to
other buildings or proposed buildings on or near the site and the traffic patterns from
such buildings or cause frequent turning movements across sidewalks and pedestrian
ways, thereby disrupting pedestrian circulation within a concentration of retail
activity. A traffic impact study shall be required.
iii. The use ofthe proposed location will not pre-empt frontage on any highway or public
road in such manner so as to substantially reduce the visibility and accessibility ofan
interior commercial area zoned or proposed for commercial use that is oriented to the
same highway or public road.
iv. When such use abuts a residential zone or institutional premises not recommended
for reclassification to commercial or industrial zone on an adopted master plan and is
not effectively screened by a natural terrain feature, the use shall be screened by a
solid wall or a substantial, slightly, solid fence, not less than five feet in height,
together with a three- foot wide planting strip on the outside of such wall or fence,
planted in shrubs and evergreens three feet high at the time of original planting and
which shall be maintained in good condition. Location, maintenance, vehicle sight
distance provision, advertising, and parking areas pertaining to screening shall be as
provided for in this ordinance.
v. When such use occupies a corner lot, the ingress or egress driveways shall be located
at least 20 feet from the intersection of the front and side street lines of the lot, as
defined in Article XII, and such driveways shall not exceed 25 feet in width, provided
that, in areas where no master plan ofhighways has been adopted, the street line shall
be considered to be at least 60 feet from the centerline of any abutting street or
highway.
vi. Drive through lanes shall be marked with distinctive pavement markings and/or
special striping and shall not block exit or entry to building or to off-street parking
spaces otherwise required on the site.
vii. Adequate spaces for stacking ( line-up) at drive through facilities shall be provided.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 15
Specifically, bank: five for first station plus two for each additional station;
restaurant: seven per station, five of which must be before the ordering station
intercom)
viii. Vehicular access shall not be by means of any street internal to a subdivision for
single-family dwellings.
Section 1142. Education institutions, private
a) Except where permitted by right, a lot, tract. or parcel of land maybe allowed to be used for
a private educational institution as a special exception upon a finding by the Board:
i. That such use will not constitute a nuisance because of traffic, number of students,
noise, type of physical activity, or any other element that is incompatible with the
environment and character of the surrounding neighborhoods; and
ii. That, except for buildings and additions thereto completed, or for which building
permits have been obtained prior to the time of adoption ofthis section, such use will
be housed in buildings architecturally compatible with other buildings in the
surrounding neighborhoods, and, in the event that such building is to be located on a
lot, tract, or parcel of land of two acres or less, in either an undeveloped area or an
area substantially developed with single-family homes, that the exterior architecture
of such building will be of a residential home design and at least comparable to
existing residential homes, if any, in the immediate neighborhood; and
iii. That such use will not, in and of itself or in combination with other existing uses,
affect adversely or change the present character or future development of the
surrounding residential community; and
iv. That such use can and will be developed in conformity with the following area,
density, building coverage, frontage, setback, access, and screening requirements,
where specified:
A. Area, frontage, and setback. As shall be specified in a site plan of
development approved by the Board, provided that in no event shall such
standards be less than the area regulations for the zone in which the private
educational institution is proposed to be located; and
B. Access building coverage and screening. As shall be specified in a site plan
of development approved by the Board; and
C. Density. Such density, being the allowable number of pupils per acre
permitted to occupy the premises at any one time, as shall be specified by the
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 16
Board upon consideration of the following factors:
b)
1. Traffic patterns, including:
a] Impact of increased traffic on residential streets;
b] Existence of arterial highways; and
2. Noise or type of physical activity;
3. Character, percentage, and density of existing development and
zoning within the community; and
4. Topography of the land to be used.
If the school offers general academic instruction below college level, an outdoor play area (or
other outdoor activity area) shall be required that shall have a usable space of at least 100
square feet per student. The area shall be located at least 25 feet from any adjoining lot.
c) Non -conforming uses. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent any existing private
educational institution that obtained a special exception prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance from continuing its use to the full extent authorized under the resolution granting
the respective special exception.
Section 1143. Festivals or events, occasional, outdoor
Occasional outdoor festivals or events, including, but not limited to horse shows, carnivals, dog
shows, arts and crafts shows, music festivals, etc., and seasonal business use may be allowed,
provided:
i. The proposed site shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the use without
adversely affecting adjacent land uses.
ii. No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 200 feet of
an existing dwelling; no tent shall be located within 250 feet of an existing dwelling.
iii. A drawing to scale shall accompany the application and shall accurately depict the
standards of this section.
iv. Non-recurring festivals or events shall not exceed seven days in any 12 consecutive
months.
v. Seasonal business uses shall not exceed a total of 90 days in any 12 consecutive
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 17
months.
vi. Amaximum continuous sound level of 60 db and a maximum peak sound level of75
db shall not be exceeded adjacent to land used for residential purposes, and
operations shall cease not later than 11: 30 pm.
vii. Activity areas shall be at least 500 feet from a residential district.
viii. Vehicular access shall be derived only from an arterial or major collector.
ix. A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for every 500 square feet of
ground area.
Section 1144. Funeral parlors or undertaking establishments
a) The use of a tract or parcel of land or buildings for a funeral parlor or undertaking
establishment may be allowed upon a finding by the approval authority that:
The use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, traffic, or type of physical
activity. Such use shall be devoted to services usually incident to funeral parlor and
undertaking establishment operation including, but not limited to, transportation of
human remains to and from the premises; embalming, cosmeticing, and casketing of
remains; visiting of the premises by decedents' families and the general public for the
purpose of viewing the remains and conducting business with the establishment;
delivery and storage of caskets, including a room or area devoted to display thereof,
provided the cremation of remains is expressly prohibited. In any residential zone,
the premises shall, and, in any commercial zone, may maintain either as a separate
building or a portion ofthe main building one dwelling unit, which shall be occupied
by the owner or an employee of the establishment.
ii. The property and building shall conform to the following:
A. The percentage of the lot covered by buildings shall not exceed 15 percent.
B. Minimum lot are: one acre.
C. Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
D. Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet each side.
E. Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
F. Building height limit: same as specified in the applicable zone.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 18
G. Minimum frontage at the building line: 100 feet.
H. Public water and sewer are available and shall be used for the operation ofthe
facilities.
I. The grounds and exterior of all buildings shall be kept and maintained in
conformity with the prevailing standards of the community.
J. The following additional requirements shall also be met:
1. Special conditions, such as provisions for additional fencing or
planting or other landscaping, additional setback from property lines,
location, arrangement of lighting, and other reasonable requirements
deemed necessary to safeguard the general community interest and
welfare, as may be invoked by the approval authority.
2. The method of waste disposal shall meet the standards set by the
Town, County, State or Federal governments.
Section 1145. Greenhouses, commercial nurseries
A horticultural nursery or commercial greenhouse may be allowed, together with buildings incidental
thereto, upon a finding by the Board that such use will not constitute a nuisance because oftraffic,
noise, or other factors. The sale of plants, trees, shrubs, seeds, fertilizers, plant foods, hand tools,
hand spraying and watering equipment, and pesticides directly related to residential gardening shall
be permitted, provided that such tools and equipment are not displayed outdoors. Nothing herein
shall be construed to permit the sale or storage of general hardware or power equipment. No such
horticultural nursery or commercial greenhouse shall be located on a tract of land containing less
than two acres and no part ofany building thereon shall be less than 50 feet from the nearest property
line. Greenhouses shall have a minimum setback oftwice the height of the building, and storage of
all materials which produce odors or attract pests shall be effectively covered.
Section 1146. Golf courses and country clubs
a) The approval authority may authorize a golf course, country club, private club, or service
organization including community buildings, upon a finding that the proposed use will not
adversely affect surrounding residential uses because ofnoise, traffic, number of people, or
type ofphysical activity, providing that the following standards and requirements can be met:
i. The provision of food, refreshments, and entertainment for club or organization
members and their guests may be allowed in connection with such use, provided the
availability ofsuch services is not reasonably expected to draw an excessive amount
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 19
of traffic through local residential streets.
ii. All buildings shall conform to the height, coverage, and setback regulations of the
zone in which they are located, and all facilities shall be so located as to conform to
other special exception standards.
iii. All outdoor lighting shall be located, shielded, landscaped, or otherwise buffered so
that no direct light shall constitute an intrusion into any residential area.
iv. A minimum 100 -foot setback for all buildings and parking areas shall be provided
adjacent to single-family dwelling districts or uses.
v. Vehicular access shall be derived from an arterial street.
vi. Thirty parking spaces shall be provided per nine holes and one space per 500 square
feet of club floor area.
vii. A minimum 50 -foot buffer shall be provided adjacent to the clubhouse/ office and
parking areas when said facilities are located adjacent to single-family dwelling
districts or uses.
viii. A minimum 25 -foot buffer shall be provided adjoining single- family zoning or uses
not part of the golf course development. Buffers shall be adequate to prevent the
escape of golf balls from the course.
ix. Off-street parking and loading areas, tennis courts, golf tees, and maintenance
facilities may require additional screening as determined by the board.
Section 1147. Golf driving range
A golf driving range may be allowed, provided that the surrounding area is predominantly
undeveloped. Such a use shall be for a period of not more than two years, subject to renewal.
Section 1148. Group assisted living facility
a) An assisted living facility may be allowed upon a finding by the Board:
i. That such use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, vehicle traffic or
parking, number of residents, or any other type of physical activity;
ii. That such use will not, when considered in combination with other existing assisted
living facilities in the neighborhood, result in an excessive concentration of similar
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 20
b)
c)
uses in the same general neighborhood of the proposed use;
iii. That any property to be used for an assisted living facility is of sufficient size to
accommodate the proposed number of residents and staff; and
iv. That the site to be used as an assisted living facility for children provide ample
outdoor play space, free from hazard and appropriately equipped for the age and
number of children to be cared for.
In order to expedite decisions regarding proposed assisted living facilities, the Board shall
give priority consideration in scheduling public hearings and in deciding petitions for such
facilities.
Non -conforming use. Where any " child care residence for up to eight children" or "group
home for mentally retarded people" has been lawfully established at the same location prior
to the effective date of this ordinance, such use shall not be required to obtain a special
exception.
d) Applicant shall meet requirements of the State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
e) The Planning Commission may prescribe specific conditions determined necessary to
minimize effects ofuse on neighboring properties given identification ofconcerns specific to
a particular site.
f) Parking and loading shall be provided at the rear of the site.
g) Adequate access to medical services, shopping areas, recreational, and other community
services often desired by elderly and handicapped people shall be available to residents or
provided on the site for residents.
h) Business uses that are permitted as accessory uses shall be integrated with the dwelling units
and oriented towards the interior of the project. No exterior signs or other evidence of
business facilities shall be visible from the periphery of the site.
i)
j)
The project shall be designed to provide a transition near the periphery ofthe site, either with
open space areas and landscaping or by designing the buildings near the periphery to be
harmonious in density and type with the surrounding neighborhood.
Open space areas, recreational facilities, and other accessory facilities shall be developed in
each phase ofdevelopment to meet the needs ofthe residents. The developer shall provide a
schedule for the installation of facilities at the time of approval.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 21
Section 1149. Home occupations
Home occupations within the context of the definition of home occupations provided in this
Ordinance are permitted subject to the following:
a) Not more than one person other than members ofthe family residing on the premises shall be
engaged in such occupation.
b) The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and clearly
subordinate to its use as a residence and not more than 25 percent, including an attached
garage or 300 square feet ofthe floor area ofthe dwelling unit or 300 square feet ofthe floor
area of the accessory building shall be used in the conduct of such occupation.
c) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, other than
one sign as permitted in Article XVI. Residential appearance shall be maintained and the
proposed development shall be in keeping with the character of the neighborhood.
d) No equipment or process shall be used which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or
electrical interference detectable outside of the dwelling unit.
e) No article of commodity shall be offered for sale or publicly displayed on the premises
except those incidental to services offered.
1) Parking generated by the conduct ofsuch home occupation shall be met offthe street and in a
location other than in a required front yard.
g) Funeral homes, veterinary animal hospitals and grocery stores shall not be permitted as home
occupations.
h) A private educational institution, boardinghouse, rooming house, or tourist home shall not be
deemed a home occupation.
Section 1150. Hospitals
A lot or parcel or tract of land to be used for a hospital or sanitarium building may be allowed, upon
a finding by the Board that such use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, traffic, or
number of people being cares for; that such use will not affect adversely the present character or
future development of the surrounding residential community; and, ifthe lot, parcel, or tract ofland
on which the buildings to be used by such institution are located, conforms to the following
minimum area, frontage, and setback requirements, off-street parking, green area requirements, and
building height limit:
a). Total area: five acres
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 22
b). Frontage: 200 feet
c). All structures shall be located at least 200 feet from any adjacent residential lot and 50 feet
from any other use.
d). All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any adjacent residential lot and shall
be limited to a minimum in the front yard.
e). Accessory uses may include recreational and educational services, therapy areas, retail stores,
personal and professional services, and health services, provided that use ofthese facilities is
limited to on-site residents and their guests.
f). A minimum of 50 percent ofthe gross site area shall be open space. The open space shall be
generally continuous, accessible to the residents, and protective of natural features.
g). The approval authority or the applicant shall request a recommendation from the Planning
Commission with respect to a site plan, submitted by the applicant, achieving and
conforming to the objectives and requirements ofthis section for off-street parking and open
space.
h). Building height limit: 75 feet.
i). A resolution approving establishment by the Board ofHealth shall be filed with the Town of
Indian Head.
Section 1151. Hotels and motels
A hotel, motel, or inn may be allowed, provided that all the requirements imposed in the zone are
met and provided further that special conditions -- such as for additional fencing and/ or planting or
other landscaping, additional setback from property lines, location and arrangement oflighting, and
other reasonable requirements deemed necessary to safeguard the general community interest and
welfare -- may be invoked by the approval authority as requisites to the grant of special exception.
a). Accessory uses may include gift shop, beauty shop, barber shop, restaurant, cocktail
lounge/night club, auditorium/meeting facilities, and similar retail stores and commercial
establishments. Planning Commission may require studies of the market for specific
accessory uses as well as the principal use.
b). Circulation and parking shall be adequate to fulfill requirements of all proposed uses,
principal and accessory. A traffic analysis shall be provided by the applicant demonstrating
adequacy of the system to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
c). The applicant shall design building roof to screen mechanical equipment from public view
11111 Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 23
and to contribute to an attractive streetscape.
d). The applicant shall develop the public streetscape between the street -front building and the
street curb to accommodate safe and convenient pedestrian movement.
e). The applicant shall locate amenities such as lighting, seating, shelter, and landscaping into
attractive groupings that provide for safe and unobstructed pedestrian movement.
1). The applicant shall design fences and retaining walls that are consistent in materials and
quality to that of the building and the adjacent properties.
g). The applicant shall design and locate signs so that their illumination is directed away from
adjacent neighbors.
h). The applicant shall integrate ground signs into the design of the site and the streetscape.
Vehicular access to the subject property shall not be by means of any street internal to a
subdivision for one -family dwellings.
Section 1152. Reserved
Section 1153. Mini -warehouses
A mini -warehouse may be permitted, provided:
a). At least 75 percent ofthe total on- site storage space shall be contained in individual enclosed
stalls containing no more than 500 square feet each and no greater than 10 feet high.
b). No activities other than the dead storage or transfer of non-volatile goods or leasing of
storage space are permitted. Prohibited uses include, but are not limited to, miscellaneous
sales; fabrication or repair ofvehicles, equipment, or other goods; transfer -storage business
based on site; residential uses ( other than the resident manager's apartment), or any use that
creates a nuisance due to noise, odor, dust, light, or electrical interference.
c). An on-site manager or resident manager shall be required and shall be responsible for the
operation of the facility in conformance with conditions of approval. A resident manager's
apartment shall be included in the use permit.
d). Adequate access and parking shall be provided. Parking for storage purposes shall be
provided via a driving/parking land adjacent to each storage space/ stall, with a minimum 30 -
foot width for one-way routes where accessed on one side ofthe land and a 45 -foot width for
a two-way route or where accessed on both sides.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 24
e). Adjoining properties sued or zoned for residential/dwelling purposes:
Non -street -facing property lines shall be improved with a minimum six- foot high,100
percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length (except
for approved access crossings); said improvements are to be located outside any
public right-of-way and interior to a minimum 50 -foot natural undisturbed buffer.
ii. Street -facing property lines shall require a minimum six- foot, 100 percent opaque,
wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length ( except for approved access
crossings); said improvements are to be located outside any public right-of-way and
interior to a minimum 20 -foot landscape strip.
f). Adjoining all properties used or zoned for other than residential/dwelling purposes:
i. Non -street -facing property lines shall be improved with a minimum six- foot high,
100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length,
interior to a 10 -foot landscape strip.
ii. Street -facing property lines shall be provided with aminimum 20 -foot landscape strip
or buffer as specified in Appendices E and F and a minimum six-foot high, 100
percent opaque, wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length (except for
approved access crossings) located outside anypublic right-of-way and interior to any
required landscape strips and/ or buffers.
Section 1154. Nursing Care Institutions
a) Anursing home or care home may be allowed upon a finding by the Board that such use will
not constitute a nuisance because of traffic, noise, or number of patients or people being
cared for; that, except for buildings completed prior to the time of adoption of this section
and additions thereto, such use will be housed in buildings architecturally compatible with
other buildings in the surrounding neighborhood; that such use will not adversely affect the
present character or future development ofthe surrounding residential community; and that
such use can and will be developed in conformity with the following minimum area, density,
coverage, frontage, setback, access, and screening requirements where specified:
i. Care home for care of not more than nine people:
A. Total area: 20,000 square feet.
B. Frontage: fifty (50) feet.
C. Setback: same as in the area regulations for the zone in which the care home
or nursing home is proposed to be located.
4110 Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 25
ii. All care institutions hereafter established and all additions to existing homes where
nine or more people are cared for:
A. Minimum lot area, as stated in the applicable zone, but in no case less than
one acre.
B. Maximum density.
1. One bed per eight hundred ( 800) square feet of net lot area in only
residential zones.
2. One bed per six hundred ( 600) square feet of net lot area in
commercial zones.
C. Maximum coverage, as required in the applicable zone.
D. Minimum lot frontage, as stated in the requirements for the applicable zone.
E. Minimum setbacks.
1. Front yards, as specified for the applicable zone, except that, for
purposes of this section, all yards facing a street shall be considered
front yards.
2. Side yards. The following minimums are in addition to those
otherwise required in the various zones:
a] One ( 1) foot for each side yard for each bed in a residential
zone.
b] One half ( Y2) feet for each side yard for each bed in
commercial and planned development zones.
c] In no case shall any minimum side yard be required to be
greater than fifty ( 50) feet more than would otherwise be
required in the applicable zone.
3. Back yards: one- half of the total of both side yards as required in
paragraph 2. above, but not less than the minimum required in the
applicable zone.
F. Minimum screening, as determined by the Board with special attention given
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 26
to off-street parking and loading areas in accordance with Articles XVII and
XVIII and in no case less than bufferyard ' C' as shown in Appendix F.
G. The Board shall increase the number ofoff-street parking spaces required for
nursing or care homes under Article XVII where the operation or method of
operation, or type of care to be provided, indicates such increase will be
needed.
Section 1155. Parking and Storage Requirements for Major Commercial vehicles and
Recreational Equipment
a) The parking or storage of major recreational equipment, including but not limited to ,
travel trailers, utility trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent
trailers, boats and boat trailers, amphibious houseboats, or similar equipment normally
used for recreational purposes shall be permitted as an accessory use in all residential
districts, subject, however, to the following regulations and requirements:
i. No more than two (2) items of recreational equipment may be parked on a lot for
each dwelling unit located thereon, other than in a totally enclosed building.
ii. Such major recreational equipment shall not exceed 28 feet in length, eight feet in
width, and 10 feet in height, exclusive of masts, antennas, ventstacks, windshields
or other accessories.
iii. Such equipment shall not be used for living, sleeping, housekeeping or business
purposes, nor shall such major recreational equipment be connected to any utility
service, except for temporary periods solely for replenishing supplies or for the
servicing or repair of equipment.
iv. Major recreational equipment shall not be parked or stored in a manner which
infringes upon the setback requirements for accessory buildings in the residential
district in which the lot is located.
v. Site plans for residential development which provide common parking areas, such
as townhouse or apartment developments, shall show special provisions made for
storage and screening of storage areas for major recreational equipment.
b) The parking or storage of school buses or other buses, commercial tractors or trailers,
specialized construction equipment, or any commercial vehicle over two ton capacity is
prohibited, except that school buses may be parked during normal school hours, provided
such parking does not obstruct traffic or traffic visibility. Outside parking or storage of
more than one commercial vehicle of any type is prohibited in any residential district
except when such vehicle is used in conjunction with or is accessory to and parked or
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 27
stored on the site of a permitted use, including but not limited to farming, a construction
site, or a permitted public or semi-public use such as a utility, school, church or other
institution.
Section 1156. Public utility buildings and public utility structures
a) In any zone, a public utility building or public utility structure not otherwise permitted,
including radio and television broadcasting stations and towers (but not including electric
power transmission or distribution lines carrying in excess of 69,000 volts, which
findings shall be controlled only by subsection (f) hereunder, may be allowed, where the
board finds that:
i. The proposed building or structure at the location selected is necessary for public
convenience and service.
ii. The proposed building or structure at the location will not endanger the health and
safety of workers and residents in the community and will not substantially impair
or prove detrimental to neighboring properties.
b) Public utility buildings in any permitted residential zone shall, whenever practicable, have
the exterior appearance of residential buildings and shall have suitable landscaping,
screen planting, and fencing, wherever deemed necessary by the Board.
c) Any proposed broadcasting tower shall have a setback of one foot from all property lines
for every foot of height of the tower, provided that any broadcasting tower lawfully
existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be exempt from the setback
limitations imposed by this subsection and may be continued, structurally altered,
reconstructed, or enlarged provided that no structural change, repair, addition, alteration,
or reconstruction shall result in increasing the height of such tower above the then
existing structurally designed height nor result in locating/relocating guy wires further
from the tower.
d) Examples of public utility buildings and structures for which special exceptions are
required under this section are buildings and structures for the occupancy, use, support, or
housing of switching equipment, regulators, stationary transformers, and other such
devices for supply electric service; telephone offices; railroad, bus, trolley, air, and boat
passenger stations; radio or television transmitter towers and stations.
e) In any zone, overhead electric power and energy transmission and distribution lines
carrying in excess of 69,000 volts may be permitted by special exception where:
i. The proposed use does not have an unduly adverse effect on the general plan for
the physical development of the district as embodied in this Ordinance and in the
comprehensive plan or portion thereof adopted by the Town Council;
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 28
ii. The proposed use will not adversely affect the health and safety of the residents or
workers in the area;
iii. There is a public necessity for the proposed building, structure, or facility at the
location selected; and
iv. The proposed use will have the least possible detrimental effect to the use of
development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood.
v. In making such findings, the Board shall consider the following factors, and such
other factors as the Board may find to be necessary or important to effectuate its
review:
A. Points at which the proposed line crosses heavily traveled highways or
streets, or other arteries of transportation, either existing or proposed;
B. Proximity of the line to schools, churches, theatres, clubs, museums, fair
grounds, or other places of assembly, either existing or proposed;
C. The amount and probability of low-level flying over the line and nearness
of the line to airports and/ or heliports, either existing or proposed;
D. Any fire hazard or interference with fire fighting equipment due to the
location and construction of the proposed line
E. Proximity of the line to public parks and recreational areas, either existing
or proposed;
F. Effect upon property values of those who will not be compensated for a
taking under the laws of the state;
G. The effect upon environmental quality and ecological balance of protected
watersheds, planned open space between corridors of development and
green belt areas surrounding satellite community development; and
H. Proximity of the line to historic sites and structures.
Section 1157. Retail establishments in a group of multiple -family dwellings
Retail sales and personal service establishments in a group of multi -family dwellings may be
permitted in the TCMX zone subject to the following requirements:
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 29
a). Only the following types of establishments shall be permitted:
Banks or saving and loan offices
Barber and beauty shops
Book stores
Drug stores
Dry-cleaning and laundry pick-up stations
Florists
Food and beverage stores
Gift shops
Jewelry stores
Laundromats
Newsstands
Office, banking
Restaurants
Variety and dry goods stores
The establishments shall be primarily for the service of the residents of the
building or complex in which it is located, and no deliveries shall be made except
to such residents.
c). The establishments shall not be located on any floor above the ground -level,
except that a restaurant may be located on a top floor or penthouse.
d). The establishments shall be located and constructed as to protect tenants of the
building from noise, traffic, odors, and interference with privacy.
Section 1158. Retail establishments in an office building
Retail sales and personal service establishments in an office building may be permitted subject to
the following requirements:
a). The establishments shall be primarily for the service of the tenants and employees
of the building or group of buildings on the same lot or group of contiguous lots in
common ownership or control.
b). Such establishments shall occupy not more than 30 percent of the total floor area
of the building or group of buildings.
c). The establishments shall be so located and constructed as to protect tenants of the
building from noise, traffic, odors, and interference with privacy.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 30
Section 1159. Residential structures - single-family attached and multi -family units
a) Townhouses
i. Both sides ofrear yards shall be screened with a privacy type fence or hedge of six
6) feet minimum height approved by the Planning Commission and extending not
less than fifteen (15) feet from the rear building wall.
ii. Open Space. A minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet per townhouse lot
shall be maintained in common open space areas exclusive of front, side, or rear
yards in a location approved by the Planning Commission.
iii. Landscaping. All areas not occupied by buildings, roads, parking areas, service
areas, or other required or permitted uses, including open spaces and usable
recreation areas shall be landscaped by lawns, trees, shrubs, gardens, or other
suitable ground cover.
iv. Landscaping plan and approval. A landscaping plan and a schedule ofplanting
shall be included with the site plan. Landscaping plans shall meet the
requirements of the sediment control ordinance and other applicable regulations.
v. Building requirements and relationship.
A. Dwelling units per townhouse structure and length of structure. No more
than five dwelling units shall be contained in a townhouse structure
without a setback between structures as specified below.
B. Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between any two
unattached townhouse structures shall be forty (40) feet. The distance
shall be increased to sixty (60) feet if the townhouse structures are face to
face. The point of measurement shall be the exterior walls of the
structures and does not include balconies or other architectural features. In
the event that the structures are contained within a townhouse cluster, the
above distances may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet and forty (40) feet
respectively.
C. Distance to service areas. No townhouse structure shall be closer than
twenty (20) feet to any interior driveway or closer than fifteen ( 15) feet to
any off-street parking area excluding garages built into an individual
townhouse unit.
D. Code requirements. All structures shall comply with all Town, County
and State Codes. In addition, separation walls between units must be a
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 31
listed, fire rated assembly, constructed of block and all units must be
provided with sprinkler protection in accordance with the requirements of
NFPA 13D. Exterior walls shall be constructed of brick. The use of
aluminum or vinyl siding is not permitted.
E. All lots within a townhouse cluster shall front on a public way. A public
way intended for pedestrian circulation shall have a minimum width of
five (5) feet.
F. All public ways or other common facilities within a townhouse cluster
shall be maintained by the property owners within the townhouse cluster.
G. A townhouse cluster shall not be bisected or penetrated by a public street.
H. A public way intended for pedestrian circulation shall be provided
between abutting rear lot lines.
I. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVII of this Ordinance.
b) Garden apartments.
i. Density controls.
A. Maximum density. The maximum density shall not exceed the permitted
density for the Zoning District as average for the total area.
B. Open area. A minimum of thirty (30%) percent of the total tract area shall
be maintained as open area. This required open area shall not be devoted
to service driveways, off-street parking, or loading spaces or drying yards.
It is further provided that twenty-five (25%) of the above -referenced open
area be suitable for usable recreational space and each such recreational
space shall be at least fifty (50) feet in the least dimension with a
minimum area of five thousand ( 5, 000) square feet.
c) Other multi -family development.
Density controls. When permitted in a residential zoning district the multi -family
structure shall meet the maximum density for that district. When permitted in
other zoning districts, the intensity will be regulated by the floor area ratio
standards below.
ii. Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio is shown in the Schedule of Zone
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 32
Regulations ( Section 1209). In calculating the floor area ratio, only the floor area
contained within the principal structure shall be included. Floor area within
covered parking garages, providing this area is exclusively devoted to off-street
parking facilities, is excluded from the calculation.
iii. Building coverage. The following maximum lot coverage shall apply to principal
and accessory buildings within the District.
A. The maximum coverage ofprincipal buildings shall not exceed twenty
20%) percent of the total tract area.
B. A combination of principal buildings and accessory parking structures
shall not exceed a maximum tract coverage of thirty-five (35%) percent.
iv. Minimum floor areas. For the purposes of this section, the following shall be
considered minimum habitable floor areas:
A. Efficiency apartments - 600 square feet
B. One -bedroom apartment - 700 square feet
C. Two-bedroom apartment - 800 square feet
D. Three or more bedroom apartments - 1, 200 square feet.
v. Open area. A minimum of thirty (30%) percent of the total tract area shall be
maintained as open area. It is further provided that fifty (50%) percent ofthe
above -referenced open area shall be maintained for and suitable as usable
recreation space. This required recreation space shall be in such dimensions as to
be usable for active and passive recreation.
vi. Setbacks. All buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of two
hundred (200) feet from the right-of-way line of any public street or adjacent
property lines. This setback shall be exclusively devoted to landscaping and open
area and shall not be occupied by any building, structure, or off-street parking
area.
vii. Setback between buildings. The setback between any two principal buildings on
the same lot shall be two (2) feet of setback for every one ( 1) foot of building
height, provided, however, that the minimum setback between buildings shall be
fifty (50) feet.
viii. Landscaping.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 33
A. Area to be landscaped. All lot area not occupied by principal and
accessory structures, required off-street parking and loading, access and
circulation facilities, or other required areas shall be landscaped by lawns,
trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other appropriate materials.
B. Bufferyards. Within the required setback areas, there shall be a
landscaped bufferyard as set forth in Article XVIII.
ix. Building height.
A. Principal building or structure. Within the RMX or WMX Planned
Districts, principal structures may be erected to a height not exceeding 75
feet when the required side and rear yards are each increased by at least
one ( 1) foot for each additional foot of building height above the height
restrictions for the district in which the building is located, except as
otherwise prohibited in as an obstruction to air navigation. When
permitted in zoning districts outside the RMX and WMX Districts, the
height shall be limited to the overall height limitations of that District.
B. Accessory structures. No accessory structure shall exceed two (2) stories
or twenty (20) feet in height.
x. Signs. Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI.
xi. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be required for each use in accordance
with the provisions of Article XVII.
Section 1160. Service clubs and philanthropic institutions
An eleemosynary or philanthropic institution may be allowed upon a finding by the Board that the
proposed use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, traffic, number of people, or type of
physical activity, subject to the following minimum area, frontage, and setback requirements:
a). Total area: 25, 000 square feet
b). Frontage: 150 feet
c). Setback: 25 feet from all property lines.
Section 1161. Swimming pools, commercial
A commercial swimming pool, including accessory buildings, may be allowed upon a finding by the
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Mafyland 11. 34
board that such a use will not constitute a nuisance because of traffic, noise, or physical activity,
provided that the following minimum area, frontage, and setback requirements shall be complied
with:
a). Area: five acres.
b). Frontage: 300 feet.
c). Swimming pools, recreation areas, and buildings shall be at least 200 feet from any
residential zone.
d). Setback: 50 feet from the front property line, 35 feet from the rear line, and 25 feet from
each side property line in all other zones.
Section 1164. Swimming pools, community
Where a community swimming pool is allowed, the approval authority shall determine that such use
will not adversely affect the present character or future development ofthe surrounding residential
community and that such use of land will conform to the following minimum requirements:
a). The swimming pool, including the apron and any buildings, shall not at any point be closer
than 75 feet to the nearest property line nor closer than 125 to any existing single- family or
two- family dwelling, provided that where the lot upon which it is located abuts a railroad
right-of-way, publicly owned land or land in a commercial or industrial zone such pool may
be constructed not less than 25 feet at any point from such railroad right-of-way, publicly
owned land, or commercial or industrial zone. Anybuildings erected on the site ofany such
pool shall comply with the yard requirements of the zone in which the pool is located.
b)•
c).
A public water supply shall be available and shall be used for the pool or use of a private
supply ofwater for the pool will not adversely affect the water supply of the community.
When the lot on which any such pool is located abuts the rear or side lot line of, or is across
the street from, any land in a residential zone, other than publicly owned land, a wall, fence,
or shrubbery shall be erected or planted so as to substantially screen such pool from view
from the nearest property of such land in a residential zone.
d). Special conditions deemed necessary to safeguard the general community interest and
welfare, such as provisions for off-street parking, additional fencing or planting or other
landscaping, additional setback from property lines, location and arrangement oflighting and
other reasonable requirements, including a showing of financial responsibility by the
applicant, may be required by the Board as a requisite to the grant of a special exception.
Financial responsibility shall not be construed to mean a showing of a 100 percent cash
position at the time of application, but shall be construed to mean at least 60 percent.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 35
Part III. Manufacturing/Processing Performance Standards
The following performance standards are established for the control of the negative impacts of
manufacturing/processing uses on other uses.
Section 1180. Smoke
a) For the purpose of determining the density of equivalent opacity ofsmoke, the Ringlemann
Chart, as adopted and published by the United States Department of Interior, Bureau of
Mines Information Circular 8333, May 1967, shall be used. The Ringlemann number
referred to in this section refers to the number of the area of the Ringlemann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density ofequivalent opacity ofthe emission ofsmoke
observed. For example, a reading ofRinglemann No. 1 indicates a 20 percent density ofthe
smoke observed.
b) All measurements shall be taken at the point of emission of the smoke.
c) In all zoning districts, no 4.000 classification use may emit from a vent, stack, chimney, or
combustion process any smoke that is visible to the naked eye.
d) In the CG -2 and BP districts, no 4.000 classification use may emit from a vent, stack,
chimney, or combustion process any smoke that exceeds a density or equivalent capacity of
Ringlemann No. 1, except that an emission that does not exceed a density or equivalent
capacity of Ringlemann No. 2 is permissible for a duration of not more than four minutes
during any eight-hour period if the source of such emission is not located within 250 feet ofa
residential district.
e) In the CG -2 and BP districts, no 4.000 classification use may emit from a vent, stack,
chimney, or combustion process any smoke that exceeds a density or equivalent capacity of
Ringlemann No. 2, except that an emission that does not exceed a density or equivalent
capacity of Ringlemann No. 3 is permissible for a duration not more than four minutes
during any eight-hour period if the source of emission is not located within 500 feet of a
residential district.
Section 1181. Noise
a) No 4.000 classification use in any permissible business district may generate noise that tends
to have an annoying or disruptive effect upon (i) uses located outside the immediate space
occupied by the 4.000 use if that use is one of several located on a lot, or (ii) uses located on
adjacent lots.
b) Except as provided in Subsection ( f), the table set forth in Subsection ( e) establishes the
maximum permissible noise levels for 4.000 classification use is located, and, as indicated,
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 36
the maximum permissible noise levels vary according to the zoning ofthe lot adjacent to the
lot on which the 4.000 classification use is located.
c) A decibel is a measure of a unit of sound pressure. Since sound waves having the same
decibel level "sound" louder or softer to the human ear depending upon the frequency ofthe
sound wave in cycles -per -second (i.e., whether the pitch of the sound is high or low) an A -
weighted filter constructed in accordance with the specifications of the American National
Standards Institute, which automatically takes account ofthe varying effect on the human ear
of different pitches, shall be used on any sound level meter taking measurements required by
this section. And accordingly, all measurements are expressed in dB (A) to reflect the use of
his A -weighted filter.
d) The standards established in the table set forth in Subsection (e) are expressed in terms ofthe
Equivalent Sound Level (Leq), which must be calculated by taking 100 instantaneous A -
weighted sound levels at 10 -second intervals ( see Appendix I) and computing the Leq in
accordance with the table set forth in Appendix I.
e) Table ofMaximum Permitted Sound Levels, dB(A).
Zoning of Adjacent Lot
re: 0.0002 Microbar)
Zoning of Lot Where Residential and RMS
4,000 Use Located 7a.m.-7p.m. 7p.m.-7a.m.
CG -1 CG -2
CG -2 50 45 55 65
BP 50 45 60 70
f) Impact noises are sounds that occur intermittently rather than continuously. Impact noises
generated by sources that do not operate more than one minute in any one-hour period are
permissible up to a level of 10 dB (A) in excess ofthe figures listed in Subsection (e), except
that this higher level of permissible noise shall not apply from 7 p.m. to 7 a.m. when the
adjacent lot is zoned residential. The impact noise shall be measured using the fast response
ofthe sound level meter.
g) Noise resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m.
shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
Section 1182. Vibration
a) No. 4.000 classification use in any permissible business district may generate any ground-
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 37
transmitted vibration that is perceptible to the human sense of touch measured at ( i) the
outside boundary ofthe immediate space occupied by the enterprise generating the vibration
if the enterprise is one of several located on a lot, or (ii) the lot line ifthe enterprise is one of
several located on a lot, or (ii) the lot if the enterprise generating the vibration is the only
enterprise located on a lot.
b) No. 4.000 classification use in an CG -2 or BD district may generate any ground -transmitted
vibration in excess of the limits set forth in Subsection (e). Vibration shall be measured at
any adjacent lot line or residential district line as indicated in the table set forth in Subsection
d).
c) The instrument used to measure vibrations shall be a three -component measuring system
capable ofsimultaneous measurement ofvibration in three mutually perpendicular directions.
d) The vibration maximums set forth in Subsection (e) are stated in terms ofparticle velocity,
which may be measured directly with suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of
displacement and frequency. When computed, the following formula shall be used:
PV=6.28 FxD
Where:
PV=Particle velocity, inches -per -second
F= Vibration frequency, cycles -per -second
D=Single amplitude displacement of the vibration, inches.
The maximum velocity shall be the vector sum of the three components
recorded.
e) Table ofMaximum Ground -Transmitted Vibration
Particle Velocity, Inches -Per -Second
Zoning Adjacent Residential
District Lot Line District
CG -2 0. 10 0.02
BP 0.20 0.02
1) The values stated in Subsection ( e) may be multiplied by two for impact vibrations, i.e.,
discrete vibration pulsations not exceeding one second in duration and having a pause of at
least one second between pulses.
g) Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs between 7 a.m. and 7
p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 38
Section 1183. Odors
a) For purposes ofthis section, the "odor threshold" is defined as the minimum concentration in
air of a gas, vapor, or particulate matter that can be detected by the olfactory systems of a
panel of healthy observers.
b) No. 4.000 classification use in any district may generate any odor that reaches the odor
threshold, measured at:
i. The outside boundary ofthe immediate space occupied by the enterprise generating
the odor.
ii. The lot line if the enterprise generating the odor is the only enterprise located on a
lot.
Section 1184. Air Pollution
a) Any 4.000 classification use that emits any " air contaminant" as defined in the state air
pollution control law shall comply with applicable state standards concerning air pollution, as
set forth in the Annotated Code of Maryland.
b) No zoning, special -use, or conditional -use permit may be issued with respect to any
development covered by Subsection (a) until the Maryland Department of the Environment
has certified to the permit -issuing authority that the appropriate state permits have been
received by the developer, or that the developer will be eligible to receive such permits and
that the development is otherwise in compliance with applicable air pollution laws.
Section 1185. Disposal of Liquid Wastes
a) No 4.000 classification use in any district may discharge any waste contrary to the provisions
of [the state law governing discharges of radiological, chemical, or biological wastes into
surface or subsurface waters].
b) No 4.000 classification use in any district may discharge into the city sewage treatment
facilities any waste that cannot be adequately treated by biological means.
Section 1186. Electrical Disturbance or Interference
No 4.000 classification use may:
a) Create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operations or equipment other
than those of the creator of such disturbance, or
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 39
b) Otherwise cause, create, or contribute to the interference with electronic signals ( including
television and radio broadcasting transmissions) to the extent that the operation of any
equipment not owned by the creator os such disturbance is adversely affected.
Zoning Ordinance June, 2007
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 40
Otherwise cause, create, or contribute to the interference with electronic signals (including
television and radio broadcasting transmissions) to the extent that the operation of y
quipment not owned by the creator os such disturbance is adversely affected.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 11. 38
ARTICLE XII DENSITY, DIMENSIONAL, AND DESIGN REGULATIONS
Section 1200. Minimum Lot Size
Subject to the provisions of Sections 1206 and 1208, all lots shall have at least the amount ofsquare
footage indicated for the appropriate zone. The total gross floor area in all buildings on the lot shall
be considered in determining the adequacy of lot area.
Section 1201. Residential Density
a) Subject to Subsection (b) and the provisions of Section 1206 and Section 1208, every lot
developed for residential purposes shall have the number of square feet per dwelling unit
indicated in the Schedule ofZone Regulations (Section 1209). In determining the number of
dwelling units permissible on a tract of land, fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole
number.
b) Two-family conversions and primary residences with an accessory apartment shall be
allowed only on lots having at least 150 percent ofthe minimum square footage required for
one dwelling unit on a lot in such district. With respect to multi -family conversions into
three- or four -dwelling units, the minimum lot size shall be 200 percent and 250 percent
respectively of the minimum required for one dwelling unit.
Section 1202. Minimum tot Widths
a) No lot may be created that is so narrow or otherwise so irregularly shaped that it would be
impracticable to construct on it a building that:
i. Could be used for purposes that are permissible in that zoning district, and
ii. Could satisfy any applicable setback requirements for that district.,_
b) The Schedule ofZone Regulations (Section 1209) indicates minimum lot widths and depths
that are recommended and are deemed presumptively to satisfy the standard set forth in
Subsection (a). The lot width shall be measured at the narrowest width within the first 30
feet oflot depth immediately in back ofthe front yard setback line. The lot depth shall be the
mean distance between the front and rear lot line, measured within the lot boundaries.
c) No lot created after the effective date of this ordinance that is less than the recommended
width shall be entitled to a variance from any building setback requirement.
Section 1203. Building Setback Requirements
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12. 1
a) Subject to Sections 1204 and the other provisions ofthis section, no portion of any building
or any freestanding sign may be located on any lot closer to any lot line or to the street rightof-
way line or centerline than is authorized in the table set forth in this section.
Ifthe street right-of-way line is readily determinable (by reference to a recorded map,
set irons, or other means), the setback shall be measured from such right-of-wayline.
If the right-of-way line is not so determinable, the setback shall be measured from
the street centerline.
ii. As used in this section, the term "building" includes any substantial structure which
by nature of its size, scale, dimensions, bulk, or use tends to constitute a visual
obstruction or generate activity similar to that usually associated with a building.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following structures shall be
deemed to fall within this description:
a. Gas pumps and overhead canopies or roofs.
b. Fences running along lot boundaries adjacent to public street rights-of-way is
such fences exceed six feet in height and are substantially opaque.
iii. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a sign may be erected on or
affixed to a structure that (i) has aprincipal function that is something other than the
support ofthe sign (e.g., a fence), but (ii) does not constitute a building as defined in
this chapter, only ifsuch sign is located so as to comply with the setback requirement
applicable to freestanding signs in the district where such sign is located.
b) Front Yards.
Averaging setbacks for existing alignment. In any zone, when the average depth of
front yards of existing buildings located within 100 feet of each side of a lot in the
same block front as such lot is less than the minimum front yard depth prescribed for
a building on such lot then the minimum front yard of any building or structure on
such lot shall not be greater than the average depth ofsaid existing front yards and it
shall not be required to exceed the average depth of front yards ofexisting buildings
on the two lots immediately adjoining; nor the average of the prescribed minimum
depth and the depth of the front yard of an existing building on a lot immediately
adjoining such lot; but shall be at least 10 feet. In no event shall any building be
constructed closer than any setback established on a plat of record.
ii. Yard on street side on lot adjoining or facing residence zone. On a lot in any nonresidential
zone sharing the same block front with a lot in any residential zone the
minimum front yard required shall equal in depth the front yard required for that
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12. 2
c)
residential zone.
iii. Front yards not parallel to the building. Where the front wall of a building is not
parallel with the front lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, the average depth of
the front yard shall not be less than the otherwise required front yard; provided,
however, that such front wall shall at all points be within five feet of the otherwise
required front yard depth.
iv. Clear- vision area on corner lots. A clear vision area shall be maintained on the
corners of all property at the intersection of two (2) streets.
a. Such clear -vision area shall consist of a triangular area, two sides ofwhich
are lot lines measured from the corner intersection ofthe street lot lines for a
distance of fifteen (15) feet, or where the lot lines have rounded corners, the
lot lines extended in a straight line to a point ofintersection and so measured,
and the third side of which is a line across the corner of the lot joining the
non -intersecting ends of the other two (2) sides.
b. A clear -vision area shall contain no planting, fence, wall, structure, or
temporary or permanent obstruction exceeding two and one-half (2 Y2) feet in
height, measured from the established street center line grade, except that
trees exceeding this height may be located in this area, provided all branches
and foliage are removed to a height of eightfeet above grade.
Side Yards. Side yard exceptions for attached dwellings. In the case of attached dwelling
units, the entire structure shall be considered as a single building with respect to side yard
requirements.
d) Rear yards. Where the rear wall of a building is not parallel with the rear lot line or is broken
or otherwise irregular, the average depth ofthe rear yard shall not be less than the otherwise
required rear yard, provided, however, that such rear wall shall not at any point be less than
one foot beyond the otherwise required rear yard.
e) Yard requirements adjoining a more restrictive zone. Where a property adjoins the side or
rear yard of a lot in another zone, the side or rear yard in the zone with the less restrictive
yard requirements shall equal the adjoining side or rear yard (as appropriate) ofthe zone with
the more restrictive yard requirements.
f) Setback distances shall be measured from the property line or street right-of-way line to a
point on the lot that is directly below the nearest extension of any part ofthe building that is
substantially a part ofthe building itself and not a mere appendage to it (such as a flagpole,
etc.).
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12. 3
April, 2004
g) Whenever a private road that serves more than three lots or more than three dwelling units or
that serves any nonresidential use tending to generate traffic equivalent to more than three
dwelling units is located along a lot boundary, then:
i. Ifthe lot is not also bordered by a public street, buildings and freestanding signs shall
be set back from the centerline of the private road just as if such road were a public
street.
ii. Ifthe lot is also bordered by a public street, then the setback distance on lots used for
residential purposes (as set forth above in the Schedule ofZone Regulations, Section
1209) shall be measured from the inside boundary of the travelled portion of the
private road.
h) Walls and Fences.
No barbed wire fences shall be permitted within any residential zone. No barbed
wire shall be permitted along any boundary adjoining a residential zone unless such
wire is located not less than six feet above ground level. Protective devices using
barbed wire may be installed upon walls or fences constructed or used in conjunction
with a non -conforming commercial or industrial use in a residential zone. Unless
otherwise prohibited by this section, barbed wire shall be permitted in all business
and industrial zones.
A fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be located in any required rear
or side yard in any residential or commercial district, other than a required front yard
adjacent to a street except as follows:
a. No fence or wall which creates a solid screen may exceed two and one half (2
1/ 2) feet in height in any required front or side yard, except that fences having
a uniform open area of fifty percent ( 50%) or more may be erected to a
maximum height ofthree ( 3) feet in such required yards.
b. Heights shall be measured from the average ground level adjacent to the
fence or wall.
i) Projections.
Covered porches, stairways, terraces or other similar features, the floor level ofwhich
is not over three feet above the average finished grade and which do not extend above
the level of the first floor of the building, when open and unenclosed, may project
into a required front, side or rear yard not more than eight feet, provided that such
covered porches, stairways, terraces, or other similar features conform to the
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12.4
provision of paragraphs ii -iv below.
ii. Outside stairways more than three feet above average finished grade may extend no
more than three feet into any required side yard, nor more than five feet into any
required rear yard.,
iii. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features,
cornices, eaves, gutters, and the like may extend no more than 24 inches into any
required yard.
iv. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no projection as listed above
shall extend into any required side yard more than one-halfthe width ofsuch yard nor
within 10 feet of the front lot line nor five feet of the rear lot line, nor within three
feet of any accessory building, provided, however, that such limitations shall not
apply to terrace and steps inside yards, or to a loading dock, or tailboard in
connection with an industrial siding.
Section 1204. Accessory Building Requirements
a) The following provision shall regulate the location of accessory buildings with respect to
required yards:
i. Accessory buildings shall be prohibited in any required front yard or side street side
yard.
ii. Accessory building shall be distant at least six feet from alley lines and four feet from
rear lot boundary lines.
iii. Where an accessory building is located in a zone requiring a side yard and such
building is entirely to the rear ofthe principal structure, the accessory building shall
be at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line.
iv. Where any portion of an accessory building projects between a principal structure
and the side lot line, the accessory building shall comply with the required side yard
restriction for a principal structure on adjoining lot.
b)
v. Where a corner lot adjoins in the rear a lot in any residential zone, no part of an
accessory building within 25 feet ofthe common lot line shall extend closer to street
than the actual or required (whichever is less) depth of the front yard for the principal
structure on adjoining lot.
Accessory buildings shall not exceed the maximum height restriction for the zone in which
they are located.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12. 5
c) Accessory buildings in residential zones shall not exceed the lot coverage nor the total square
footage of the building to which it is accessory.
d) Where the high point ofthe roof or any appurtenance of any accessory building exceeds 12
feet in height, the accessory building shall be set back from rear lot boundary lines an
additional two feet for every foot of height exceeding 12 feet.
Section 1205. Building Height Limitations
a) For purposes of this section:
i. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure, or part thereof, shall
hereafter be erected or altered to a height greater than the maximum specified for the
respective zone.
ii. The "height" ofa wall or structure or a part of a building is the mean vertical distance
from the average established grade in front of the lot, or from the average natural
grade at the building line, ifhigher, to the average height ofthe top ofthe cornice of
flat roofs, or roof line, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the middle height
ofthe highest gable or dormer in a pitched, or hipped roof, or ifthere are no gables or
dormers, to the middle height of such pitched or hipped roof. Where a lot abuts on
two or more streets or alleys, of different average established grades in front of the
lot, the higher of such grades shall control.
iii. A point of access to a roof shall be the top of any parapet wall or the lowest point of
a roofs surface, whichever is greater. Roofs with slopes greater than 75 percent are
regarded as walls.
b) Subject to the remaining provisions ofthis section, building height limitations in the various
zoning districts shall be as indicated in The Schedule of Zone Regulations ( Section 1209).
c) Exceptions to height limits. Not withstanding other regulations in this Article or the
maximum specified for the respective zone, the height limits ofthis Zoning Ordinance shall
not apply to the following:
i. Church spires, belfries, and cupolas, not for human occupancy; water towers,
chimneys, flag poles, radio towers, masts, and aerials.
d) Towers and antennas are allowed in all zoning districts to the extent authorized in the Table
of Permissible Uses, use classification 18.000.
Section 1206. Cluster Subdivisions
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
12.6
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
a) In anyRMXresidential zone, a developer may create lots that are smaller than those required
by Section 1200 ifsuch developer complies with the provisions ofthis section and ifthe lots
so created are not smaller than the minimums set forth in the Schedule ofZone Regulations
Section 1209).
b) The intent ofthis section is to authorize the developer to decrease lot sizes and leave the land
saved" by doing so as usable open space, thereby lowering development costs and
increasing the amenity value of the project without increasing the density beyond what
would be permissible if the land were subdivided into the size of lots required by Section
1200.
c) The amount of usable open space that must be set aside shall be determined by:
i. Subtracting from the standard square footage requirement set forth in Section 1209
the amount of square footage of each lot that is smaller than that standard;
ii. Adding together the results obtained in ( 1) for each lot.
d) The provisions of this section may only be used if the usable open space set aside in a
subdivisioncomprises at least 10,000 square feet of spacethat satisfies the definition of
usable open space set forth in Section 1302 and if such usable open space is otherwise in
compliance with the provisions of Article XIII.
e) The setback requirements of Sections 1203 and 1204 shall apply in cluster subdivisions.
Section 1207. Town Center Mixed Use
a) The intent of the TCMX floating zone is to provide for a mixture of residential types with
commercial activities to serve primarily a resident population and foster forms of
development that are consistent with traditional neighborhood design principles. The
following Design Objectives and Design Principles shall be used to guide the development of
land in the TCMX zone to achieve the purposes of traditional neighborhood development
which include:
i. Recognizing the community character and heritage of the Town of Indian Head
through the layout of streets and alleys in a grid or modified grid form,
complemented by sidewalks;
ii. To regulate uses and structures at, along or near the Village Center so as to protect
and enhance its unique historical and architectural interest and value;
iii. To promote an effective form for neighborhood conservation, through the use of
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12. 7
standards that require such elements as the placement ofdwellings on a build -to line,
a front porch and detached private garages accessible from an alley;
iv. To provide for opportunities to build on the mixed uses in the village center that help
promote a sense of neighborhood, such as schools, churches, and neighborhood
parks;
v. To help insure that tracts and lots which may be subdivided will preserve the
character of the Town by the continuation of elements such as through -streets and
alleys, sidewalks and shade trees; and
vi. To promote the objectives of the Town of Indian Head Comprehensive Plan.
b) Design Objectives
i Dwellings, shops and workplaces generally located in close proximity to each other;
the scale ofwhich accommodates and promotes pedestrian travel for trips within the
Town.
Modestly sized buildings fronting on, and aligned with, streets in a disciplined
manner, uninterrupted by parking lots.
iii. A generally rectilinear pattern of streets, alleys and blocks reflecting the street
network of the existing Town which provides for a balanced mix ofpedestrians and
automobiles.
iv. Squares, greens landscaped streets and parks woven into the street and block patterns
to provide space for social activity, parks and visual enjoyment.
v. Promotion of civic buildings for assembly or other civic purposes.
vi. A recognizable, functionally diverse, visually unified Town center, focused on a
village green or square.
vii. A development size and scale which accommodates and promotes pedestrian travel
rather than vehicle trips within the Town.
c) Use Standards
The permitted principal uses, accessory uses special exception and conditional uses shall be as
specified in Section 1008 except as they may be modified by the following design standards and
requirements.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12. 8
April, 2004
d) Design Standards and Requirements for Traditional Neighborhood Development in
theTCMX District.
In addition to other design standards contained in this Ordinance and the Town of Indian Head
Subdivision Regulations, the following minimum design requirements shall apply to Planned
Traditional Neighborhood Development in the TCMX District.
i. The front porch shall be placed on the build -to line.
ii. A green space shall be provided between the edge of the sidewalk closest to the
dwelling and the front porch.
iii. The front green space shall be landscaped with shrubs, ground covers, flowers and
the like.
iv. Unless existing shade trees are proposed to remain, a minimum of two shade trees
shall be provided on each lot. This requirements may be met with street trees and
existing trees.
v. Accessory Structures - Detached garages located at the rear of a lot and attached to a
similar garage on a contiguous lot may be located within the side yard setback and
within four (4) feet of the rear property line.
vi. Circulation
1. Streets and alleys shall be a continuation and extension ofexisting streets and
alleys and shall have the name of existing streets and alleys.
2. Alleys shall be at least ten ( 12) feet wide. The right-of-way for an alley shall
be four (4) feet wider than the driving lane.
3. All street shall have curbs, and curbs shall not be required for alleys.
4. Street lights shall be provided and shall not exceed eighteen ( 18) feet in
height at no more than seventy-five (75) foot intervals on both sides of the
street.
Zoning Ordinance
April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12. 9
e)
unit/building.
ix. Fences and walls four (4) foot or less are permitted in the front yard. Fences to a
maximum height of five (5) feet may be permitted in the front yard, provided it is
greater than 50 percent transparent. Frontage fences should be designed to take into
account the amenity ofthe street, surveillance and safety, the security ofchildren and
pets and property, and the use of front landscape space.
In any traditional neighborhood development, the developer may create lots and construct
buildings without regard to any minimum lot size, lot width, or setback restrictions except
that:
i. Lot boundary setback requirements shall apply where and to the extent that the
subdivided tract abuts land that is not part of the subdivision, and
ii. Each lot must be of sufficient size and dimensions that it can support the structure
proposed to be located on it, consistent with all other applicable requirements ofthis
ordinance.
f) The number ofdwelling units in a traditional neighborhood development maynot exceed the
maximum density authorized for the tract in the TCMX district.
Section 1208. Density on Lots Where Portion Dedicated to the Town
a) Subject to the other provisions of this section, if (i) any portion of a tract lies within an area
designated on any officially adopted Town plan as part ofa proposed public park, greenway,
or bikeway, and (ii) before the tract is developed, the owner ofthe tract, with the concurrence
ofthe Town, dedicates that portion ofthe tract so designated, then when the remainder ofthe
tract is developed for residential purposes, the permissible density at which the remainder
may be developed shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this section.
b) Ifthe proposed use ofthe remainder is a single-family detached residential subdivision, then
the lots in such subdivision may be reduced in accordance with the provisions of Sections
1206 and 1207 except that the developer need not set aside usable open space to the extent
that an equivalent amount of land has previously been dedicated to the Town in accordance
with Subsection (a).
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12. 10
April, 2004
c) If the proposed use of the remainder is a two-family or multi -family project, then the
permissible density at which the remainder may be developed shall be calculated by
regarding the dedicated portion ofthe original lot as if it were still part ofthe lot proposed for
development.
d) If the portion of the tract that remains after dedication as provided in Subsection ( a) is
divided in such a way that the resultant parcels are intended for future subdivision or
development, then each of the resultant parcels shall be entitled to its pro rata share of the
density bonus" provided for in Subsections (b) and (c).
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 12. 11
April, 2004
Section
1.
Schedule
of
Zone
Regulations SCHEDULE
OF
ZONE
REGULATIONS
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Yard
Recuirements
Area sq.
ft.)
Area/
du
Width
Depth
Front
Side
Agregate
Frontage
Rear
Maximum Height
Lot Coverage Max. % (
6)
Feet
Stories
Density/
Int
ensity
Max
FAR
or
du'
s/
acre
Min. OSR
Min. LSR
Minimum Tract
Size
R-
1
Singlefamily
residential
low
density
15,
000 7)
75 7)
100 7)
30 7)
10 7)
25 7)
50 7)
25 7)
35
2.
5
30 7)
R-
2
Singlefamily
residential
medium
density
8,
000
75
100
25
10
25
40
25
35
2.
5
30
RM
Singlefamily
8,
000
75
100
25
10
20
18
30
40
3
30
Duplex
6,
000
6,
000
40
100
25
10
20
18
30
40
3
30
Townhouse
1,
500
5)
3)
4)
40
3
50
8
30
15
1
acres
Garden
apartment
40
3
50
15
30
20
5
acres
TCMX Comercial
8,
000
60
100
3
2
5
60
15
60
3
70)
10
Residential
Uses
5)
5)
5)
5)
5)
5)
5)
5)
5)
75
50 1)
20
5)
5)
5
acres
SEE
PAGE
12.
13
FOR
DEFINITIONS
AND EXPLAINATION
OF
NOTES (
1) — (
7)
Townhouse,
Garden
Apartment
and
other
multi -
family
developments
are
subject
to
the
regulations
contained
in
Section
1159.
12.
12
Zoning
Ordinance
Town
of
Indian
Head,
Maryland
March
2004
Section
1209.
Schedule
of
Zone
Regulations SCHEDULE OF
ZONE
REGULATIONS
NOTES
From
page
12.
12)
1)
Varies
by
base
zoning
district (
see
Article
II).
2)
Required
side
and
rear
yards
shal
be
increased
by
at
least
one
foot
for
each
aditional
foot
of
building
above
40
feet.
7) 6) 5) 4) 3)
May
be
reduced
to
15
feet
when
the
lot
does
not
front
on
an
aproved
public
stret.
Shal
be
increased to
20
feet
for
end
units
adjacent
to
an
adjoining
property.
Based
on
the
design
of
the
development.
Includes
both
principal
and
acesory
buildings.
Also
includes
parking
areas
in
residential
districts.
In
cluster
subdivisions, as
per
Section
1200,
minimum
lot
area
wil
be
8,
000
square
feet.
Minimumlot
width
will
be
80
feet;
however,
maximum
density
for
a
cluster
subdivision
shal
be
3
dweling
units
per
acre.
Definitions: OSR (
Open
Space
Ratio) -
LSR (
Landscape
Ratio)
FAR (
Floor
Area
Ratio)
Frontage Agregate
The
proportionof
a
site
consistingof
open
space
calculated
using
the
base
site
area.
The
ration
derived
by
dividing
the
area
of
the
landscaped
surface
by
the
base
site
area.
An
intensity
measuredas
a
ratio
derived
by
dividing
the
total
floor
area
of
a
building
by
the
base
site
area.
The
combined
distance
of
both
side
yard
setbacks.
The
dimension of
the
front
lot
line.
Townhouse,
Garden
Apartment
and
other
multi -
family
developmentsare
subject
to
the
regulations
containedin
Section
1159.
12.
1
3
Zoning
Ordinance
Town
ofIndian
Head,
Maryland
March
2004
ARTICLE XIII RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND OPEN SPACE
Section 1300. Neighborhood Parks Required
In order to implement the Parks and Recreation Plan for Indian Head, all residential subdivisions
shall provide recreation opportunities or pay impact fees or a combination thereof, according to the
following subsections:
a) Subject to Subsection ( c), all residential developments in the Town shall provide, at a
minimum, (through dedication or reservation; see Sections 1303 and 1304) recreational areas
in the form ofneighborhood parks (as described in Section 1301) in an amount equal to the
standards set forth in Subsection (b)). Such recreational areas shall be provided in addition
to the open space areas required by Section 1302.
b) For purposes of this section, land area reserved or dedicated for neighborhood park areas
shall be as follows: for one -bedroom dwelling units 0.0025 acres; two-bedroom units 0.005
acres; and units with three or more bedrooms 0.0075 acres.
c) The Town Council may permit payment of an impact fee, dedication, reservation or a
combination as set forth in Ordinance 5- 1- 89 establishing a parks and recreation impact fee
whenever the requirements in Subsections (a) and (b) cannot adequately meet the open space
and recreation responsibilities of the development or if the development is less than 30
homes or within 1, 500 feet from another park or playground. The fee shall be on a per -
dwelling -unit basis as established in ordinance no.5- 1- 89 ofthe Town ofIndian Head. The
fee shall be listed with the annual schedule of fees for the Town and may change from time
to time due to changes in fiscal impact. Fees will be collected upon application for a
building permit. The fee shall be deposited only in a designated account with funds
expended only for planned park and recreation facilities.
d) In the case of large proposed developments, which are hereafter defined as any developments
over 100 dwelling units, the Planning Commission may require a combination ofimproved
park and recreational property and playgrounds, at the minimum rate of 0.015 acre per
dwelling unit, and an impact fee in order to meet the planned town open space and recreation
objectives.
e) When park or recreational facilities approved for dedication are completed and accepted, a
deed shall be conveyed to the Town of Indian Head, after which the supervision and
maintenance shall be the responsibility ofthe Town. When park or recreational facilities are
reserved, the developer shall establish conditions as to ownership, maintenance, and use of
such areas as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to assure preservation of its
intended purposes.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 13. 1
Section 1301. Neighborhood Parks: Purpose and Standards
a) The purpose ofthe neighborhood park is to provide adequate active recreational facilities to
serve the residents of the immediately surrounding neighborhood within the development.
The following are illustrative of the types of families that shall be deemed to serve active
recreational needs and therefore to count toward satisfaction of the neighborhood park
requirements of this article: tennis courts, racquetball courts, swimming pools, sauna and
exercise rooms, meeting or activity rooms within clubhouses, basketball courts, swings,
slides, and play apparatus.
b) Each development shall satisfy its neighborhood park requirement by installing the types of
recreational facilities that are most likely to be suited to and used by the age bracket of
persons likely to reside in that development. However, unless it appears that less than 5
percent of the residents of any development are likely to be children under 12, then at least
15 percent ofthe neighborhood park must be satisfied by the construction of "tot lots" ( i.e.,
areas equipped with imaginative play apparatus oriented to younger children as well as
seating accommodations for parents).
c) Neighborhood parks shall be attractively landscaped and shall be provided with sufficient
natural or man-made screening or buffer areas to minimize any negative impacts upon
adjacent residences.
d) Each neighborhood park shall be centrally located and easily accessible so that it can be
conveniently and safely reached and used by those persons in the surrounding neighborhood
it is designed to serve.
e) Each neighborhood park shall be constructed on land that is relatively flat, dry, and capable
of serving the purposes intended by this article.
Section 1302. Provision of Common Open Space
a) Common open space ( spaces designed and intended for the . use and enjoyment of all
residents ofthe development) may contain such complimentary structures, improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use, benefit and enjoyment of residents of the
development. Common open space areas shall meet the following requirements:
i. Common open space areas shall:
A. be exclusive of tidal wetlands and road rights-of-ways/parking areas;
B. equal or exceed remaining percentages ofthe gross site area (maintenance of
areas of productive farmland may serve to meet open space requirements);
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 13. 2
C. no more than 60% of the open space required shall consist of those areas
designated as non -tidal wetlands.
ii. Common open space may serve recreational purposes, preserve significant site
features, and preserve open space. The uses authorized shall be appropriate to the
purposes intended to be served. Open space designed to serve recreational purposes
shall be appropriate to the scale and character ofthe cluster development, considering
its size, density, expected population, and the number and type of dwelling units
proposed.
iii. Common open space will be suitably improved for its intended use, except that
common open space containing natural features worthy of protection may be left
unimproved. The buildings, structures, and improvements to be permitted in the
common open space must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the
common space.
Section 1303. Open Space Requirement - Ownership
Private Ownership. If joint use facilities are not dedicated to public use, they shall be
protected by legal arrangements, satisfactory to the Planning Commission, sufficient to
assure their maintenance and preservation for whatever purpose they are intended.
Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership ofthe open space, method of
maintenance, maintenance taxes and insurance, compulsory membership and compulsory
assessment provisions and guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain open
space will not be dissolved without the consent of the Planning Commission.
b) Open Space. Unless the Planning Commission finds that the size, location, type of
development, or cost ofdevelopment or maintenance ofsuch open space or the availability of
public open space would make public use desirable and necessary, open space shall not be
made available for the use ofall residents ofthe Town. The Planning Commission generally
will require dedication of all areas indicated for acquisition in the adopted Recreation and
Parks Plan.
Section 1304. Management of Common Open Space Property
a) The developer shall insure that the common open space and improvements not dedicated and
accepted for public ownership are maintained and cared for, and the developer shall provide
for and establish an organization for the ownership, maintenance and preservation of open
space which shall conform to the following standards and procedures:
i. The organization shall be established by the developer before sale or rental of
dwelling units in the development, and prior to final approval of the development
plan by the Indian Head Town Manager.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 13. 3
ii. The financial and organizational structures, rules of membership, and methods of
cost assessment of the organization shall be devised to insure the successful
fulfillment ofthe maintenance, preservation and improvement responsibilities ofthe
organization.
iii. The organization responsible for maintenance, preservation, and improvement of
common open space lands, and all property owners within the cluster development
shall be permitted to participate in such organization.
iv. Areas set aside to meet the open space requirements hereof shall be adequately
described. Instruments in the form of deed restrictions and/ or covenant shall be
provided to insure the purpose for which the open space is provided: will be achieved.
Said instruments shall be approved by the Town Manager, and Public Works
Department prior to recordation among the Land Records of Charles County.
Section 1305. Bond for Improvements
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, there shall be delivered by the owner or developer some
form of surety acceptable to the Town in an amount as specified by the Town Manager, which shall
be submitted with the site plan, as described in the Indian Head Subdivision Regulations, which
surety shall secure an agreement to construct such required physical improvements as identified in
the Proposed Plan ofDevelopment.
Section 1306. Homeowners Associations
a) Homeowners associations or similar legal entities that, pursuant to Section 1303, are
responsible for the maintenance and control of common areas, including recreational
facilities and open space, shall be established in such a manner that:
i. Provision for the establishment ofthe association or similar entity is made before any
lot in the development is sold or any building occupied;
ii. The association or similar legal entity has clear legal authority to maintain and
exercise control over such common areas and facilities;
iii. The association or similar legal entity has the power to compel contributions from
residents of the development to cover their proportionate shares of the costs
associated with the maintenance and upkeep of such common areas and facilities.
Section 1307. Flexibility in Administration Authorized
a) The requirements set forth in this article concerning the amount, size, location, and nature of
recreational facilities and open space to be provided in connection with residential
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 13. 4
developments are established by the Town as standards that presumptively will result in the
provision of that amount of recreational facilities and open space that is consistent with
officially adopted Town plans. The Town recognizes, however, that due to the particular
nature of a tract of land, or the nature of the facilities proposed for installation, or other
factors, the underlying objectives ofthis article may be achieved even though the standards
are not adhered to with mathematical precision. Therefore, the permit -issuing body is
authorized to permit minor deviations from these standards whenever it determines that: (i)
the objectives underlying these standards can be met without strict adherence to them; and
ii) because ofpeculiarities in the developer's tract ofland or the facilities proposed it would
be unreasonable to require strict adherence to these standards.
b) Whenever the permit -issuing board authorizes some deviation from the standards set forth in
this article pursuant to Subsection (a), the official record ofaction taken on the development
shall contain a statement of reasons for allowing the deviation.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 13. 5
ARTICLE XIV UTILITIES
Section 1400. Utility Ownership and Easement Rights
m any case in which a developer installs or causes the installation ofwater, sewer, electrical power,
telephone, or cable television facilities and intends that such facilities shall be owned, operated, or
maintained by a public utility or any entity other than the developer, the developer shall transfer to
such utility or entity the necessary ownership or easement rights to enable the utility or entity to
operate and maintain such facilities.
Section 1401. Underground Utilities
a) All electric power lines ( not to include transformers or enclosures containing electrical
equipment including, but not limited to, switches, meters, or capacitors which may be pad
mounted), telephone, gas distribution, and cable television lines in subdivisions constructed
after the effective date ofthis Ordinance shall be placed underground in accordance with the
specifications and policies of the respective utility service providers.
b) Whenever an unsubdivided development is hereafter constructed on a lot that is undeveloped
on the effective date of this ordinance, then all electric power, telephone, gas distribution,
and cable television lines installed to serve the development that are located on the
development site outside of a previously existing public street right-of-way shall be placed
underground in accordance with the specifications and policies of the respective utility
companies.
Section 1402. Utilities To Be Consistent With Internal and External Development
a) Whenever it can reasonably be anticipated that utility facilities constructed in one
development will be extended to serve other adjacent or nearby developments, such utility
facilities (e.g., water or sewer lines) shall be located and constructed so that extensions can
be made conveniently and without undue burden or expense or unnecessary duplication of
service.
b) All utility facilities shall be constructed in such a manner as to minimize interference with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and to facilitate maintenance without undue damage to
improvements or facilities located within the development.
Section 1403. Electric Service
Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have available to it a source of electric
power adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within such
subdivision. Compliance with this requirement shall be determined as follows:
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 14. 1
If the use is not a subdivision and is located on a lot that is served by an existing
power line and the use can be served by a simple connection to such power line (as
opposed to a more complex distribution system, such as would be required in an
apartment complex or shopping center), then no further certification is needed.
ii. If the use is a subdivision or is not located on a lot served by an existing power line
or a substantial internal distribution system will be necessary, then the electric utility
service provider must review the proposed plans and certify to the Town that it can
provide service that is adequate to meet the needs ofthe proposed use and every lot
within the proposed subdivision.
Section 1404. Lighting Requirements
a) All entrances and exits in substantial buildings used for nonresidential purposes and in twofamily
or multi -family residential developments containing more than four dwelling units
shall be adequately lighted to ensure the safety ofpersons and the security ofthe buildings.
b) ._ Excessive Illumination. Lighting within any lot that unnecessarily illuminates any other lot
and substantially interferes with the use or enjoyment of such other lot is prohibited.
Lighting unnecessarily illuminates another lot is it clearly exceeds the standard set forth in
Section 1405 or if the standard set forth in Section 1405 could reasonably be achieved in a
manner that would not substantially interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring
properties.
Section 1405. Lighting Standards
a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the spill-over of light and glare on
operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the proximity of the light source.
With respect to motor vehicles in particular, safety considerations from the basis of the
regulations contained herein. In other cases, both the nuisance and hazard aspects of glare
are regulated. This section is not intended to apply to public street lighting.
b)
Site lighting shall be oflow -intensity from a concealed source, shall be ofa clear white light
which minimizes distortion colors and shall not spill over into adjoining properties, buffers,
roadways, or in any way interfere with the vision of oncoming motorists.
The following standards are required of all exterior lighting except the outdoor recreational
uses specifically exempted below. Manyuses have the option ofproviding a lower light post
with a no -cutoff luminaire or a higher pole, up to sixty (60) feet, with a luminaire that totally
cuts off light spill-over at a cutoff angle smaller than ninety (90) degrees. The maximum
light post height permitted is dependent on the amount of cutoffprovided. This is designed
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 14.2
as a protection against excessive glare and light spilling over to neighboring properties. The
exceptions which are permitted provide adequate protection for neighboring residential
property.
c) Exterior lighting shall meet one ( 1) of the following standards:
i. When light source or luminaire has no cutoff:
Standard
Residential parking lots
Non-residential parking lots
Maximum permitted
height of luminaire
12 feet
20 feet
ii. When a luminaire has total cutoff of light at an angle less than ninety (90) degrees
and is located so that the bare light bulb, lamp, or light source is completely shielded
from the direct view of an observer five (5) feet above the ground at the point where
the cutoff angle intersects the ground, then the maximum permitted illumination and
the maximum permitted height of the luminaire shall be:
Standard
Residential parking areas
Non-residential parking areas
Street lights
Maximum permitted
height of post
20 feet
30 feet
per requirement ofthe
Town Public Works Dept.
iii. Exemption for specified outdoor recreational uses. Because of their unique
requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation, ball
diamonds, playing fields, and tennis courts are exempted from the exterior lighting
standards of Subsection ii above upon satisfying the Planning Commission during a
site plan review that the site plan indicates that these outdoor recreational uses meet
all other requirements of this section and of this Ordinance and the following
conditions:
A. The outdoor recreational uses specified above shall not exceed a maximum
permitted post height of forty (40) feet.
B. The outdoor recreational uses specified above may exceed a total cutoff angle
of ninety (90) degrees, provided that the luminaire is shielded in either its
orientation or by a landscaped bufferyard to prevent light and glare spill-over
to adjacent residential property. The maximumpermitted illumination at the
Zoning Ordinance
April, 2004
14. 3 Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
interior bufferyard line shall not exceed two (2) footcandles.
d) Additional regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision ofthis section to the contrary:
i. No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
ii. Light sources or luminaires shall not be located within bufferyard areas except on
pedestrian walkways.
e) Exterior lighting plan. At the time any exterior light is installed or substantially modified,
and whenever a zoning certificate is sought, an exterior lighting plan shall be submitted to
the Town in order to determine whether the requirements ofthis section have been met and
that adjoining property will not be adversely impacted by the proposed lighting.
Section 1406. Sites For and Screening of Dumpsters
a) Every new development constructed from the effective date ofthis ordinance that is or will
be required to provide one or more dumpsters for solid waste collection shall provide sites
for such dumpsters that are:
b)
i. Located so as to facilitate collection and minimize any negative impact on persons
occupying the development site, neighboring properties, or public rights-of-way, and
ii. Constructed according to specifications established by the Town to allow for
collection without damage to the development site or the collection vehicle.
All such dumpsters shall be screened if and to the extent that, in the absence of screening,
they would be clearly visible to:
i. Persons located within any dwelling unit on residential property other than that where
the dumpster is located.
ii. Occupants, customers, or employees located within any building on nonresidential
property other than that where the dumpster is located.
iii. Persons travelling on any public street, sidewalk, or other public way.
c) When dumpster screening is required under this section, such screening shall be constructed,
installed, and located to prevent or remedy the conditions requiring the screening.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 14.4
ARTICLE XV DRAINAGE, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL AND STORM •
WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 1500. Reserved
Section 1501. Natural Drainage System Utilized to Extent Feasible
a) To the extent practicable, all development shall conform to the natural contours ofthe land and
natural and pre-existing man-made drainage ways shall remain undisturbed.
b) To the extent practicable, lot boundaries shall be made to coincide with natural and preexisting
man-made drainage ways within subdivisions to avoid the creation of lots that can be built
upon only by altering such drainage ways.
Section 1502. Developments Must Drain Properly
a) All developments shall be provided with a drainage system that is adequate to prevent the
undue retention of surface water on the development site. Surface water shall not be regarded
as unduly retained if:
i. The retention results from a technique, practice or device deliberately installed as part of
an approved sedimentation or storm water runoff control plan; or
ii. The retention is not substantially different in location or degree than that experienced by
the development site in its pre -development stage, unless such retention presents a
danger to health or safety.
b) No surface water may be channeled or directed into a sanitary sewer.
c) Whenever practicable, the drainage system ofa development shall coordinate with and connect
to the drainage systems or drainage ways on surrounding properties or streets.
d) Use of drainage swales rather than curb and gutter and storm sewers in subdivisions is
provided for in the Town' s Storm Water Management Ordinance. Private roads and access
ways within unsubdivided developments shall utilize curb and gutter and storm drains to
provide adequate drainage if the grade of such roads or access ways is too steep to provide
drainage in another manner or if other sufficient reasons exist to require such construction.
Section 1503. Storm Water Management
a) In addition to the requirements contained in the Town ofIndian Head storm water management
ordinance, all developments shall be constructed and maintained so that adjacent properties are
not unreasonably burdened with surface waters as a result of such developments. More
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004 •
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 15. 1
specifically:
No development may be constructed or maintained so that such development
unreasonably impedes the natural flow of water from higher adjacent properties across
such development, thereby unreasonably causing substantial damage to such higher
adjacent properties; and
ii. No development may be constructed or maintained so that surface waters from such
development are unreasonably collected and channeled onto lower adjacent properties at
such locations or at such volumes as to cause substantial damage to such lower adjacent
properties.
Section 1504. Sedimentation and Erosion Control
a) In addition to the requirements contained in the Town's grading and sediment control
ordinance, no zoning permit maybe issued and final plat approval for subdivisions maynot be
given with respect to any development that would cause land disturbing activity subject to the
jurisdiction of the Charles County Soil Conservation District Sedimentation Control
Commission, unless the commission has certified to the Town, either that:
An erosion control plan has been submitted to and approved by the commission; or
ii. The commission has examined the preliminary plans for the development and it
reasonably appears that an erosion control plan can be approved upon submission by the
developer of more detailed construction or design drawings. However, in this case,
construction ofthe development may not begin (and no building permits maybe issued)
until the commission approves the erosion control plan.
b) For purposes ofthis section, land disturbing activity means any use ofthe land by any person
in residential, industrial, educational, institutional, or commercial development, and highway
and road construction and maintenance that results in a change in the natural cover or
topography and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation. Sedimentation occurs whenever
solid particulate matter, mineral or organic, is transported by water, air, gravity, or ice from the
site of its origin.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 15. 2
Section 1505. Existing Slopes of 25% or greater
a) Grading or removal ofvegetative cover shall not be permitted on land with existing slopes of
25% or greater, except:
i. When the Planning Commission determines that it is necessary for the extension of
roads, streets, trails, pathways or utilities; or
ii. When the contiguous area of slopes 25% or greater is less than 20,000 square feet and is
not adjacent to a floodplain or wetland.
b) Areas containing existing slopes of25% or greater should be included as open space, but may
instead be included in building lots, provided the lot area is increased by an amount equal to
the area containing slopes 25% or greater.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 15. 3
April, 2004
Si
ARTICLE XVI SIGNS
Section 1600. Definitions
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context, the words and
phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this article.
Sign. Any device that (i) is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot where such
device is located to accomplish either of the objectives set forth in subdivision ii of this
definition, and (ii) is designed to attract the attention of such persons or to communicate
information to them.
Billboard. An off -premises signowned by a person, corporation, or other entity that engages in
the business of selling the advertising space on that sign.
Effective Date of this Article. The effective date of this article as originally adopted, or the
effective date of an amendment to it if the amendment makes a sign nonconforming.
Freestanding Sign. A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure (such
as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a
building or other structure whose principal function is something other than the support of a sign.
A sign that stands without supporting elements, such as " sandwich sign," is also a free-standing
sign. If the message is removed from a structure that was originally designed and used as a
freestanding sign, this structure shall still be considered a sign.
Internally Illuminated Signs. Signs where the source of the illumination is inside the sign and
light emanates through the message of the sign, rather than being reflected off the surface of the
sign from an external source. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, signs that consist
of or contain tubes that (i) are filled with neon or some other gas that glows when an electric
current passes through it and (ii) are intended to form or constitute all or part of the message of
the sign, rather than merely providing illumination to other parts of the sign that contain the
message, shall also be considered internally illuminated signs.
Off -Premises Signs. A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a
business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that
exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided at a location other than the premises
on which the sign is located. A sign that draws attention to a cause or advocates or proclaims a
political, religious, or other noncommercial message shall also be an off - premises sign unless
such sign is excluded from regulation under Section 1602 or is subject to regulation under
Section 1603.
On -Premises Sign. A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a
business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16. 1
exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided on the premises where the sign is
located.
Temporary Sign. A sign that (i) is used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or event
that is designed, intended, or expected to take place or to be completed within a reasonably short
or definite period after the erection of such sign, or (ii) is intended to remain on the location
where it is erected or placed for a period ofnot more than 15 days. If a sign display area is
permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be
regarded as temporary.
Section 1601. Permit Required for Signs
a) Except as otherwise provided in Sections 1602 and 1603, no sign may be constructed,
erected, moved, enlarged, illuminated or substantially altered except in accordance with
the provisions of this section. Mere repainting or changing the message of a sign shall
not, in and of itself, be considered a substantial alteration.
b) Signs not exempted under the provisions referenced in Subsection ( a) may be constructed,
erected, moved, enlarged, illuminated or substantially altered only in accordance with a
sign permit issued by the Zoning Administrator.
i. Sign permit applications and sign permits shall be governed by the same
provisions of this ordinance applicable to zoning permits.
ii. In the case of a lot occupied or intended to be occupied by multiple business
enterprises ( e.g., a shopping center), sign permits shall be issued in the name of
the lot owner or his agent rather than in the name of the individual business
enterprise requesting a particular sign. The Town of Indian Head may assist the
owner by suggesting a formula whereby the maximum square footage of sign area
allowed on the lot may be allocated equitably among all tenants, but the Town
shall be responsible for enforcing only the provisions of this ordinance and not the
provisions of any allocation formula, lease, or other private restriction.
Section 1602. Signs Excluded From Regulation
The following signs are exempt from regulation under this Ordinance except for those stated in
Subsections 1612 ( b) through (e).
a) Signs not exceeding three ( 3) square feet in area that are customarily associated with
residential use and that are not of a commercial nature, such as ( i) signs giving property
identification names or numbers or names of occupants, ( ii) signs on mailboxes or
newspaper tubes, and (iii) signs posted on private property relating to private parking or
warning the public against trespassing or danger from animals.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16.2
b) Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to the authorization of a governmental body,
including legal notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic, directional, or
regulatory signs.
c) Official signs of a noncommercial nature erected by public utilities.
d) Flags, pennants, or insignia of any governmental or nonprofit organization when not
displayed in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device.
e) Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings or works of art, so long as such
features or works do not contain letters, trademarks, moving parts, or lights.
f) Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property that do not exceed four square feet
each and that bear no advertising matter.
g) Church bulletin boards, church identification signs, and church directional signs that do
not exceed one per abutting street and 16 square feet in area and that are not internally
illuminated.
h) Signs painted on or otherwise permanently attached to currently licensed motor vehicles
that are not primarily used as signs.
Signs proclaiming religious, political, or other noncommercial messages ( other than those
regulated by Subsection 1603 v) that do not exceed one per abutting street and 16 square
feet in area and that are not internally illuminated.
Section 1603. Certain Temporary Signs: Permit Exemptions and Additional Regulations
a). The following temporary signs are permitted without a permit. However, such signs shall
conform to the requirements set forth below as well as all other applicable requirements
of this ordinance.
Signs containing the message that the real estate on which the sign is located
including buildings) is for sale, lease, or rent, together with information
identifying the owner or agent. Such signs may not exceed four (4) square feet in
area and shall be removed immediately after sale, lease, or rental. For lots of less
than five acres, a single sign on each street frontage may be erected. For lots of
five acres or more in area and having a street frontage in excess of 400 feet, a
second sign not exceeding four square feet in area may be erected.
ii. Construction site identification signs. Such signs may identify the project, the
owner or developer, architect, engineer, contractor and subcontractors, funding
sources, and may contain related information including but not limited to sale or
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16.3
leasing information. Not more than one such sign may be erected per site, and it
may not exceed 32 square feet in area. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the
issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within 10 days after the
issuance of the final occupancy permit.
iii. Signs attached temporarily to the interior of a building window or glass door.
Such signs, individually or collectively, may not cover more than 25 percent of the
surface area of the transparent portion of the window or door to which they are
attached. Such signs shall be removed within 30 days after placement.
iv. Displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observance of
holidays. Such signs shall be removed within 10 days following the holidays.
v. Signs erected in connection with elections or political campaigns. Such signs
shall be removed within three days following the election or conclusion of the
campaign. No such sign may exceed 16 square feet in surface area. A deposit of
50.00 shall be paid at time ofpermit to ensure removal of signs as required; the
deposit will be returned upon completion of sign removal.
vi. Signs indicating that a special event such as a grand opening, fair, carnival, circus,
festival, or similar event is to take place on the lot where the sign is located. Such
signs may be erected not sooner than two weeks before the event and must be
removed not later than three days after the event. A deposit of $50.00 shall be
paid at time ofpermit to ensure removal of signs as required; the deposit will be
returned upon completion of sign removal.
vii. Yardlgarage sale signs, so long as such signs meet the following restrictions:
a. Not more than one such sign may be located on any lot.
b. No such sign may exceed (4) four square feet in surface area.
c. Such sign may not be displayed for longer than three consecutive days nor
more than 10 days out of any 365 -day period.
d. Such sign or related directional sign may not be located in any public right
ofway.
viii. Temporary signs not covered in the foregoing categories, so long as such signs
meet the following restrictions:
a. Not more than one such sign may be located on any lot.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16.4
ti
b)
b. No such sign may exceed (4) four square feet in surface area.
c. Such sign may not be displayed for more than10 days out of any 365 -day
period.
Other temporary signs not listed in Subsection (a) shall be regarded and treated in all
respects as permanent signs, except that (as provided in Section 1606) temporary signs
shall not be included in calculating the total amount ofpermitted sign area.
Section 1604. Determining the Number of Signs
a) For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a
single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and
composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without
organized relationship of elements, each element shall be considered a single sign.
b) A two- sided or multi -sided sign shall be regarded as one sign so long as:
i. With respect to a V -type sign, the two sides are at no point separated by a distance
that exceeds five feet; and
ii. With respect to double faced (back to back) signs, the distance between the backs
of each face of the sign does not exceed three feet.
Section 1605. Computation of Sign Area
a). The surface area of a sign shall be computed by including the entire area within a single,
continuous, rectilinear perimeter ofnot more than eight straight lines, or a circle or an
ellipse, enclosing the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other
display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of
the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which
it placed, but not including any supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental
to the display itself.
b) If the sign consists ofmore than one section or module, all of the area, including that
between sections or modules, shall be included in the computation ofthe sign area.
c) With respect to two- sided, multi -sided, or three- dimensional signs, the sign surface area
shall be computed by including the total of all sides designed to attract attention or
communicate information that can be seen at any one time by a person from one vantage
point. Without otherwise limiting the generality of the.foregoing:
i. The sign surface area of a double faced, back to back sign shall be calculated by
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16. 5
using the area of only one side of such sign, so long as the distance between the
backs of such signs does not exceed three feet.
ii. The sign surface area of a double faced sign constructed in the form of a "V" shall
be calculated by using the area of only one side of such sign (the larger side if
there is a size difference), so long as the angle ofthe "V" does not exceed 30
degrees and at no point does the distance between the backs of such sides exceed
five (5) feet.
Section 1606. Total Building Sign Surface Area
a) Unless otherwise provided in this article, the total surface area devoted to all building
signs on any lot shall not exceed the limitations set forth in this section and in sections
1617 and 1618, and all signs including temporary signs shall be included in this
calculation.
h) If a lot has frontage on more than one street, then the total sign surface area permitted on
that lot shall be the sum of the sign surface area allotments related to each street on which
the lot has frontage. However, the total sign surface area that is oriented toward a
particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot's total sign surface area allocation
that is derived from frontage on that street.
c) Whenever a lot is situated such that it has no street frontage on any lot boundary and an
applicant desires to install on such a lot a sign that is oriented toward a street, then the
total sign surface area permitted on that lot shall be the sign surface area that would be
allowed if the lot boundary closest to the street toward which such sign is to be oriented
fronted on such street. The applicant shall be restricted to using only one street an the
closest lot boundary to this street for determining the total permitted sign surface area.
However, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to determine the one street used in
the calculations.
d) The sign surface area of any sign located on a wall of a structure may not exceed 50
percent of the total surface area of the wall on which the sign is located.,
e) The total sign surface area for any overlay or floating zone shall be as required. For the
base zone and as specified in Article IX.
Section 1607. Freestanding Sign Surface Area
a) Unless otherwise provided in this article, the total surface area devoted to all freestanding
signs on any lot shall not exceed the limitations set forth in this section and in
section 1617 and 1618, and all signs including temporary signs shall be included in this
calculation.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
16. 6 Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
b) For purposes of this section, a side of a free-standing sign is any plan or flat surface
included in the calculation of the total sign surface area as providing Section 1605. For
example, wall signs typically have one side. Freestanding signs typically have two sides
back to back), although four-sided and other multi -sided signs are also common.
Signage on gas canopies will be computed as part of the allowable free standing sign
surface area.
c) In no case may a single side of a freestanding sign exceed 50 square feet in surface area if
the lot on which the sign is located has less than 200 feet of frontage on the street toward
which that sign is primarily oriented, 75 square feet on lots with 200 or more but less than
400 feet of frontage, and 100 square feet on lots with 400 or more feet of frontage.
d) With respect to freestanding signs that have no discernible sides, such as spheres or other
shapes not composed of flat planes, no such freestanding sign may exceed the maximum
total surface area allowed under Subsections (b) or (c) for a single side of a freestanding
sign.
e) To encourage the reduction in height of freestanding signs, an increase of 20 percent of
the sign area permitted in the base zone will be allowed if a freestanding sign is no more
than seven ( 7) feet in height.
Section 1608. Number of Freestanding Signs
a) : ,_ Except as authorized by this section, no development may have more than one
freestanding sign.
If a development is located on a corner lot that has at least 100 feet of frontage on each of
the two intersecting public streets, then the development may have not more than one
freestanding sign along each side of the development bordered by such streets.
c) If a development is located on a lot that is bordered by two public streets that do not
intersect at the lot's boundaries (double front lot), then the development may have not
more than one freestanding sign on each side of the development bordered by such
streets.
d) A free-standing sign to be used on a parcel of Commercial or Business Park property with
multiple uses and a name distinct from that of any occupant, such as a shopping center or
industrial park, shall be used only to identify the center or park and/ or a register to
identify the multiple uses. Where such use has over 1, 000 feet of total street frontage, the
allowable signage may be divided between two (2) free-standing structures.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16. 7
Section 1609. Subdivision and Multi -Family Entrance Signs
At any entrance to a residential subdivision or multi -family development, there may be not more
than two signs identifying such subdivision or development. A single side of any such sign may
not exceed 16 square feet, nor may the total surface area of all such signs located at a single
entrance exceed 32 square feet.
Section 1610. Location and Height Requirements
a) Freestanding signs shall observe the setback requirements set forth in Article XXI,
Section 1203.
b) No sign may extend above any parapet or be placed upon any roof surface, except that for
purposes of this section, roof surfaces constructed at an angle of 75 degrees or more from
horizontal shall be regarded as wall space. This subsection shall not apply to displays,
including lighting, erected in connection with the observation of holidays on the roofs of
residential structures.
c) No sign attached to a building may project more than 12 inches from the building wall.
d) No sign or supporting structure may be located in or over the traveled portion of any
public right-of-way unless the sign is attached to a structural element of a building and an
encroachment permit has been obtained from the Town.
e) No part of a freestanding sign may exceed a height, measured from ground level (not
including artificial berms), of 15 feet in all other districts.
1) No sign shall obstruct a clear view to and from traffic along any street right-of-way
entrance or exit.
Section 1611. Sign Illumination and Signs Containing Lights
a) Unless otherwise prohibited by this ordinance, signs may be illuminated if such
illumination is in accordance with this section.
b) No sign within 150 feet of a residential zone maybe illuminated between the hours of
midnight and 6 a.m., unless the impact of such lighting beyond the boundaries of the lot
where it is located is entirely inconsequential.
c) Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it illuminates only the face of the
sign and does not shine directly into a public right-of-way or residential premises.
d) Except as herein provided, (i) internally illuminated signs are not permissible in any
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16. 8
residential districts, and ( ii) where permissible, internally illuminated freestanding signs
may not be illuminated during hours that the business or enterprise advertised by such
sign is not open for business or in operation. This subsection shall not apply to the
following types of signs:
i. Signs that constitute an integral part of a vending machine, telephone booth,
device that indicates the time, date, or weather conditions, or similar device whose
principal function is not to convey an advertising message.
ii. Signs that do not exceed two square feet in area and that convey the message that
a business enterprise is open or closed or that a place of lodging does or does not
have a vacancy.
e) Subject to Subsection (g), illuminated tubings or strings of lights that outline property
lines, sales areas, roof lines, doors, windows, or similar areas are prohibited unless the
lighting is an integral part of the sign design or building design, subject to Zoning
Administrator approval.
1) Subject to Subsection ( g), no sign may contain or be illuminated by flashing or
intermittent lights or lights of changing degrees of intensity, except signs indicating the
time, date or weather conditions.
g) Subsections ( e) and (f) do not apply to temporary signs erected in connection with the
observance of holidays.
Section 1612. Miscellaneous Restrictions and Prohibitions
a) As provided in the Table of Permissible Uses (use classification 26.000), no off - premises
signs (except those exempted from regulation or from permit requirements under Sections
1602 or 1603) maybe located in any district. Off -premises signs shall meet setback
requirements established in Section 1203 and shall not exceed 10 feet in height and shall
not be any larger than eight square feet in total sign area.
b) No sign may be located so that it substantially interferes with the view necessary for
motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public
streets or private roads.
c) Signs that revolve or are animated or that utilize movement or apparent movement to
attract the attention of the public are prohibited. Without limiting the foregoing, banners,
streamers, animated display boards, pennants, and propellers are prohibited, but signs that
only move occasionally because ofwind are not prohibited if their movement (i) is not a
primary design feature of the sign, and (ii) is not intended to attract attention to the sign.
The restriction of this subsection shall not apply to signs specified in Subdivision 1602
111111 Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16. 9
d) or subdivision 1611 ( d).
d) No sign may be erected so that by its location, color, size, shape, nature, or message it
would tend to obstruct the view of or be confused with official traffic signs or other signs
erected by governmental agencies.
e) Freestanding signs shall be securely fastened to the ground or to some other substantial
supportive structure so that there is virtually no danger that either the sign or the
supportive structure may be moved by the wind or other forces of nature and cause injury
to persons or property.
f) Where permitted projecting signs shall not exceed a maximum of four feet on any side
and shall be securely fastened to the building so that there is virtually no danger that
either the sign or the supportive structure may be moved by the wind or other forces of
nature and cause injury to persons or property.
g)
g)
In addition to the other provisions of this article, all signs in the Town shall be subject to
the following additional design standards:
i. Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its visual relationship to
buildings and surroundings.
ii. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building
and site to which it principally relates.
iii. The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and
harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates.
iv. The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to
convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the sign
face.
v. Each sign shall be compatible with the sign's on adjoining premises and shall not
compete for attention.
vi. Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall conform to
the criteria for all other signs.
The Planning Commission and/ or Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine if proposed
new signs meet the performance standards set forth in Subsection (f).
Section 1613. Maintenance of Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16. 10
April, 2004
a) All signs and all components thereof, including without limitation supports, braces, and
anchors, shall be kept in a state of good repair. With respect to freestanding signs,
components ( supporting structures, backs, etc.) not bearing a message shall be
constructed ofmaterials that blend with the natural environment or shall be painted a
neutral color to blend with the natural environment.
b)
c)
If a sign other than a billboard advertises a business, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or
being offered or conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and shall, within 30
days after such abandonment, be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where
the sign is located, or other party having control over such sign.
If the message portion of a sign is removed, leaving only the supporting " shell" of a sign
or the supporting braces, anchors, or similar components, the owner of the sign or the
owner of the property where the sign is located or other person having control over such
sign shall, within 30 days of the removal of the message portion of the sign, either replace
the entire message portion of the sign or remove the remaining components of the sign.
This subsection shall not be construed to alter the effect of Subsection 1615 ( c), which
prohibits the replacement of a nonconforming sign. Nor shall this subsection be
construed to prevent the changing of the message of a sign.
d) The area within 10 feet in all directions of any part of a freestanding sign shall be kept
clear of all debris and all undergrowth more than five inches in height.
Section 1614. Unlawful Cutting of Trees or Shrubs
No person may, for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign, damage,
trim, destroy, or remove any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation located:
a) Within the right-of-way of any public street or road, unless the work is done pursuant to
the express written authorization of the Town or other agency having jurisdiction over the
streets.
b) On property that is not under the ownership or control of the person doing or responsible
for such work, unless the work is done pursuant to the express authorization of the person
owning the property where such trees or shrubs are located;
c) In any area where such trees or shrubs are required to remain under a permit issued under
this ordinance.
Section 1615. Nonconforming Signs
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16. 11
a) Subject to the remaining restrictions ofthis section, nonconforming signs that were
otherwise lawful on the effective date of this article may be continued.
b) No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of
nonconformity of a nonconforming sign. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, no nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to
aggravate the nonconforming condition, nor may illumination be added to any
nonconforming sign.
c) A nonconforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring the sign into
complete conformity with this ordinance.
d) Ifa nonconforming sign is destroyed by natural causes, it may not thereafter be repaired,
reconstructed, or replaced except in conformity with all the provisions of this ordinance,
and the remnants of the former sign structure shall be cleared from the land. For purposes
ofthis section, a nonconforming sigh is "destroyed" ifdamaged to an extent that the cost
ofrepairing the sign to its former stature or replacing it with an equivalent sign equals or
exceeds the value (tax value if listed for tax purposes) of the sign so damaged.
e) The message of a nonconforming sign maybe changed so long as this does not create
any new nonconformities (for example, by creating an off -premises sign under
circumstances where such a sign would not be allowed).
f) Subject to the other provisions of this section, nonconforming signs may be repaired and
renovated so long as the cost of such work does not exceed within any 12 -month period
50 percent of the value (tax value if listed for tax purposes) of such sign.
If a nonconforming sign other than a billboard advertises a business, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or
being offered or conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed
within 30 days after such abandonment by the sign owner, owner of the property where
the sign is located, or other person having control over such sign.
If a nonconforming billboard remains blank for a continuous period of 180 days, that
billboard shall be deemed abandoned and shall, within 30 days after such abandonment,
be altered to comply with this article or be removed by the sign owner, owner of the
property where the sign is located, or other person having control over such sign. For
purposes of this section, a sign is " blank" if:
g)
h)
i. It advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other
enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted; or
ii. The advertising message it displays becomes illegible in whole or substantial part;
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
16. 12 Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
or
iii. The advertising copy paid for by a party other than the sign owner or promoting
an interest other than the rental ofthe sign has been removed.
i) As soon as reasonably possible after the effective date ofthis article, the Zoning
Administrator shall make every reasonable effort to identify all the nonconforming signs
within the Town's planning jurisdiction. He shall then contact the person responsible for
each such sign (as well as the owner ofthe property where the nonconforming sign is
located, ifdifferent from the former) and inform such person (i) that the sign is
nonconforming, (ii) how it is nonconforming, (iii) what must be done to correct it and by
what date, and (iv) the consequences of failure to make the necessary corrections. The
administrator shall keep complete records ofall correspondence, communications, and
other actions taken with respect to such nonconforming signs.
Section 1616. Reserved
Section 1617. Maximum Total Sign Area by Zoning District
Total Maximum Sign Area shall not exceed the lesser ofthe following:
R- 1 R-2
Uiii illii iT e . 1! t _ i i Vie:
Freestandin
Buildin
3
3
3
3
RM
3
3
TCMX
32
32
GC
50
100
Freestandin
Buildin
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16. 13
1
2
2
4
April, 2004
Section 1618. Permitted Signs by Type and by Zoning District
Sign Type / District:
Banner
Buildint Marker
Carso.
Identification
Mar. uee
Pro' ectin
Residential
Roof
Roof Intel al
Sus ' ended
Te . or
Window
Banner
Fla.
Portable
R- 1
S*
N
P
N
P
N
N
P
N
N
N
P
R- 2
S*
N
P
N
P
N
N
P
N
N
N
P
RM
S*
N
P
N
P
N
N
P
N
N
N
P
TCMX
S
S
GC
S
P
S
P
S
S
N/A
N
S
S
P
S
P
S
P
S
S
N/A
N
S
S
P
N
N
P
N
N
P
N
N
P
N
P
S
P
N
P
S
N
P = Allowed without sign permit
S = Allowed only with sign permit
N = Not Allowed
Does not apply to signs described in sub -section 1602 ( a)
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 16. 14
April, 2004
110 ARTICLE XVII PARKING AND LANDSCAPING OF PARKING FACILITIES
Part I Parking
Section 1700. Definitions
Unless otherwise specifically provided or unless clearly required by the context, the words and
phrases defined below shall have the meaning indicated when used in this section.
Circulation Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used for access to parking or
loading areas or other facilities on the lot. Essentially, driveways and other maneuvering areas
other than parking aisles and parking spaces) comprise the circulation area.
Driveway. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area that consists of a travel lane
bounded on either side by an area that is not part ofthe vehicle accommodation area.
Gross Floor Area (GFA). The total area of a building measured by taking the outside
dimensions of the building at each floor level intended occupancy or storage.
Loading and Unloading Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used to satisfy
the requirements of Section 1710.
Vehicle Accommodation Area. That portion of a lot that is used by vehicles for access,
circulation, parking, and loading and unloading. It comprises the total of circulation areas,
loading and unloading areas, and parking areas ( spaces and aisles).
Parking: Area Aisles. That portion ofthe vehicle accommodation area consisting of lanes
providing access to parking spaces.
Parking Space. A portion of the vehicle accommodation area set aside for the parking of one
vehicle.
Section 1701. Number of Parking Spaces Required
a) All developments in all zoning districts shall provide a sufficient number of parking
spaces to accommodate the number of vehicles that ordinarily are likely to be attracted to
the development in question.
b) The presumptions established by this article are that: (i) a development must comply with
the parking standards set forth in Subsection (e) to satisfy the requirement stated in
Subsection (a), and (ii) any development that does meet these standards is in compliance.
However, the Table ofParking Requirements is only intended to establish a presumption
and should be flexibly administered, as provided in Section 1702.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 1
c) All off-street parking spaces required to serve buildings or a use erected or established
after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be located on the same zoning lot as the
building or use served, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required
by a change or enlargement of a non-residential use or where spaces are provided
collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more non-residential buildings or
establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained as set forth in Sections
1702, 1707, and 1708.
d) The Town recognizes that the Table of Parking Requirements set forth in Subsection (e)
cannot and does not cover every possible situation that may arise. Therefore, in cases not
specifically covered, the permit -issuing authority is authorized to determine the parking
requirements using this table as a guide.
e) Table ofMinimum Parking Requirements
Use
Residential
Off -Street Parking Requirement
Single -Family Detached 2.0 spaces
Residential Unit
Accessory Apartments 2.0 spaces
Multi -family
1 Bedroom
2 Bedroom
3 Bedroom
Townhouse
1 Bedroom
2 Bedroom
3 Bedroom
Elderly Housing
Room or Boarding House
Non-residential
Assembly Hall
Amusement Park
Appliance/Hardware store
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
1. 8 spaces
2.0 spaces
2. 1 spaces
2.25 spaces
2.5 spaces
2.75 spaces
1. 0 space per unit
1. 0 space per room
1. 0 space per every 100 sq. ft. GFA
2.0 spaces*
2.25 spaces*
2. 5 spaces*
10 spaces per ride or activity area
2. 0 spaces per every 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1. 0 space per every
300 sq. ft. GFA over 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
17.2
April, 2004
ti
Art gallery
Auditorium
Bar
Beauty Parlor
Bed and Breakfast
Bowling Alley
Bank
Car Wash
Church/ Synagogue
Convenience Store
Day Care Center
Equipment sales/ service shop/wholesale
Express Delivery Service
Fast Food Restaurant
Fiduciary Institutions
Finishing Operations
Funeral Home
Furniture Store
Golf Course
Group Home
Health Club
Hospital
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland
1. 0 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA
1. 0 space per 6 permanent seats
1. 0 space per 2 seats
3. 0 spaces per chair
1. 0 space per guest room plus 2 spaces per owner's unit
4.0 spaces per alley
4.0 spaces per every 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
10 spaces per washing lane
1. 0 space per 3 seats
1. 4 spaces per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
1. 0 space per 7 children, plus 1 space per staff person
2.0 spaces per every 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1. 0 space per every
300 sq. ft. GFA over 1, 000
1. 0 space per two employees on maximum shift, plus 1. 0 space
per each vehicle maintained on the premises
1. 0 space per 4 seats, plus 1. 0 space per 2 employees on
maximum shift. With drive -Through facility, add 11 stacking
spaces for the drive-in window with five such spaces at the
ordering station.
1. 0 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
1. 0 space per 800 sq. ft. GFA
1. 0 space per 4 permanent seats, or 1. 0 space per 30 sq. ft. GFA
1. 0 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1. 0 space per employee on
maximum shift
4.0 spaces per hole, plus 1. 0 space per employee on maximum
shift
1. 0 space per staff person, plus 1 space per 2 occupants
10 spaces per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1. 0 space per every 2
employees, and 1. 0 space per each employee on maximum
working shift (minimum of 5 spaces)
2.0 spaces per bed or 1. 0 space per 150 sq. ft. GFA, whichever is greater
17.3
April, 2004
Hotel/Motel 1. 0 space per room, plus 1. 0 space per employee on maximum
shift, plus 1. 0 space per each 200 sq. ft. GFA of commercial floor
area contained therein
Industrial 1. 0 space per 800 sq. ft. GFA
Library 1. 0 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
Marina 0.5 spaces per slip total. 0.25 spaces per slip shall be improved
for parking with remaining areas open to accommodate peak
period needs.
Manufacturing/Warehouse 1. 0 space per 800 sq. ft. GFA or 1. 5 spaces per each employee in
maximum work shift, plus 1. 0 space per each truck or vehicle
used in connection therewith, whichever is greater
Medical Center 1. 0 space per 250 sq. ft. GFA
Miniature Golf 1. 5 spaces per hole
Movie Theater 1. 0 space per 5 seats
Movie Theater in Shopping Center 1. 0 space per 4 seats
Nightclub 1. 0 space per 2 seats
Nursing Home 1. 0 space per 2 beds
Offices
Under 49,999 sq. ft. GFA
50,000 - 99,999 sq. ft. GFA
100,000 + sq. ft. GFA
4.5 spaces per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
4.0 spaces per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
3. 5 spaces per 1. 000 sq. ft. GFA
Pool or Billiard Hall 4.0 spaces per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
Post Office 1. 0 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1 space per employee
Racquetball Courts 2.0 spaces per court
Receiving Centers 1. 0 space per 5, 000 sq. ft. GFA
Research Centers 1. 0 space per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
Restaurant 1. 0 space per 3 seats
Retail Store 1. 0 space per 200 sq. ft. GFA
Schools
Elementary 2.0 spaces per classroom, but not less than 1. 0 per teacher and staff
Intermediate 1. 5 spaces per classroom, but not less than 1. 0 per teacher and staff
Secondary 5. 0 spaces per classroom
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 4
April, 2004
Service Station 4.0 spaces per bay and work area
Shipping Center 1. 0 space per 5, 000 sq. ft. GFA
Shopping Center
Regional 4.0 spaces per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
Community 6. 0 spaces per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
Neighborhood 8. 0 spaces per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
Storage Areas 1. 0 space per 5,000 sq. ft. GFA
Self -Storage facility 1. 0 space per 20 storage stalls
Supermarket 3. 0 spaces per 1, 000 sq. ft. GFA
Swimming Pool 1. 0 space per 4 persons, up to capacity
Veterinary Office 1. 0 space per 400 sq. ft. floor space in office, with a
4 space minimum.
Table Notes:
GFA = Gross Floor Area
GLA = Gross Leasable Area
When determination of the number of parking spaces required results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction shall be counted as one parking space.
Parking Bonuses that can be obtained upon negotiation with the Planning Commission relative to on -
street, alley or rear parking.
Section 1702. Flexibility in Administration Required
a) The Town of Indian Head recognizes that, due to the particularities of any given development,
the inflexible application ofthe parking standards set forth in Subsection 1701 ( e) may result
in a development either with inadequate parking space or parking space far in excess of its
needs. Alternative off-street parking standards may be accepted if the applicant can
demonstrate that such standards better reflect local conditions and needs.
b)
c)
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the permit -issuing authority may allow
deviations from the parking requirements set forth in Subsection 1701 ( d) when it finds that:
i. A residential development is irrevocably oriented toward the elderly;
ii. A business is primarily oriented to walk-in trade.
Whenever the permit -issuing authority allows or requires a deviation from the parking
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 5
requirements set forth in Subsection 1701 ( e), it shall enter on the face of the permit the
parking requirement that it imposes and the reasons for allowing or requiring the deviation.
d) If the permit -issuing authority concludes, based upon information it receives in the
consideration of a specific development proposal, that the presumption established by
Subsection 1701 ( e) for a particular use classification is erroneous, it shall initiate a request for
an amendment to the Table of Parking Requirements in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Article XX.
Section 1703. Parking Space Dimensions
a) Subject to Subsections (b) and (c), each parking space shall contain a rectangular area at least
19 feet long and 9 feet wide. Lines demarcating parking spaces may be drawn at various
angles in relation to curbs or aisles, so long as the parking spaces so created contain within
them the rectangular area required by this section.
b) In parking areas containing 10 or more parking spaces, up to 20 percent ofthe parking spaces
need contain a rectangular area of only 7 1/ 2 feet in width by 15 feet in length. If such spaces
are provided, they shall be conspicuously designated as reserved for small or compact cars
only.
c) Wherever parking areas consist of spaces set aside for parallel parking, the dimensions of such
parking spaces shall be not less than 22 feet by 9 feet.
d) Each handicapped parking space shall be at least 19 feet long and 13 feet, wide. ( See Section
1711 also.)
Section 1704. Required Widths of Parking area Aisles and Driveways
a) Parking area aisle widths shall conform to the following table, which varies the width
requirement according to the angle of parking.
Parking Angle
Aisle Width 0° 30° 45° 60° 90°
One -Way Traffic
Two -Way Traffic
13 11 13 18 24
19 20 21 23 24
b) Driveways shall be not less than 10 feet or exceed 15 feet in width for one-way traffic and less
than 18 feet or exceed 30 feet in width for two-way traffic, except that 10 -feet -wide driveways
are permissible for two-way traffic when (i) the driveway is not longer than 50 feet, (ii) it
provides access to not more than 6 spaces, and (iii) sufficient turning space is provided so that
vehicles need not back into a public street.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17.6
Section 1705. General Design Requirements
a) Unless no other practicable alternative is available vehicle accommodation areas shall be
designed so that, without resorting to extraordinary movements, vehicles may exit such areas
without backing onto a public street. This requirement does not apply to parking areas
consisting of driveways that serve one or two dwelling units, although backing onto arterial
streets is discouraged.
b)
c)
Vehicle accommodation areas of all development shall be designed so that sanitation,
emergency, and other public service vehicles can serve such developments without the
necessity of backing unreasonable distances or making other dangerous or hazardous turning
movements.
Every vehicle accommodation area shall be designed so that vehicles cannot extend beyond
the perimeter of such area onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Such areas shall
also be designed so that vehicles do not extend over sidewalks or tend to bump against or
damage any wall, vegetation, or other obstruction.
d) Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can proceed safely without posing a danger
to pedestrians or other vehicles and without interfering with parking areas.
e) Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be arranged so as to reflect away
from any adjoining residential zone or uses and any public or private right-of-way.
f) A "sight triangle" shall be observed within a triangle formed by the intersection of the street
lines and points on the street line fifteen feet from the intersection at all street intersections or
intersections of driveways with streets.
g) All parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water within the parking area
without carrying the said water accumulation over a public sidewalk. Piping the water to a
suitable outfall may be required.
h) Permanent storm water retention shall be provided for all off-street parking areas as required
in the Town' s Storm Water Management Ordinance.
i) No required off-street parking space in any residential zone shall be located within any
required front yard or side street side yard area except that parking in driveways for up to two
2) spaces is permitted.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 7
j) Additional parking in residential zones: Provided the above parking ( Subsection i) has been
met, additional parking shall be permitted in the required front yards or side street side yard,
provided the following setback requirements are met:
Zone Front Yard Setback Side Yard Setback
R-1 15' 8'
R-2 10' 4'
The percentage of coverage of permitted parking areas and driveways in any residential zone
shall not exceed 50 percent of the total required front yard.
Off-street parking facilities may be located within the required front yard of any commercial
zone but shall not be nearer than 50 feet to any residential district.
m) Special access, surface, and location requirements for garages, parking lots, automobile
service stations, and vehicle sales lots:
i) No building, structure or premises shall be used, erected, or altered which is intended
or designed to be used as a community garage, an automobile repair shop, a service
station, or a parking lot or structure as the principal useon a property, which has an
entrance or exit for vehicles in the same block front and within 200 feet of the property
boundary of any school, public playground, church, hospital, public library,
convalescent, nursing, or rest home, orphanage, and no such entrance or exit, except
for a community garage, shall be located within 20 feet of any residential zone; not
shall any structure used for an automobilerepair, shop or service station or any part of a
parking lot or structure be located within 100 feet of any property boundary line of any
of the aforesaid public or institutional uses. " Parking lot" as used herein does not
include off-street parking areas as otherwise required for the public or institutional
uses listed above.
ii) No gasoline pump, oil draining pit, or similar appliance for any purpose shall be
located within 15 feet of any right-of-way or within 50 feet of a residential zone,
except where such a pump, pit, or appliance is within a completely enclosed building
and distant at least 15 feet from any vehicular entrance or exit of such building.
Except for gasoline service stations, no gasoline pumps shall be permitted as an
accessory use for another activity unless a site plan is submitted to and approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
Section 1706. Vehicle Accommodation Area Surfaces
a) Vehicle accommodation areas that (i) include lanes for drive-in windows or (ii) contain
parking areas that are required to have more than 10 parking spaces and that are used regularly
at least five days per week shall be graded and surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 8
material that will provide equivalent protection against potholes, erosion, and dust.
Specifications for surfaces meeting the standard set forth in this subsection are contained in
Appendix D.
b) Vehicle accommodation areas that are not provided with the type of surface specified in
Subsection (a) shall be graded and surfaced with crushed stone, gravel, or other suitable
material (as provided in the specifications set forth in Appendix D) to provide a surface that is
stable and will help to reduce dust and erosion. The perimeter of such parking areas shall be
defined by bricks, stones, railroad ties, or other similar devices. In addition, whenever such a
vehicle accommodation area abuts a paved street, the driveway leading from such street to
such area (or, if there is no driveway, the portion of the vehicle accommodation area that
opens onto such streets), shall be paved as provided in Subsection (a) for a distance of 15 feet
back from the edge of the paved street. This subsection shall not apply to single-family or
two-family residences or other uses that are required to have only one or two parking spaces.
c) Parking spaces in areas surfaced in accordance with Subsection (a) shall be appropriately
demarcated with painted lines or other markings. Parking spaces in areas surfaced in
accordance with Subsection (b) shall be demarcated whenever practicable.
d) Vehicle accommodation areas shall be properly maintained in all respects. In particular, and
without limiting the foregoing, vehicle accommodation area surfaces shall be kept in good
condition (free from potholes, etc.) and parking space lines or markings shall be kept clearly
visible and distinct.
Section 1707. Joint Use of Required Parking Spaces
a) One parking area may contain required spaces for several different uses, but except as
otherwise provided in this section, the required space assigned to one use may not be credited
to any other use.
b) To the extent that developments that wish to make joint use of the same parking spaces
operate at different times, the same spaces maybe credited to both uses. For example, if a
parking lot is used in connection with an office building on Monday through Friday but is
generally 90 percent vacant on weekends, another development that operates only on
weekends could be credited with 90 percent of the spaces on that lot. Or, if a church parking
lot is generally occupied only to 50 percent of capacity on days other than Sunday, another
development could make use of 50 percent of the church lot's spaces on those other days.
c) If the joint use of the same parking spaces by two or more principal uses involves satellite
parking spaces, then the provisions of Section 1708 are also applicable.
d) In the case ofmixed uses ( with different parking requirements occupying the same building or
premises) or in the case of a joint use of a building or premises by more than one use having
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 9
the same parking requirements, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately, except that parking requirements for
permitted accessory retail and service uses in a hotel, motel, or motor lodge that contains 50 or
more dwelling units may be reduced by the following percentages:
1. Retail sales, offices, service establishments, 50 percent
2. Restaurants and dining rooms, 75 percent
3. Ballrooms, banquet halls, meeting rooms, auditoriums, 80 percent.
e) Off-street parking areas required for residential use shall not be included in any joint parking
arrangement.
Section 1708. Satellite Parking for Commercial Uses
a) If the number of off-street parking spaces required by this ordinance cannot reasonably be
provided on the same lot where the principal use associated with these parking spaces is
located, then spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby lots in accordance with the
provisions of this section. These off-site spaces are referred to in this section as satellite
parking spaces.
b) All such satellite parking spaces ( except spaces intended for employee use) must be located
within 1, 000 feet of a public entrance of a principal building housing the use associated with
such parking, or within 1, 000 feet of the lot on which the use associated with such parking is
located if the use not housed within any principal building. Satellite parking spaces intended
for employee use maybe located within any reasonable distance. No more than 60 percent of
the total required spaces are to be located in satellite parking spaces.
c) The developer wishing to take advantage of the provisions of this section must present
satisfactory written evidence that he has the permission of the owner or other person in charge
of the satellite parking spaces to use such spaces. The developer must also sign an
acknowledgment that the continuing validity of his permit depends upon his continuing ability
to provide the requisite number of parking spaces.
d) All satellite parking spaces shall be located in the same zoning district as the structures or uses
served or shall abut at least 50 feet, either directly or across an alley, from the structure or uses
served.
e) Satellite parking spaces shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles. No
commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be conducted, and no change shall be
made for parking. No sign of any kind, other than designating ownership, entrances, exits, and
conditions of use, shall be maintained on such satellite parking areas.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 10
f) Each entrance and exit to and from such parking area shall be at least 20 feet distant from any
adjacent lot line located in any residential zone.
g) The satellite parking areas shall be subject to all requirements of this ordinance concerning
surfacing, lighting, drainage, landscaping, screening, and setbacks.
Section 1709. Special provisions For Lots With Existing Buildings
a) Any increase in the intensity of use of any structure shall mean the addition of dwelling units,
employees, gross floor area, seating capacity, or any other unit of measurement used as a basis
for determining required parking facilities. When the intensity of use of any structure is
increased by less than 20 percent, parking facilities shall be provided for the increase, but not
for any existing deficiency in such facilities. When the intensity is increased by more than 20
percent, including consecutive increases from the date of this Ordinance, parking facilities
shall be provided for the entire structure on premises.
b) When the use of any structure or premises is changed to a different use, parking facilities shall
be provided for the different use.
Section 1710. Loading and Unloading Areas
a) Subject to Subsection ( e), whenever the normal operation of any development requires that
goods, merchandise, or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from that development,
a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area must be provided in accordance with this
section to accommodate the delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner.
b) The loading and unloading area must be of sufficient size to accommodate the numbers and
types of vehicles that are likely to use this area, given the nature of the development in
question. The following table indicates the number and size of spaces that, presumptively,
satisfy the standard set forth in this subsection. However, the permit -issuing authority may
require more or less loading and unloading area if reasonably necessary to satisfy the
foregoing standard.
Gross Leasable Area of Building Number of Spaces*
1, 000- 19,000 1
20,000- 79,999 2
80,000- 127,999 3
128,000- 191, 000 4
192,000-255, 999 5
256,000- 319,999 6
320,000- 391, 999 7
Minimum dimensions of 12 feet x 55 feet and overhead clearance of 14 feet from
street grade required.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 11
c) Loading and unloading areas shall be so located an designed that the vehicles intended to use
them can (i) maneuver safely and conveniently to and from a public right-of-way, and (ii)
complete the loading and unloading operations without obstructing or interfering with any
public right-of-way or any parking space or parking lot aisle.
d) No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area
requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking are be used
to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading facilities.
e) No such space shall be located closer than 50 feet to any other lot in any residential district
unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless enclosed on all sides by a wall
or uniformly painted board fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
Section 1711. Parking facilities for the Physically Handicapped
a) Location. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be located as close as possible
to ramps, walkways, entrances, and elevators. Where feasible, these parking spaces shall be
located so that the physically handicapped are not forced to wheel or walk across main traffic
lanes or behind parked cars to reach the ramps, and other facilities. The spaces shall be
situated in those areas of the parking lots located nearest to each primary building entrance.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 12
April, 2004
b) Each handicapped parking space shall contain a rectangular area of at least 19 feet long
and 13 feet wide.
c) Required Number of Spaces. The following number ofparking spaces shall be reserved
for the physically handicapped:
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Required Minimum Number
Upto25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1, 000 2 % of Total
Over 1, 000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1, 000
d) Identification. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be identified by signs,
generally located eight (8) feet above grade. The signs shall state that the space is
reserved by law for the physically handicapped. Where these signs are placed flush
against buildings or structures, or in other locations not accessible to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, the height may be reduced to six ( 6) feet.
e) Curbs.
i) Where a curb exists between a parking lot and a sidewalk, a horizontally scored
ramp or curb cut shall be provided for wheelchair access.
ii) The curb cut shall not be less than four (4) feet wide and shall have a grade of not
more than one ( 1) foot in 12 feet.
iii) Curb cuts shall be provided within 30 feet of each accessible entrance to the
structure, at all pedestrian walk intersections, and elsewhere to provide reasonably
direct circulation within each development.
iv) The curb cuts shall not be more than 150 feet apart for access purposes.
1) Sidewalks.
i) Sidewalks shall be scored or textured to indicate the location of doors to blind
persons.
ii) Exterior sidewalks shall not be obstructed.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 13
g)
h)
iii) Exterior sidewalks shall have a side slope not greater than one ( 1) inch in four (4)
feet. They shall be at least four (4) feet wide and have a grade ofnot more than
1) foot in 20 feet.
iv) Wherever sidewalks cross driveways, parking lots, or other sidewalks, they shall
blend to a common level.
Storm Drains. Storm drain grates and similar devices shall not be located within the
required access for the physically handicapped.
Grade. The grade of parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall not be more than
one ( 1) foot in 20 feet.
Part IILandscaping of Parking Facilities
Section 1750. Intent
a) It is intended that the application of the landscape standards set forth below will reduce
the visual and environmental impacts oflarge expanses of parking areas. Breaking up of
paved parking areas with plantings will provide improved aesthetics and micro -climatic
benefits by reducing heat and glare.
Section 1751. Sites affected
a) New sites. No new parking areas shall hereafter be constructed or used unless
landscaping is provided as required by the provision of this Article.
b)
c)
Existing sites. No parking areas shall be expanded, moved, or removed and/ or
reconstructed unless the minimum landscaping required by the provision of this Article is
provided for the property to the extent of its alteration or expansion, but not for the entire
property.
Change of use. No use shall be changed to another use for which the Zoning Ordinance
requires additional parking over and above that required for the previous use, unless
vehicular use area perimeter landscaping as required by this Article is provided for such
additional parking. The provisions of this section shall be effective regardless of whether
or not new construction is necessary to meet the parking requirements for the new uses.
Where new construction will not be necessary to meet the parking requirements, such
additional required parking shall be deemed to be on the perimeter for as much as
possible of the existing vehicular use area. Where the previous use had no required
parking, perimeter landscaping shall be provided for the entire vehicular use area serving
the new use. Interior landscaping shall not be required where only the use of the property
is changed and no new construction or reconstruction is proposed.
d) Change of zone. No use of an existing building, structure, or vehicular use area shall be
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 14
commenced subsequent to a change in zoning unless property perimeter landscaping as
required herein has been provided.
Section 1752. Perimeter Landscaping
a) Property line landscape buffers between adjacent land uses shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements spelled out in Article XVIII, Screening and Shading.
b) Any parking lot that is adjacent to a road or public right-of-way shall provide a
landscaping area width based upon the following right-of-way width:
c)
Right of Way Width
60 feet wide or less:
More than 60 feet wide:
Width ofrequired landscape area
10 foot minimum landscape area width
15 foot minimum landscape area width.
The permit -issuing authority may allow deviations from this requirement when it finds that the
site in question exhibits irregular, confining, or otherwise unusual characteristics. In no case
shall the required landscape area width be less than five (5) feet.
d) Where the pavement width of the parking lot exceeds 60 feet, the landscape area adjacent to a
road or public right-of-way shall be increased by five (5) feet for every additional 60 feet of
parking lot width perpendicular to the right-of-way as indicated in the following table:
Parking Lot Width
1- 60 ft.
61- 120 ft.
121- 180 ft.
181- 240 ft.
241- 300 ft.
301- 360 ft.
361- 420 ft.
Required Landscape Area Width
15 ft.
20 ft.
25 ft.
30 ft.
35 ft.
40 ft.
45 ft.
e) Each landscape area adjacent to a street right-of-way shall contain a minimum of one ( 1) tree
per 40 feet of landscape area parallel to the right-of-way. In addition, a vegetative screen,
landscaped berm, fence, wall, or other methods to reduce the visual impact of the parking area
shall be provided. The vegetative screen shall have an average continuous height of three (3)
feet. A three ( 3) foot decrease in elevation from the adjoining property to the street right-ofway
shall be construed as satisfying the vegetative screen requirement.
f) Grass or ground cover shall be planted on all portions of the landscape area not occupied by
other landscape material.
g) Special notes on existing natural vegetation:
i) In all cases where significant natural vegetation exists, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, there will be limits of clearing/grading areas established to protect and
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 15
preserve these natural areas. These natural areas will not be disturbed by the
installation of any structures, utilities, storm and sanitary sewers, water lines, sediment
and erosion control traps, stormwater management systems, signage. Existing
landscape material which is proposed to be used to fulfill landscape requirements shall
be shown in the required plan.
ii) In the case where buffers are created by the application of these standards, no
structures, utilities, storm and sanitary sewers, water lines, sediment and erosion
control traps, stormwater management systems, and signage will be permitted.
iii) Where pedestrian and bike paths are proposed in the landscape area, such paths shall
be meandering in order to preserve the existing trees.
h) Trees required as a part of the parking lot street right-of-way landscaping may be placed on the
right-of-way adjoining such vehicular use area when approved by the Planning Commission.
Such trees shall be in addition to any street trees required by the subdivision regulations.
i)
1)
Landscaping in Easements. The required landscape area for parking areas may be combined
with a utility or other easement only when all landscape requirements cannot be met.
Otherwise, the landscape area shall be in addition to, and separate from, any easement.
In any parking lot perimeter landscaping area there shall be a four (4) feet minimum setback
from all trees to the edge of paving where vehicles overhang.
Section 1753. Interior Landscaping for Parking Lots
a) For any parking lot containing more than 6,000 square feet of area or 15 or more spaces,
interior landscaping shall be provided in addition to the previously required perimeter
landscaping. Interior landscaping shall be contained in peninsulas or islands containing a
minimum area of 153 square feet having a minimum width of eight and one-half (8. 5) feet and
a minimum length of 18 feet. There shall be a minimum distance of four (4) feet to all trees
from the edge of paving where vehicles overhang. The minimum landscape area permitted
shall be 10 percent of the parking area. Each island or peninsula shall be enclosed by
appropriate curbing or a similar device at least six ( 6) inches wide and six (6) inches in height
above the paving surface.
b) Where a parking area is altered or expanded to increase the size to 6,000 or more square of
area or 15 or more vehicular parking spaces, interior landscaping for the entire parking area
shall be provided and not merely to the extent of its alteration or expansion.
c) Landscape area. For each 100 square feet, or fraction thereof, of vehicular use area, five (5)
square feet of landscaped area shall be provided. The interior landscaping requirement shall
be computed on the basis of the "net parking facility." For the purposes of this Section, " net
parking facility" shall include parking stalls, access drives, aisles, walkways, dead spaces, and
required separations from structures, but shall not include required street setbacks or access
driveways or walkways within such setbacks.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 16
d) Landscape islands or peninsulas - number required:
i) For less than 100 spaces one island or peninsula is required for every seven ( 7) parking
spaces.
ii) For 100 spaces or more, one island or peninsula is required for every 10 spaces.
iii) Each 10 parking spaces shall require an interior planting island.
iv) All interior parking aisles shall end in a landscape island.
e) Maximum contiguous areas for interior parking lot landscaping. In order to encourage the
required landscape areas to be properly dispensed, no required landscape area shall be larger
than the following:
g)
h)
i) 350 square feet in parking areas under 30,000 square feet.
ii) 1, 500 square feet in parking areas over 30,000 square feet.
Landscape areas larger than the above are permitted as long as the additional area is in excess
of the required minimum, except that landscape areas larger than the maximum permitted may
be allowed as required landscaping areas in those cases where significant natural vegetation
exists. ( See Section 1752 ( g) above.)
Minimum plant materials. A minimum of one ( 1) tree for each 250 square feet or fraction
thereof of required landscape or for each five (5) spaces of required parking or for each 161
square feet of island or peninsula, whichever is greater, shall be required. The remaining area
of the required landscaped area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover not to exceed
two (2) feet in height, or grass.
Landscaping for service structures. All service structures shall be fully screened, except when
located in a single-family, agriculture, or industrial zone or when located more than 35 feet
above the established grade. Service structures in an industrial zone shall be fully screened
when located within 100 feet of any zone other than industrial. For the purposes of this
article, service structures shall include propane tanks, dumpsters, air conditioning units and
condensers, electrical transformers and other equipment or elements providing service to a
building or a site.
i) Location of screening. A continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall, or earth mound shall
enclose any service structure on all sides unless such structure must be frequently
moved, in which case screening on all but one ( 1) side is required. The average height
of the screening material shall be one ( 1) foot more than the height of the enclosed
structure, but shall not be required to exceed eight (8) feet in height. Whenever a
service structure is located next to a building wall, perimeter landscaping material, or
vehicular use area landscaping material, such walls or screening material may fulfill
the screening requirement for that side of the service structure if that wall or screening
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 17
material is of an average height sufficient to meet the height requirement set out in this •
section. Whenever service structures are screened by plant material, such material may
count towards the fulfillment of required interior or perimeter landscaping. No interior
landscaping shall be required within an area screened for service structures.
ii) Protection of screening material. Whenever screening material is placed around any
trash disposal unit or waste collection unit that is emptied or removed mechanically on
a regular basis, a fixed barrier to contain the placement of the container shall be
provided within the screening material on those sides where there is such material.
The barrier shall be at least 18 inches from the material and shall be of sufficient
strength to prevent possible damage to the screening when the container is moved or
emptied. The minimum front opening of the screening material shall be 12 feet to
allow service vehicles access to the container.
Interior landscaping for parking areas shall be installed and continuously maintained by the
owner according to the requirements contained in Article XVIII of this ordinance.
Landscape material type and quality shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article
XVIII of this ordinance.
Plan submission and approval. Whenever any property is affected by these parking area
landscape requirements, the property owner or developer shall prepare a landscape plan for
approval according to the requirements contained in Article XVIII of this Ordinance.
Unnecessary paving or irregular paving plans are strongly discouraged and, if incorporated in
a site plan, shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator.
Alternative parking area landscaping design may be considered by the permitting officials in
cases where unique topography and site constraints dictate such alternative. The innovative
use ofplanting design and materials is encouraged and will be evaluated on the intent
demonstrated to fulfill the stated objectives of this ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 17. 18
April, 2004
ARTICLE XVIII SCREENING & SHADING
Part I Buffeerss
Section 1801. Purpose
a) One of zoning's most important functions is the division of land uses into districts which
have similar character and contain compatible uses. All uses permitted in any district have
generally similar nuisance characteristics. Bufferyards will operate to minimize the negative
impact between different zoning districts of any future use on neighboring uses.
b) The bufferyard is a combination ofsetback and a visual buffer or barrier and is a yard or area
together with the planting required thereon. Both the amount of land and the type and
amount ofplanting specified for each bufferyard requirement ofthis Ordinance are specified
and are designed to ameliorate nuisances between adjacent zoning districts to ensure a
desired character along public streets and roads.
c) Bufferyards shall be required to separate different zoning districts from each other in order to
eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare oflights, signs, and
unsightly buildings or parking areas, or to provide spacing to reduce adverse impacts of
noise, odor, or danger from fires or explosions. Mature woodlands are considered the best
buffers and should be used whenever possible.
Section 1802. Location of Bufferyards
Bufferyards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or parcel
boundary line. Bufferyards shall not be located on any portion of an existing or dedicated public or
private street or right-of-way. Bufferyards shall not be located within a yard required in a single
family attached (townhouse) development or planned unit development.
Section 1803. Determination of Required Bufferyard
To determine the type ofbufferyard required on a parcel or between two parcels or between a parcel
and a street, the following procedure shall be used:
i. Identify whether any portion or property line ofthe site constitutes a zoning district
boundary. If it does, determine the zoning on both sides of the property.
ii. Determine whether the land on the adjoining property is vacant or developed or
whether a plat of the subdivision has been approved.
iii. Classify any street adjacent to the proposed use as a local, collector, or arterial street.
4111 Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 18. 1
iv. Determine the bufferyard required on each boundary ( or segment thereof) of the
subject parcel by referring to the Tables ofRequired Bufferyards (See section 1805).
v. Determine if the proposed development is a use which has bufferyards required to
separate that use from certain uses. Then determine the bufferyard required between
such uses by referring to the Tables of Required Bufferyards (See section 1805).
Section 1804. Responsibility for Bufferyards
a) When a proposed use adjoins a vacant parcel for which a bufferyard is required by the
presence of a zoning boundary, that use shall at the time of development provide one-half
0.5) of the buffer which is required by the Tables ofRequired Bufferyards.
b) The second use to develop shall, at the time it develops, provide all additional plant material
and/or land necessary to provide the total bufferyard required between those two (2) uses. If
the adjoining use had developed without a bufferyard, the second use will be responsible for
installing the total bufferyard.
c) Existing plant material and/ or land located on the preexisting ( first developed) land use
which meets the requirements of this Ordinance may be counted as contributing to the total
bufferyard required between it and the second ( adjacent) land use to develop.
Section 1805. Tables of Required Bufferyards
Table of Required Bufferyards Between Adjacent Zoning Districts
Table 1805 A
Bufferyards only required between single-family attached and multi -family and single-family
detached homes.
Indicates Bufferyards either not required or not applicable
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 18.2
April, 2004 •
Table of Required Street Buffers
Table 1805 B
Section 1806. Bufferyard Requirements
Illustrations graphically indicating the specification ofeach bufferyard are contained in Appendix F.
Section 1807. Bufferyard Use
A bufferyard may be used for passive recreation or stormwater management. It may contain
pedestrian, bike, or equestrian trails provided that: ( a) no plant material is eliminated, (b) the total
width of the bufferyard is maintained, and (c) all other regulations ofthe Ordinance are met. ( d) In
no event, however, shall swimming pools, tennis courts or other such uses be permitted in
bufferyards. The Planning Commission may allow substitution or reduction of the bufferyard if it
finds that the required bufferyard will obstruct the view of a driver or that the bufferyard is
incompatible with the existing streetscape.
Section 1808. Ownership of Bufferyards
Bufferyards may remain in the ownership of the original developer (and assigns) of a land use, or
they may be subjected to deed restrictions and subsequently be freely conveyed, or they may be
transferred to any consenting grantees, such as adjoining landowners, the Town ofIndian Head, or a
homeowner's association, provided that any such conveyance adequately guarantees the protection of
the bufferyards for the purposes ofthis Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 18. 3
Section 1809. Bufferyards Which Exceed Minimum Requirements
Where the bufferyard required between a land use and vacant land turns out to be greater than that
bufferyard which is required between the first use and the subsequently developed use, the following
options apply:
The subsequent use may provide one half (0. 5) ofthe buffer required by this Section.
The existing use may expand its use into the original buffer area, provided that the
resulting total bufferyard between the two uses meets the bufferyard requirements of
this Section.
ii. The existing use may enter into agreements with abutting landowners to use its
existing buffer to provide some or all of the required bufferyard of both land uses.
The total buffer shall equal the requirements of this Section. Provided that such an
agreement can be negotiated, the initial use may provide the second use some or all
of its required bufferyard and/or extra land on which it might develop. The existing
use may reduce its excess buffer by transferring part or all ofthe excess buffer to the
adjoining landowner to serve as its buffer. Any remaining excess buffer areamaybe
used by the existing use for expansion ofthat use or for transfer by it to the adjoining
landowner to expand that adjoining use.
Section 1810. Contractual Reduction of Bufferyards
When a land use is proposed adjacent to vacant land, and the owner ofthat vacant land enters into a
contractual relationship with the owner ofthe land that is to be developed first, a reduced buffer may
be provided by that first use, provided that: the contract contains a statement: by the owner ofthe
vacant land of an intent to develop at no greater than a specified land use intensity class; and an
agreement by that vacant landowner to assume all responsibility for additional buffer, ifneeded by
the subsequent development of a less intense use than had been agreed upon, is transferred to the
owner ofthe vacant (second in time to be developed) land.
Part II Shading
Section 1850. Town Findings and Declaration of Policy: Shade trees
a) The Town finds that:
i. Trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for human survival,
ii. Trees appreciably reduce the ever increasing environmentally dangerous carbon
dioxide content of the air and play a vital role in purifying the air we breathe,
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 18. 4
iii. Trees transpire considerable amounts of water each day and thereby purify the air
much like the air -washer devices used on commercial air conditioning systems,
b)
iv. Trees have an important role in neutralizing waste water passing through the ground
from the surface to ground water tables and lower aquifers,
v. Trees, through their root systems play an important and effective part in soil
conservation, erosion control, and flood control,
vi. Trees are an invaluable physical, aesthetic, and psychological counterpoint to the
urban setting, making urban life more comfortable by providing shade and cooling
the air and land, reducing noise levels and glare, and breaking the monotony of
human developments on the land, particularly parking areas, and
vii. For the reasons indicated in Subsection vi., trees have an important impact on the
desirability of land and therefore on property values.
Based upon the findings set forth in Subsection ( a), the Town declares that it is not only
desirable but essential to the health, safety, and welfare of all persons living or working
within the Town's planning jurisdiction to protect certain existing trees and, under the
circumstances set forth in this article, to require the planting ofnew trees in certain types of
developments.
Section 1851. Required Trees Along Dedicated Streets
long both sides ofall newly created streets that are constructed in accordance with the public street
standards set forth in the Town' s Subdivision Ordinance, the developer shall at a minimum either
plant or retain sufficient trees so that between the paved portion of the street and a line running
parallel to and 50 feet from the centerline ofthe street, there is for every 35 feet of street frontage at
least an average of one deciduous tree that has or will have when fully mature a trunk at least 12
inches in diameter. When trees are planted by the developer pursuant to this section, the developer
shall choose trees that meet the standards set forth in Appendix E.
Section 1852. Retention and Protection of Large Trees
a) Every development shall retain all existing trees 15 inches in diameter or more unless the
retention of such trees would unreasonably burden the development.
b) No excavation or other subsurface disturbance may be undertaken within the drip line ofany
tree 18 inches in diameter or more, and no impervious surface (including, but not limited to,
paving or buildings) may be located within 12 1/ 2 feet (measured from the center of the
trunk) of any tree 18 inches in diameter or more unless compliance with this subsection
would unreasonably burden the development. For purposes ofthis subsection, a drip line is
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 18. 5
c)
defined as a perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where
precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground.
The retention or protection oftrees 18 inches in diameter or more as provided in Subsections
a) and ( b) unreasonably burdens a development if, to accomplish such retention or
protection, the desired location of improvements on a lot or the proposed activities on a lot
would have to be substantially altered and such alteration would work an unreasonable
hardship upon the developer.
d) If space that would otherwise be devoted to parking cannot be so used because of the
requirements of Subsections (a) or (b), and, as a result, the parking requirements set forth in
Article XVII cannot be satisfied, the number of required spaces may be reduced by the
number of spaces " lost" because of the provisions of Subsections ( a) -and ( b), up to a
maximum of 15 percent of the required spaces.
Section 1853. Shade Trees in Parking Areas
a) Vehicle accommodation areas that are required to be paved by Section 1706 must be shaded
by deciduous trees (either retained or planted by the developer) that have or will have when
fully mature a trunk at least 12 inches in diameter. When trees are planted by the developer
to satisfy the requirements ofthis subsection, the developer shall choose trees that meet the
standards set forth in Appendix E.
b) Each tree of the type described in Subsection (a) shall be presumed to shade a circular area
having a radius of 15 feet with the trunk ofthe tree as the center, and there must be sufficient
trees so that, using this standard, 20 percent of the vehicle accommodation area will be
shaded.
c) No paving may be placed within 12 1/ 2 feet (measured from the center ofthe trunk) of any
tree retained to comply with Subsection (a), and new trees planted to complywith Subsection
a) shall be located so that they are surrounded by at least 200 square feet ofunpaved area.
d) Vehicle accommodation areas shall be laid out and detailed to prevent vehicles from striking
trees. Vehicles will be presumed to have a body overhang of three feet, six inches.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 18. 6
ARTICLE XIX ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS
Section 1900. Adequate Public Facilities Required
a) No final plat for a subdivision or final development plan shall be approved unless the
Planning Commission first determines that adequate facilities are available to support and
service the proposed subdivision or development as set forth in this Article.
b) The applicant shall submit with any preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary site plan
sufficient information and data to demonstrate the expected impact on and use ofthe public
facilities by the residents or occupants ofthe proposed subdivision, planned development, or
other development.
c) Unless otherwise specified herein, this Article does not apply to minor subdivisions and
insignificant commercial or industrial development for which only a minor subdivision or
minor site plan is required.
Section 1901. Fire Suppression
a) The proposed development shall be adequately served by fire suppression facilities.
b) A proposed development shall be considered to be adequately served by fire suppression
facilities if:
i. the availability of a fire apparatus that has a pump with a rated capacity of250 gpm
or more at 150 psi.
ii. a water system capable ofdelivering 250 gpm or more for a period oftwo hours, plus
consumption at the maximum daily rate ( 24 hour period which the highest
consumption is recorded in the latest three-year period) at a fire location.
iii. the needed fire flow for selected locations is based on a variety offactors, including,
but not limited to:
A. area ofbuilding.
B. type of construction.
C. type of occupancy.
Section 1902. Streets
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 19. 1
a) . The proposed development shall be served by access roads adequate to accommodate the
vehicular traffic projected to be generated by the development.
b) Access roads shall be considered adequate to accommodate the traffic projected to be
generated by the proposed development if:
existing Town or State roads from the point of first egress from and ingress to the
proposed development to and including the intersection with the first Town or
County arterial street or State road in all directions from the development are capable
of accommodating existing traffic, traffic projected to be generated from
developments for which plats and plans have been approved, and traffic projected to
be generated from the proposed development at an established minimum service
level, set forth below as defined by the then current edition ofthe Highway Capacity
Manual (Special Report #87) published by the Transportation Research Board; or
ii. the County, State or Town has programmed for construction in the respective capital
improvements plans or like documents additional roads, or road improvements,
necessary in combination with existing roads and intersections to comply with the
standards specified in item i. of this subsection. The programmed improvements
must be scheduled to be in place at the time the anticipated development will need
occupancy; or
iii. the developer agrees to undertake the construction of the roads or road
improvements.
c) The established minimum level ofservice (LOS) for developments in the Town is LOS C for
off-peak hours and LOS D for peak hour. Ifthe existing level of service ofthe affected road
or street is less than the standard above, then the transportation facility will be considered
inadequate if the proposed development degrades the facility by more than a factor of 0.01
based on the volume to capacity ratio.
d) The determination ofthe rating ofa road under subsection c ofthis Section.shall consider the
effects ofexisting traffic, traffic projected to be generated from developments for which final
plats and plans have been approved, and traffic projected to be generated from the proposed
development.
e) When a developer submits a preliminary plan of a proposed development to the Town, the
developer shall indicate the development's anticipated vehicle trip generation rates and shall
submit a listing of those existing roads and highways, including intersections, that will be
impacted by vehicular traffic to and from the development from the point of first ingress to
and egress from the proposed development to and including the intersection with the first
County or Town arterial road or State highway in all directions from the proposed
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 19.2
development.
f) When the applicant submits an application for final plan approval, the applicant shall submit
a traffic impact study including traffic flow studies ofthe roads, highways, and intersections
identified in the preliminary analysis. The traffic flow studies shall consider, at a minimum,
existing traffic, traffic projected to be generated from proposed developments for which final
plats have been approved and for which public works agreements are outstanding, and traffic
projected to be generated from the proposed development. The Administrator shall review
traffic impact study submitted for compliance with the traffic impact study guidelines set
forth in this Section. Ifthe traffic impact study does not comply with the traffic impact study
guidelines, the developer shall supplement the study to correct the deficiencies.
Section 1903. Schools
a) This section does not apply to:
i. development to be exclusively for nonresidential uses; or
ii. a proposed development, according to federal regulations, restricting occupancy in
the dwelling units to elderly persons.
1111 (
b) The Zoning Administrator shall submit all preliminary plats and plans to the Charles County
Board of Education in order to facilitate the appropriate facility planning and for input to the
Town.
c) The Town Planning Commission will not deny a plat or plan based on inadequate facilities as
long as Charles County is collecting an education impact fee.
Section 1904. Sewerage
a) The proposed development shall be served by an adequate sewerage system.
b) The sewerage system shall be considered adequate if, taking into account demands on the
system generated or projected to be generated by existing connections, buildings under
construction that will be connected to the system, buildings unconnected but required by law
to connect to the system, buildable approved lots for which building permits have not been
issued in active developments served by the system, properties using individual sewerage
systems that will be required by law to connect to the system on completion of a capital
project then under construction for which funding has been authorized, rights- of-way
acquisition completed, construction plans completed, other buildable approved lots (adjusted
for degree of inactivity), and other proposed developments to be served by the system for
which final plats have been approved:
Zoning Ordinance
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 19. 3
April, 2004
lateral systems to serve the proposed development are designed to accommodate
expected ultimate peak flows from the development;
ii. interceptors to serve the proposed development have sufficient available capacity to
accommodate ultimate peak gravity flows from the development with adjustment for
pump flows where applicable;
iii. pumping stations and force mains in the service area have sufficient available
capacity to accommodate expected ultimate peak flows from the proposed
development; and
iv. the Indian Head treatment plant has sufficient available capacity to accommodate
expected peak flows from the proposed development for the hydraulic system and
average daily flows from the proposed development for the treatment process.
c) The Town's sewerage system is also considered adequate if there is compliance with
paragraph (b) i. of this Section and the Town has awarded a contract for the construction or
improvement ofthe facilities necessary to comply with requirements ofparagraphs (b) ii, iii,
and iv of this Section and the facilities will be available for use before the issuance of the
first building permit for the development.
d) The calculations required by subsection (b) ofthis Section shall be based on criteria specified
in applicable Charles County standards.
e) All future developments shall comply with the provisions and intent ofthe Comprehensive
Water and Sewerage Plan ofCharles County, the Charles County Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewerage Construction and the regulations of the Town of Indian Head. The
owner, developer, or other applicants for a building permit shall present evidence that the
proposed method of sewerage disposal and water supply is consistent with said plans and
directives.
f) All sewerage systems shall be constructed to established standards as approved by the
Maryland Department of the Environment.
Section 1905. Storm drainage
a) The proposed development shall be served by an adequate storm drainage system.
b) A storm drainage system shall be considered adequate if:
i. the on-site drainage system installed by the developer will be capable of conveying
through and from the property the design flow of storm water runoff originating in
the development, as determined in accordance with criteria specified in the Town of
Indian Head's Storm Water Management Ordinance, in addition to flows from
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 19.4
c)
upstream developments for which plats have been recorded and other approved
development and undeveloped land upstream in the natural watershed of the
proposed development, without resulting in erosion, sedimentation or flooding ofthe
receiving channel and downstream properties; and
ii. the off-site downstream drainage systems are capable of conveying to an acceptable
outfall the design flow of storm water runoff originating in the development, as
determined in accordance with criteria specified in Indian Head's Storm Water
Management Ordinance, in addition to flows from upstream developments for which
plats have been recorded and other approved development and undeveloped land
upstream within the natural watershed of the proposed development, without
resulting in erosion, sedimentation, or flooding of the receiving channel and
downstream properties.
A storm drainage system shall be considered adequate ifthere is compliance with subsection
b i. ofthis Section and the Town has awarded a contract for the construction or improvement
ofoff-site downstream drainage systems necessary, in combination with existing systems, to
comply with the standard specified in subsection b ii. ofthis section and the construction or
improvement ofthe off-site downstream drainage system is expected to be completed before
the issuance of the first building permit for the development or the developer agrees to
undertake the construction or improvement of the off-site downstream drainage systems.
d) In determining adequacy of a storm drainage system, storm water runoffflows from land for
which a plat has not been recorded shall be calculated as ifthe land was developed according
to its existing zoning classification and storm water management techniques, as may be
required by Storm Water Management Ordinance, have been utilized. Storm water runoff
flows from other lands shall be calculated on the basis of whether or not storm water
management techniques have been utilized.
Section 1906. Water
a) :: The proposed development shall be served by an adequate water supply system.
b) The Town's water supply system shall be considered adequate if, taking into account
demands on the system generated or projected to be generated by existing connections,
buildings under construction that will be connected to the system, buildings unconnected but
required by law to connect to the system, buildable approved lots for which building permits
have not been issued in active developments served by the system, properties using
individual water supply systems that will be required by law to connect to the system on
completion of a capital project then under construction or for which funding has been
authorized, rights-of-way acquisition completed, construction plans completed (adjusted for
degree of inactivity), other buildable approved lots ( adjusted for degree of inactivity), and
other proposed developments to be served by the system for which final plats have been
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 19. 5
approved:
source facilities in the service area have sufficient available capacity to provide
maximum daily demand to the proposed development in accordance with the Town's
hydraulic water supply model. The Town may require the developer to upgrade the
model to assure sufficient water supply;
ii. storage tanks in the service area have sufficient available capacity to provide peak
hour demand in addition to fire flow to the proposed development;
iii. local pumping stations to provide water to theproposed developments have sufficient
available capacity to provide maximum day demand where storage facilities are
available on the discharge side or have sufficient capacity to provide for fire flow
where storage facilities are not available on the discharge side; and
iv. the distribution system is capable of providing normal required pressure and
minimum residual pressure to the proposed development under fire flow for the type
of development planned.
c) Apublic community water supply system shall also be considered adequate ifthe Town has
awarded a contract for the construction or improvement ofthe facilities necessary to comply
with the requirements of subsection b of this Section and the facilities will be available for
use before the issuance ofthe first building permit for the development.
d) The calculations required by subsection.b of this Section shall be made based on criteria
specified in applicable Charles County standards.
e) All future developments shall comply with the provisions and intent of the Comprehensive
Water and Sewerage Plan ofCharles County, the Charles County Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewerage Construction, and the regulations of the Charles County Health
Department as approved by the Town. The owner, developer, or other applicants for a
building permit shall present evidence that the proposed method of sewerage disposal and
water supply is consistent with said plans and directives.
f) All central water systems shall be constructed to established standards as approved by the
Maryland Department of the Environment.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 19. 6
ARTICLE XX AMENDMENTS
Section 2000. Amendments In General
a) The Town Council may from time to time amend, supplement, modify, or repeal the
regulations, or district boundaries herein established on its own motion or on petition of the
owner(s) or contract owner(s) of the property proposed for change.
b) Any application for a zoning amendment shall contain specific information setting forth the
basis for the granting ofthe request. Any application must disclose the names and addresses
of all persons having legal or equitable interest in the property which is the subject of the
amendment, including shareholders owning= more than five ( 5) percent of the stock in a
corporation that has any interest in land involved in the application, excepting those
corporations which are listed and regularly traded on a recognized stock exchange.
Section 2001. Initiation of Amendments
a) Any owner or contract owner wishing to amend, supplement, modify, or repeal anyportion of
this Ordinance shall file a Zoning Amendment Petition with the Zoning Administrator in such
form and accompanied by such information as maybe required by the Zoning Administrator.
b) Upon determination by the Zoning Administrator that the application is complete, the
application shall be promptly submitted for comment and review to appropriate Town, county,
and state departments and agencies. Upon completion of such administrative review (to be
completed within sixty ( 60) days from submission by the Zoning Administrator) the
application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.
Section 2002. Planning Commission Consideration of Proposed Amendments
a) The Planning Commission shall consider the application and shall conduct a public hearing
regarding the application. The public hearing shall be conducted as follows:
i. The applicant shall be given ample time to present his case to the Planning
Commission. In so doing the applicant may call on expert witnesses to support their
request.
ii. The zoning administrator shall present a staff report representing a review of the
application by the Zoning Adminstrator. The staff report shall include, without
limitation, an assessment ofthe impact of the proposed amendment on the following
matters: population change, availability of public facilities, present and future
transportation patterns, compatibility with existing and proposed development for the
area, the relationship of such proposed amendment to the Town of Indian Head
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 20. 1
Comprehensive Plan, and a recommendation for approval or denial of the proposed
amendment.
iii. The Planning Commission shall ask such questions of either the applicant, any
witnesses, or the staff as may be necessary in deciding its approval or denial of the
application.
iv. The Public shall be given an opportunity to testify or ask questions ofthe applicant,
his witnesses, or the planning staff. The Planning Commission may in turn question
those testifying and may place a reasonable time limit for such testimony.
b) Within sixty (60) days from the Planning Commission's final hearing on the application, the
Planning Commission shall transmit the application to the Town Council, together with its
recommendations for approval or disapproval. The Planning Commission shall concurrently
transmit this information to the applicant.
c) After the Planning Commission makes its formal recommendation on the application, the
Town Council shall hold a public hearing on the application.
Section 2003. Hearing Required; Notice
a) All public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with Section 4.04 ofArticle 66B ofthe
Annotated Code of Maryland. Specifically, the following procedures shall apply:
The Town shall provide for the manner in which such regulations and restrictions and
the boundaries of such districts shall be determined, established, and enforced, and
from time to time amended, supplemented, modified or repealed. However, a
regulation, restriction, or boundarymay not become effective until ten (10) days after
at least one ( 1) public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and
citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
ii. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, together with a summary of the
proposed regulation, restriction, or boundary, shall be published in at least one ( 1)
newspaper of general circulation in Indian Head once each week for two ( 2)
successive weeks, with the first such publication ofnotice appearing at least 14 days
prior to the hearing.
Section 2004. Town Council Action on Amendments
a) Before approving or disapproving any application for amendment, the Town shall hold at least
one ( 1) public hearing in relation to the application, at which parties in interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 20.2
b) The Town Council shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days after receipt of the
Planning Commission's recommendation. At least fifteen ( 15) days' notice of the time and
place of said hearing shall be published in an official newspaper ofgeneral circulation in the
Town.
c) Prior to holding the public hearing, the property in question shall be posted and all property
owners within 200 feet of subject property shall be notified by the applicant by registered or
certified mail at the last known address as reflected on the tax records.
d) Conditional Zoning. The Town Council, upon the zoning or rezoning of any land or lands,
may impose such additional restrictions, conditions, or limitations as may be deemed
appropriate to preserve, improve, or protect the general character and design of the lands and
improvements, and may, upon the zoning andrezoning of any land or lands, retain or reserve
the power and authority to approve or disapprove the design of buildings, construction,
landscaping, or other improvements, alterations and changes made or to be made on the
subject land or lands to assure conformity with the intent and purpose of Article 66B ofthe
Annotated Code of Maryland, and the Town of Indian Head Comprehensive Plan and this
Ordinance.
e) In reaching a decision on zoning district reclassification amendments, the Town Council shall
make findings offact in each specific case including, but not limited to, the following matters:
population change, adequacy ofpublic facilities, present -and future transportation patterns,
compatibility with existing and proposed development for the area, the recommendations of
the Planning Commission, relation to the Comprehensive Plan, fiscal impact upon Town
government, and the suitability of the property in question for the uses permitted under the
existing and proposed zoning classifications; and may grant the amendment based upon a
finding that there was a substantial change in the character of the neighborhood where the
property is located or that there was a mistake in the existing zoning classification. It shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to delineate the boundaries of the neighborhood and to
identify the change in the character of the neighborhood.
1) An application for reclassification shall not be accepted for filing by the Zoning Administrator
ifthe application is for the reclassification of the whole or any part of land which has been
denied by the Town Council until twelve ( 12) months from the date of denial.
The record in all zoning cases shall include the application, all documents or communications
submitted regarding the application, the recorded testimony received at the hearing, any
reports or communications to or from any public officials or agency concerning the
application, and the final decision of the Town Council. The record shall be open to public
inspection and shall be maintained in the Office ofthe Zoning Administrator. The burden of
proof for any zoning change shall be upon the applicant.
g)
Zoning Ordinance
April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 20.3
Section 2006. Amendment Procedure within the Critical Area District
Amendment Procedure within the Critical Area District shall be as set forth in Article IX, Section
961, and with the provisions of Article XX.
Zoning Ordinance April, 2004
Town ofIndian Head, Maryland 20.4
APPENDIX A
BASIC INFORMATION REQUIRED WITH ZONING AND BUILDING
PERMIT APPLICATIONS
NOTE: Allplats andplans must be clear and legible. Incomplete plats will be returned to the applicant
for completion and re -submission.
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 1
March 2004
DEVELOPMENT STAGE
Major Site Plan
Item DESCRIPTION
Sketch/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
General
Develop.
Plan Prelim. Final
I. PROJECT -PLAT INFORMATION
1. Name, address of owner, applicant, developer and
lienholder, date of application.
X X X X X
2. Name and address of engineer, land surveyor architect,
planner, and/or landscape architect, as
applicable, involved in document preparation.
X X X X X
3. Date of survey. X X X
4. Seal, signature and license number of engineer, land
surveyor, architect, and/or landscape architect, as
applicable involved in document preparation. Each
sheet must have a surveyor's seal.
X X X
5. Title block denoting name and type of application, tax
map sheet, block and lots, parcel, and street location.
X X X X X
6. A vicinity map at a specified scale ( no smaller than
1 "= 200') showing location of the tract with reference to
surrounding properties, streets, landmarks, streams,
etc. Show all of the property owned according to the
Tax Map(s) if only part of the property is to be developed.
X X X X X
7. Existing and proposed zoning of tract and adjacent
property.
X X X X X
8. Adjacent property owners, names, Liber and Folio. X X X X X
9. Title, north arrow and scale ( 1"= 100'). X X X
10. Appropriate signature block for planning director,
planning commission chairman, and the health
department.
X X X
11. Appropriate certification blocks. X X
12. Certification and dedication by the owner or owners to
the effect that the subdivision as shown on the final
plat is made with his or her consent and that it is
desired to record same.
X X
13. Monumentation, location and description. X X
14. Standardized sheets 18" x24" ( final - black ink on mylar).
X X X
15. Metes and bounds survey showing dimensions,
bearings, curve, data, length of tangents, radii, arc,
chords, and central angles for all centerlines and
rights-of-way, and centerline curves on streets, datum
X X X
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 1
March 2004
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 2
March 2004
DEVELOPMENT STAGE
Major Site Plan
Item DESCRIPTION
Sketch/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
General
Develop.
Plan Prelim. Final
and benchmark, primary central points approved by
the Town Engineer. (Boundary of proposed subdivision
can be a deed plot).
16. Acreage of tract to the nearest thousandth of an acre. X X X X X
17. Date of original and all revisions. X X X X X
18. Size and location of any existing or proposed structures
with all setbacks dimensioned (for concept plan,
GDP general location but not setbacks). Include storm
drains, culverts, retaining walls, fences, stormwater
management facilities, sediment and erosion structures.
X X X X X
19. Number of dwelling units. X X X X X
20. Location, dimensions, bearings, names of any existing
or proposed roads or streets.The location of
pedestrian ways, driveways.Right of way widths. (for
GDP, concept plans, general locations).
X X X X X
21. All proposed lot lines (width and depth) and area of
lots in square feet, number of lots, lot numbers.
X X X
22. Location and type of utilities. X X
23. Copy and/or delineation of any existing or proposed
deed restrictions or covenants.
X X
24. References to protective covennnts governing the
maintenance of undedicated public spaces or reservations.
X X
25. Location and size of proposed Natural Park areas,
play grounds and other public areas.
X X X X
26. Any existing or proposed easement (drainage and
utility) or land reserved for or dedicated to public use*.
Location, dimensions of proposed reservations, right
of ways, open space, buffers, forested areas along
with means by which these areas will be permanently
maintained.
X X X X X
27. Statement of owner dedicating streets, right-of-way,
and any sites for public use.
X X
28. Development stages or phasing plans (for GDP and
concept plans, general phasing). Sections numbered
by phase.
X X
29. Total number of off-street parking spaces including
ratio and number of units per space.
X X X X
30. List of required regulatory approvals/ permits. X X X X X
31. List of variances required or requested. X X X X X
32. Requested or obtained design waivers or exceptions. X X X X X
33. Payment of application fees. X X X X X
34. Total area of the site that will be temporarily and/or
permanently disturbed.
X X
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 2
March 2004
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 3
March 2004
DEVELOPMENT STAGE
JMajor Site Plan
Item DESCRIPTION
Sketch/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
General
Develop.
Plan Prelim. Final
II. SETTING -ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION
35. All existing streets, water courses, flood plains
wetlands, or other environmentally sensitive areas on
or adjacent to the site.
X X X X
36. Existing rights-of-way and/or easements on or immediately
adjacent to the tract.
X X X X X
37. Topographical features of subject property from
USGS map or more accurate source at 2'-5' intervals,
50' beyond the boundary, with source stated on maps.
X X X
38. Field delineated or survey topo. X X
39. General areas of >15% slope shaded and identified
as steep slopes.
X X X
40. Slope analysis of >15% slopes. These areas shall be
shaded and identified as steep slopes.
X X
41. Forest Stand Delineation ( See Zoning Ordinance). X X
42. Existing system of drainage of subject site and adjacent
sites and of any larger tract or basin of which it is
a part.
X X X
43. A 100 Year Flood Plain based on FEMA maps. X X X X X
44. Tidal and non -tidal wetland delineation based on NWI
maps and field review.
X X X X
45. Non -tidal wetlands identification based on field delineation/
determination.
X
46. Location of sensitive areas and their Buffers (Zoning
Ordinance).
X X X X X
47. Location and width of Bufferyards. X X X X X
48. Soil types based on Charles County Soil Survey. X X
49. Traffic Impact Study, as required. X
50. Statement of effect on school district and school bus
service, as required.
X
The following additional information items are required in the areas designated Critical Areas
51. Location of the Critical Area District boundary and
Critical Area designation.
X X X X X
52. Number of acres in the Critical Area. X X X X
53. Mean high waterline and landward edge of tidal
wetlands.
X X X X
54. Location of existing forested areas to be disturbed by
construction. Planting plan approved by the Maryland
Forest Service (final).
X X X X
55. The known locations of HPA's, the habitat of any
threatened or endangered species, and the habitat of
any Species in Need of Conservation (see
Chesapeake City Critical Area Program). Habitat
X X X X X
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 3
March 2004
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 4
2004
DEVELOPMENT STAGE
Major Site Plan
Item DESCRIPTION
Sketch/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
General
Develop.
Plan Prelim. Final
Protection Plan reviewed by the Maryland Fish,
Heritage and Wildlife Administration.
56. The location of the Critical Area Buffer and the expanded
Buffer, as required.
X X X X X
57. Hydric and highly erodible soils based on the Charles
County Soil Survey.
X X X X
58. Natural Park management plan, if applicable. X
59. Shore erosion protection plan, if applicable. X
60. Environmental assessment. X X X
61. Statement of consistency with the Critical Area Program.
X X X X
III. PLATS, IMPROVEMENT PLANS, AND CONSTRUCTION INFORMATION
62. Subdivision Plat meeting requirements of the Town of
Indian Head Subdivision Regulations.
X X
63. Grading and drainage plans including roads, drainage
ditches, sediment basins, and berms.
X X X
64. Existing and proposed contour intervals as follows: X X X
Less than 5% slope = 1 foot
5 to 15% slopes = 2 feet or less
15% = as required for construction
65. Proposed street grades, typical cross sections and
profiles, right-of-way widths, pedestrian ways, total
area of roads.
X X X
66. Existing and proposed utility infrastructure plans and
profiles including sanitary sewer, water, storm drainage
and stormwater management, as appropriate in
the case of minor subdivisions.
X X X
67. Grades and sizes of sanitary sewers and waterlines. X X X
68. Direction and distance to water and sewer if not available
on or adjacent to the site with invert and elevation
of sewer.
X X
69. Certification from electric and telephone utilities of
adequate facilities to serve proposed development.
X X
70. Location of fire hydrants. X X
71. Construction details as required by ordinance. X X
72. Stormwater Management Plan. X X X
73. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. X X X
74. Lighting plan and details, as required. X
75. Landscape plan and details, including required
Bufferyards.
X X X
76. Forest Conservation Plan (see Section 311). X X
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 4
March 2004
Notes:
X = item required at indicated development stage
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 2004
DEVELOPMENT STAGE
Major Site Plan
Item DESCRIPTION
Sketch/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
General
Develop.
Plan Prelim. Final
77. Proposed street names. X X
78. New block and lot numbers. X X
79. Solid waste management plan. X X
80. Preliminary architectural plan and elevations. X X
81. Required County, State, and/ or Federal or approvals,
e.g., State Highway Administration, County Public
Works, Army CORPS of Engineers, DNR Wetlands
Permit/ License, MDOE Quality Certification, MDOE
sanitary construction permit, local Health Department
approvals.
X X
82. Public works agreement and surety instruments. X
Notes:
X = item required at indicated development stage
Appendix A
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance
March 2004
Appendix B
Specifications on Driveway Entrances
The Town has incorporated by reference the driveway specifications set forth in the County Road
Ordinance.
Appendix C
Specifications for Street Design and Construction
The Town incorporates by reference the specifications for street design and construction in the
County Road Ordinance.
Appendix D
Vehicle Accommodation Area Surfaces
The Town incorporates by reference the specifications for Vehicle Accommodation Area
Surfaces in the County Road Ordinance.
Appendices B, C, and D April 2004
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance
APPENDIX E
GUIDE FOR LANDSCAPING
E- 1: Guide for Protecting Existing Trees
Section 1852 provides for the retention and protection of large trees when land is developed. To better
ensure the survival of existing trees, the developer should heed the following guidelines (in addition to the
mandatory requirements of Section 1852):
1) Protect trees with fencing and armoring during the entire construction period. The fence should
enclose an area 10 feet square with the tree at the center.
2) Avoid compaction ofthe soil around existing trees due to heavy equipment. Do not pile dirt or
other materials beneath the crown of the tree.
3) Keep fires or other sources of extreme heat well clear of existing trees.
4) Repair damaged roots and branches immediately. Exposed roots should be covered with topsoil.
Severed limbs and roots should be painted. Wherever roots are destroyed, a proportional amount
ofbranches must be pruned so the tree doesn't transpire more water than it takes in. Injured trees
must be thoroughly watered during the ensuing growing year.
5) Prune all existing trees that will be surrounded by paving to prevent dehydration.
E-2: Standards for Street and Parking Lot Trees
Trees planted in compliance with the requirements of Section 1851 and 1853shall have most or all of the
following qualities. The trees recommended in Section E- 10 represent the best combinations of these
characteristics.
1) Hardiness
a) Resistance to extreme temperatures.
b) Resistance to drought.
c) Resistance to storm damage.
d) Resistance to air pollution.
e) Ability to survive physical damage from human activity.
2) Life Cycle
a) Moderate to rapid rate of growth.
b) Long life.
3) Foliage and Branching
a) Tendency to branch high above the ground.
b) Wide spreading habit.
Appendix E April 2004
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 1
c) Relatively dense foliage for maximum shading.
4) Maintenance
a) Resistance to pests.
b) Resistance to plant diseases.
c) Little or no pruning requirements.
d) No significant litter problems.
E-3: Formula for Calculating 20 Percent Shading of Vehicle Accommodation Areas
The following is an elementary formula for determining the number of shade trees required in and around
paved parking lots in order to presumptively satisfy the shading requirements of Section 1853.
1) Including parking spaces, driveways, loading areas, sidewalks, and other
circulation areas and not including building area or any area which will
remain completely undeveloped, calculate square footage of the vehicle
accommodation area: sq.ft.
2) Multiply x .20
3) Area to be shaded = sq.ft.
Add:
4) Area shaded by existing trees to be retained in and around the vehicle
accommodation area:* sq. ft.
5) Area shaded by required screening trees, if any:* sq. ft.
6) Area shaded by required street trees, if any:* sq. ft.
7) Subtotal = sq.ft.
If line (7) is greater than line (3), then the shading requirement has been
met. If not, go to line (8).)
8) Enter the difference between line (7) and line (3): sq.ft.
9) Divide line (8): / 707
10) Total number of shade trees required within the vehicle accommodation area
trees
Existing trees retained in compliance with Section 1852 will be credited according to their actual
crown radius. Shaded area may be calculated as follows:
3. 14 x (crown radius)2= shaded area.
Appendix E April2004
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 2
Trees planted within the vehicle accommodation area are credited with shading 707 square feet
based on a crown radius of 15 feet). New or existing trees on the perimeter of the parking lot are
credited for having only half a crown over the vehicle accommodation area ( e.g., new perimeter
trees will be credited for shading 354 square feet). Generally, all trees planted in compliance with
the screening requirements of Article XVIII, Part I, and the street tree requirements of Section
1851 will be considered perimeter trees. When smaller trees such as Dogwoods are planted, the
credited shading area will be adjusted downward to 314 square feet for interior trees and 157
square feet for perimeter trees. ( Based on a crown radius of 10 feet.)
E-4: Typical Parking Lot Planting Islands
Appendix E
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 3
April 2004
E-5: Guide for Planting Trees
The trees recommended in Section E- 10 have minimal maintenance requirements. However, all trees must
receive a certain degree of care, especially during and immediately after planting, To protect an investment
in new trees, the developer should ensure that the following guidelines are followed when planting:
Selection. Select trees well adapted to the microclimates of individual planting sites. A poor tree
match dooms the tree from the start no matter how much care is taken in planting.
Planting Times. The best times for planting are early spring and early fall. Trees planted in the
summer run the risk of dehydration.
Drainage. Prior to planting, test soil drainage. If water does not drain out of a sample planting
hole within a few hours, consider installing drainage in the bottom of the hole to drain away excess
water. Also consider raising or berming the planting site, or adding several inches of good quality
topsoil in the planting hole and the surrounding area, but do not simply amend the soil in the
planting hole - water movement will be detrimentally altered. Ifnone of the above is possible,
select a more water tolerant tree species ( red maple, sycamore, bald cypress, willow oak river
birch, etc. - avoid trees like dogwoods that don't like " wet feet").
The Planting Hole. The planting hole that is dug should be wide and shallow. A flat, pancakeshaped
hole that approximates the shallow, horizontal root growth that the tree will produce is
recommended. In average soil, dig the hole only as deep as the root ball, and in heavy clayy soil, to
enhance drainage, dig the hole an inch or two shallow. Loose soil should not be put beneath the
root ball in order to avoid having the tree end up planted too deep as the soil beneath it settles or
compacts. The exposed top of the ball can be covered with mulch., Whenever possible, hole walls
should gradually taper up to grade, rather than being straight, to more closely approximate where
root growth will occur.
Soil Additives. Adding water -absorbing polymers (hydrogels, super slupers, etc.) to the backfill
soil has not proven beneficial in the majority of the landscape research that has been conducted
with regard to tree planting. The same is true to adding organic amendments (peatmoss, compost,
etc.). In general the only substitute for backfilling with the existing soil, unamended, is backfilling
with better quality topsoil.
Planting Near Sidewalks, Driveways, and Other Areas. Plant all trees at least 3 1/ 2 feet from
the end of head -in parking spaces to prevent damage from car overhangs. When planting near
sidewalks, driveways and other areas where tree root surfacing can cause damage or be a
maintenance problem, consider installing one of the physical root redirecting barriers being
marketed, or try the herbicide treated landscape fabric now available for this purpose (Biobarrier).
No long term research has yet been published on the use of these tree redirecting materials, so their
long term effect on trees is not yet known.
Balled and Burlapped Trees. When planting balled and burlapped trees, closely inspect the
material used to wrap the root ball. Many synthetic materials (nylons, etc.) are being used, as well
as burlaps treated to retard their degradation. When in doubt as to whether or not these materials
Appendix E April 2004
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 4
will degrade underground, do not leave them intact. Remove the pinning nails or lacing, and roll
back the top several inches. Make vertical slits in several places around the ball. You do not want a
wrapping material that won't degrade to restrict root growth.
Wire Baskets. Research has shown that the wire baskets used to protect root balls, whether
galvanized or not, are degrading only very slowly underground due to low oxygen. No long term
root girding or damage has been found, however, so it does not appear that the baskets need to be
removed. If the top loops of the wire basket will be at ground level or slightly above, it will be
advisable to remove this section to keep equipment from hanging up in the loops.
Ropes. Be sure to remove all ropes, whether jute or nylon, that have been tied around the trunk.
Again, degradation is slow or nonexistent, resulting in trunks being girded.
Containers. Be sure to remove all plastic containers from the root balls of container -grown or
containerized trees. If trees have been grown or potted into fiber pots, break away the top several
inches ofthe fiber pot. Many fiber pots are being coated with extra materials to extend their shelf
life, but this can slow degradation below ground and retard root extension.
Root Care in Container Plants. When a container is removed, if roots are found circling around
the outside of the root ball, cut them in a few places to remove the possibility of the curling root
eventually girding the trunk. Select trees grown in pots with vertical ribs rather than ones with
straight walls or horizontal ribs as the vertical ribs help reduce root circling.
Fertilizer. Fertilizer can be added to the backfill ifit is a slow release form - Osmocote, Woodace
briquettes, tree spikes, etc. The caution in the past against adding fertilizers at planting time was a
result of not having slow release fertilizers available - agronomic fertilizers that were and still can
be used in landscaping have the potential to burn, and should not be added.
Watering. Good follow-up watering is important to help establish a tree's root system. Several
water reservoir devices are available, but may be too expensive or cumbersome to justify using.
Mulching. Trees should be mulched, but not over mulched, when planted. Two or three inches of
organic mulches, such as shredded or chunk pine bark, or inorganic mulches, such as volcanic
rock, is adequate. Keep mulches from touching the trunks of trees. With organic mulches,
excessive mulch piled against tree trunks can hold too much moisture against the bark and lead to
disease problems. It also may become a habitat for rodents that will feed on the bark. With
inorganic mulches, if the tree is in a windy location and the trunk moves considerably, the bark
may become abrased by the inorganic mulch.
Appendix E April 2004
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 5
Landscape Fabrics for Weed Control. The use of black plastic beneath mulch around trees is
not recommended because air and water exchange is blocked. For added weed control try one of
the landscape fabrics that has proven more weed root penetration resistant (Dalen's Weed -X,
DeWitt's Pro 5, Weed Barrier, etc.) but do not pile too much mulch (not over two inches) atop the
fabric or weeds will simply grow in the mulch layer.
Tree Staking. Don't automatically stake all trees, especially small ones. If a tree is in a windy
location, or has a crown, stake for a maximum of one year. Try to stake so that the tree has a slight
amount of flex rather than being held rigidly in place. Use guying or attaching material that will
not damage the bark. If the stakes are to be left in place longer than one year to serve as a barrier
against equipment, be sure to remove the guying to prevent trunk girding. A variety ofprotective
devices are available for trunk protection if that is an important consideration.
Tree Wraps. The use of tree wraps and other protection materials that are applied directly to the
trunk is currently under investigation. If a material is applied (paper, fabric, burlap, strips, etc.),
remove it after one year. If materials are wrapped onto the trunk, wrap from the base of the tree
upward so that water is shed off the wrap, not funneled under it.
Tags and Labels. Remove tags and labels from the trees to prevent them from girding the trunk.
Postplanting Care. Conscientious postplanting care, especially watering, structural pruning and
fertilizing, is a must for street and parking lot trees.
Appendix E April 2004
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 6
I.
E-6: Typical Opaque Screens
Stri I I t Pe 37 pIJfltd „30
on n te r p rat ing i
B- 10 0).
x
I •
r s ----i:—^"
planted 40 fcet
on cent; cc plontin,) list
E- 10
Tcvcrcrccn t ty„ E.E„
p kiritod. with b rs.inc he touch ing
the 9round.: Fee planting E- 19
h.),
ke•
foot iih eve rg rET: n ,.. Aqing
Ell rub b rry p Irate d - FCIJr tct on
cent.er, 5c planting it E - 10( d)
ei
1 1 1 ..—' ...
5
p. .,,;-.'.. 4,.. 7
z
L
14; 1777
foot I- i1h redwood
Appendix E
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 7
April 2004
E-7: Typical Semi -Opaque Screens
I. CI
Small trees pl. rfted
feel. on center. . See
pla- tia I t U- 11-.11.
1 )
rL
I I 1 •
Isiflull
7 .1..
Ni" -
4,-41-•-' •.•-•-
Small tree. lanted
feef on center on top of
a berm . See plant ViaI if
T " 1-4.,.
I --_
I
I - •
r--
P-- ,--..
Liric' trees planted . 14: 1
feet cc, center
B - 101c).
Three foc.t h iihstcne Wall
Three h hill seeded
earth b erm
V.V.
1" P• - r- 1 it' 1- 0-
4.7.;
3' 4) 2;2
1hr
Three foot high c".. er.lre,evi
hedao shrubbery pl alited
three feet on center. See.
plant. Via list B- 100).
Appendix E
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 8
April 2004
E-8: Typical Broken Screens
i; ?'
a
Srno.11trs_ plontedfi
feet on center.:_,;
pohfI ? list E'- 1iitoi.
hTrr.
J `.
5niIItrea_ planted `31.1
Tf6at on carp^ r. See
wti, plopiiq list E; - 10i9).
4, 1'.2
4
f: 2 f X'
1
7
1T Y T 1
Srno.11 t re e_ p tont ed 3 0
feetor. cent€ r. Sea
pb.ntihq lisf 2- 10( o).
k_ sorted. 7hrubbery.. 5ee 1 plont lug list E- 10
Appendix E
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 9
April 2004
E-9: Guide for Planting Shrubs
Shrubs planted for screening purposes should be given a proper culture and sufficient room in which to
grow. Many of the guidelines for tree planting listed in Section E-5 also apply to shrubs. However, because
specific requirements vary considerably between shrub types, this appendix does not attempt to generalize
the needs of all shrubs. For detailed planting information on individual species, refer to:
Manual of Woody Landscape Plants by Michael Din
E-10: Lists of Recommended Trees and Shrubs
The following lists indicate plantings which will meet the screening and shading requirements of Article
XVIII of the development ordinance. The lists are by no means comprehensive and are intended merely to
suggest the types of flora which would be appropriate for screening and shading purposes. Plants were
selected for inclusion on these lists according to four principal criteria; (i) general suitability for the climate
and soil conditions of this area, ( ii) ease of maintenance, (iii) tolerance of urban conditions, and (iv)
availability from area nurseries. When selecting new plantings for a particular site, a developer should first
consider the types of plants which are thriving on or near that site. However, if an introduced species has
proven highly effective for screening or shading in this area, it too may be a proper selection.
Sections E- 11 through E- 16 contain descriptions of some of the trees and shrubs listed here.
a) Small Trees for Partial Screening
1) River Birch
2) American Hornbeam
3) Eastern Redbud
4) Flowering Dogwood
5) Washington Hawthorn
6) Russian Olive
7) Mountain Silverbell
8) American Holly
9) Golden Rain Tree
10) Crape Myrtle
11) Sourwood
12) Caroline Cherry -Laurel
13) Callery Pear
b) Large Trees for Evergreen Screening
1) Deodar Cedar
2) Southern Magnolia
3) Carolina Hemlock
Appendix E
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 10
April 2004
c) Large Trees for Shading
1) Norway Maple
2) Red Maple
3) Ginkgo
4) Honeylocust
5) Sweet Gum
6) London Plane -Tree
7) Sycamore
8) Eastern Red Oak
9) Willow Oak
10) Scarlet Oak
11) Laurel Oak
12) Littleleaf Linden
d) Small Shrubs for Evergreen Screening
1) Glossy Abelia
2) Warty Barberry
3) Wintergreen Barberry
4) Dwarf Horned Holly
5) Little Holly
6) Convexa Japanese Holly
7) India Hawthorn
8) Azaleas/Rhododendrons
9) Japanese Yew
e) Large Shrubs for Evergreen Screening
1) Hedge Bamboo
2) Thorny Elaengus
3) Burford Holly
4) Yaupon Holly
5) Laurel or Sweet Bay
6) Japanese Privet
7) Fortune Tea Olive
8) Red Photinia
9) Laurentinus Viburnum
f) Assorted Shrubs for Broken Screens
1) Japanese Barberry
2) Fringetree
3) Border Forsythia
4) Vernal Witch Hazel
5) Common Witch Hazel
6) Pfitzer Juniper
Appendix E
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance
7) Drooping Leucothoe
8) Winter Honeysuckle
9) Star Magnolia
10) Northern Bayberry
11) Judd Viburnum
12) Doublefile Viburnum
11
April 2004
E- 11: Small Trees for Partial Screening
The following trees are recommended for use in all types of screens. Though smaller than the trees listed in
planting lists E-12 and E- 13, each of these trees will reach a height of at least 20 feet.
1) River Birch (Betula nigra). Height 20-40 feet; Spread:` 8- 16 feet. The River Birch is a native tree
which usually grows along stream banks. In landscape design, it is adaptable to either high or low
locations, but still requires a lot of moisture. This tree has an interesting papery bark and a graceful
branching habitat. It has no special pest or maintenance problems.
2) American Hornbeam (Carpinus carolinia). Height 20-30 feet; Spread: 15- 20 feet. This native tree
has a natural yet refined appearance. It is slow growing, but at maturity it serves as an excellent
small shade tree. It's fluted muscular trunk is an interesting feature. In the wild, the American
Hornbeam is common in moist rich soil, yet, when used in landscape design, it is soil tolerant and
does not require an unusual amount of water. It has no pests and no special maintenance problems.
E-12: Large Trees for Evergreen Screening
The following trees are ideal for screening large scale areas such as shopping centers and industrial sites.
They are also effective in combination with other smaller screening plants. Both are moderate to fast
growers. They are not considered to be shade trees.
1) Deodar Cedar (Cedrus deodara). Height: 40- 150 feet; Spread: 30 feet +. The Deodar Cedar is a
useful and attractive evergreen. It should be allowed plenty ofroom in order to assume it's
beautiful natural form. It's pendulous branches should be allowed to touch the ground. It prefers
relatively dry soils, grows rapidly, and is easy to maintain. "True Cedars" such as the Deodar are
not native to North America, but they have become quite popular in the South as a landscape tree.
2) Southern Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora). Height: 40- 60 feet; Spread: 25 feet +. Magnolias are
striking trees which serve well as screens when their branches are allowed to grow to the ground.
Generally, this tree does well in city conditions, but it should be planted in quite rich acidic soils
and it requires a lot of moisture. Furthermore, magnolias require ample space for growth. If
planted in full sunlight, they will grow rapidly. Because it drops large waxy leaves, seed pods, and
flowers, the magnolia may present a litter problem.
E- 13: Large Trees for Shading
The following trees may be used for screening, but they are recommended especially for shading streets
and parking lots. Unless otherwise noted, they will grow rapidly. Each species will attain a mature spread
of at least 30 feet.
1) Red Maple (Acer rubrum). Height: 40-50 feet; Spread 25 feet +. This tree is an example of a
maple which is not recommended where there will be high concentrations of air pollution.
However, with it's excellent shading characteristics and beautiful colors, it should not be ignored.
This tree grows rapidly, but, unlike the Norway Maple, it does not become brittle with age. The
Red Maple is a native tree which is usually found in moist, even swampy areas, but it adapts well
Appendix E April2004
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 12
to a variety of situations. Although subject to maple insects and diseases, it is usually a long-lived
tree.
2) Honeylocust (Gleditisia triacanthos). Height: 50-75 feet; Spread: 25 feet +. It's open, spreading
form and feathery leaves may give the Honeylocust a frail appearance, but it is fact a quite sturdy
tree, notable for it's resistance to storm damage. It is a native tree which is drought resistant and
adaptable to city conditions. Grass and shrubs thrive beneath a Honeylocust because it casts light
shade. This tree is especially useful for its ability to be transplanted at a relatively advanced age.
Accordingly, it may be used for immediate effect in a landscape design. The Honeylocust has its
pests and diseases, but it is fairly hardy. Thornless and fruitless varieties such as " Moraine" are
recommended.
E- 14: Small Shrubs for Evergreen Screening
The following shrubs are recommended for informal (unclipped) hedges or screens. Each species grows to
a height of less than six feet; therefore, these shrubs are appropriate for semi-opaque screens.
1) Glossy Abelia (Abelia grandiflora). Height: 4-6 feet; Spread: 3- 5 feet. Abelia is quite common in
local nurseries and tends to be less expensive than other shrubs on this list. It bears pale pink
flowers throughout the summer. Although it has proven quite popular for informal hedges, it has
several drawbacks. Abelia should be pruned and thinned to maintain its best form. It may drop its
leaves due to low temperatures, lack ofpruning, or starvation.
2) Warty Barberry (Berberis verruculosa). Height: 3- 4 feet; Spread: 3- 4 feet. Barbenys as a group
have proven to be excellent hedge plants. With their dense, spiny limbs, they are effective barriers
in public places. The Warty Barberry is a shrub with a neat, compact habit. It is soil tolerant and
has no special maintenance requirements. It grows slowly, but it will reach a height of three to four
feet within five years.
E- 15: Large Shrubs for Evergreen Screening
The following shrubs are recommended for high hedges or screens. Each species grows to a height of more
than six feet; therefore, these shrubs are appropriate for opaque screens.
1) Hedge Bamboo (Bambusa multiplex). Height: 10- 12 feet; Spread: 4-6 feet. Hedge Bamboo
grows rapidly yet is more easily confined to a limited area than most types ofbamboo. It is
adaptable to a variety of situations, but requires plenty of water. For best effect as a screen, Hedge
Bamboo should be stagger planted.
2) Thorny Elaengus (Elaengus pungens). Height: 8- 10 feet; Spread: 6- 10 feet. This shrub tolerates
many adverse conditions. It will grow rapidly in relatively infertile, dry soils. It's dense thorny
branches form an excellent natural hedge. It is one of the most common evergreen shrubs in the
south.
Appendix E April 2004
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 13
E-16: Assorted Shrubs for Broken Screens
The following is a sampling of shrubbery that would be appropriate in a broken screen. Because many of
these plants are deciduous, they are not suitable for opaque and semi-opaque screens. ( Note: Many of the
evergreen shrubs described in planting lists B- 14 and B- 15 are also suitable for broken screens).
1) Japanese Barberry (Berberis thunbergii). Height: 3- 5 feet; Spread: 3- 5 feet. This extremely
common deciduous shrub is considered to be one of the toughest members of the Barberry family.
It survives drought, poor soils, exposure, and the worst city conditions. With its many thorns, the
Japanese Barberry is often used as an impenetrable barrier, but it is attractive enough to stand
alone as a specimen plant. It requires no special maintenance and, when planted singly, needs no
pruning.
2) Fringetree (Chioanthus virginicus). Height: 10- 30 feet; Spread: 8- 10 feet. The Fringetree is
known for its profusion of beautiful flowers. It is considered to be one of the most striking native
American shrubs. It is relatively difficult to transplant, but once established it does well in cities as
it endures heavy smoke and dust. The mature Fringetree's only drawback is that its leaves appear
rather late in spring.
Appendix E April 2004
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 14
APPENDIX F
Bufferyard Requirements
F-1: Bufferyard Specifications
The following illustrations graphically indicate the specifications of each bufferyard. Bufferyard
requirements are stated in terms of the width of the bufferyard and the number of plant units required per
one hundred ( 100) linear feet of bufferyard. The requirements of a bufferyard may be satisfied by any of
the options thereof illustrated. The " plant unit multiplier" is a factor by which the basic number of plant
materials required for a given bufferyard is determined given a change in the width of that yard. The type
and quantity of plant materials required by each bufferyard, and each bufferyard option, are specified in
this section. Only those plant materials capable of fulfilling the intended function shall satisfy the
requirements of this ordinance.
The options within any bufferyard are designed to be equivalent in terms of their effectiveness in
eliminating the_ impact of adjoining uses. Cost equivalence between options was attempted where
possible. Generally, the plant materials which are identified as acceptable are determined by the type(s)
of soil present on the site. The following illustrations have mathematically rounded the number of plant
units required for each option within a given bufferyard. In actual practice, mathematical rounding would
be applied to the total amount of plant material required by a bufferyard, not to each one hundred ( 100)
foot length of bufferyard. All of the following illustrations are drawn to scale and depict the bufferyard
according to the average projected diameter of plant materials at five (5) years after planting.
Each illustration depicts the total bufferyard located between two uses.
Whenever a wall, fence, or berm is required within a bufferyard, these are shown as " structure required"
in the following illustrations, wherein their respective specifications are also shown. All required
structures shall be the responsibility of the higher intensity use. Whenever a wall is required in addition
to a berm, the wall shall be located between the berm and the higher intensity use, in order to provide
maximum sound absorption.
F-2: Plant Material
The following plant material substitutions shall satisfy the requirements of this section.
1. In bufferyards C, D, and E evergreen canopy or evergreen understory trees may be
substituted for deciduous canopy forest trees without limitation.
2. In bufferyards A and B evergreen canopy or evergreen understory trees may be
substituted as follows:
a. In the case of deciduous canopy forest trees, up to a maximum of fifty (50)
percent of the total number of the deciduous canopy trees otherwise required.
b. In the case of deciduous understory, without limitation.
3. In all bufferyards, evergreen or conifer shrubs may be substituted for deciduous shrubs
without limitation.
4. In all bufferyards required of public service uses, the public service use may substitute
evergreen canopy or evergreen understory plant materials for canopy forest trees and
understory plant materials, without limitation.
If the development on the adjoining use is existing, planned, or deed -restricted for solar access,
Appendix F
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance 1
April 2004
understory trees may be substituted for canopy trees where canopy trees would destroy solar access.
Any existing plant material which otherwise satisfies the requirements of this section may be counted
toward satisfying all such requirements.
The exact placement of required plants and structures shall be the decision of each user except that the
following requirements shall be satisfied:
1. Evergreen ( or conifer) class III and IV plant materials shall be planted in clusters rather
than singly in order to maximize their chances of survival.
2. Berms with masonry walls (BWI, BW2, and BW3) required of bufferyard D and E options
are intended to buffer more significant nuisances from adjacent uses and, additionally, to
break up and absorb noise, which is achieved by the varied heights of plant materials
between the masonry wall and the noise source.
a. When berms with walls are required, the masonry wall shall be closer than the
berm to the higher intensity use.
b. Within a bufferyard, a planting area at least five ( 5) feet wide containing fifteen
15) percent of the total plant requirements ( based on the multiplier = 1) shall be
located between the masonry wall and the higher intensity class use. These
plants shall be chosen to provide species and sizes to reduce noise in conjunction
with the wall.
All bufferyard areas shall be seeded with lawn unless ground cover is already established.
F-3: Structures
The following structures are equivalent and may be used interchangeably, so long as both structures are
specified in the bufferyard illustrations in this section.
Appendix F
Indian Head Zoning Ordinance
Structure Equivalent Structure
F3 B1
F4 B2
FS B3
F6 BW1
B1 F3
B2 F4
B3 Fs
BWI F6
2 April 2004'
Town
of
Indian
Head
2006
Comprehensive
Land
Use
Plan
Potovi,
qc
Auer
goaro'
walk
avof
shorelip l=
e
0lect
s
R'
wll
wt v.
PO
LAR
OR.
MITC
ir :
4
44.
110,
604.
1%
We,
the
undersigned,
do
hereby
certify
on
this
day
of
2006,
that
this
Plan
is
an
oficial
copy
of
the
Comprehensive
Plan
for
the
Town
of
Indian
Head,
Maryland,
adopted
in
acordance
with
Article
66B
of
the
Anotated
Code
of
Maryland.
Denis
J.
Schesele.
Mayor (
date
arie
A.
Posey.
Vice
Mayor (
date)
Mary
E.
Thompson.
Council
date)
S T C E J 0 R P
SPECIAL
AREAS
DESIGNATED
NEIGHBORHOD
BUSINES
AREAS
FOR
COMERCIAL,
OFICE,
R&
D,
AND
MIXED
USES)
DESIGNATED
PRIORITY
FINDING
AREA
CHESAPEAKE
BAY
CRITICAL
AREA
LINE (
SEE
OFICIALCRITICAL
AREA
MAP)
MUNICIPAL
TERITORY':
POTENTIAL
USE
OF
GROWTH
ALOCATION
IF
ANEXED:
POTENTIAL
USE
OF
GROWTH
ALOCATION
TOWN
CENTER
AT
VILAGE
GREN
POTOMAC
RIVER
BOARDWALK
AND
SHORELINE
PROJECT
STRAUS
AVENUE
REDEVELOPMENT
AREA
J
itl
i
CHAPMAN' S
PARE;/
DNR
NORTHERN
i TRACT)
r
a
Nci
lea
IERITORY
SITUATED
BETWEN
THE
TOWN
AND
CHAPMAN' S
PARK
ANEXATION
STUDY
AREA)
i--
Land
Use
Plan
SINGLE
FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL
MULTI -
FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL
TOWN
MIXED
USE
GENERAL
COMERCIAL
PUBLIC/
INSTITUTIONAL
CHAP\
IAA'
s
PARK/
DNR
Sou
mERN
I
RACT )
Scale
in
feet
MD24
OPEN
POTENTIAL SPACE
ANEXATION -
STUDY
AREAS
HIGHWAY
CORIDOR
AREA
MUNICIPAL.
BOUNDARY

COUNCIL FOR THE TOWN OF INDIAN HEAD
ORDfNANCE NO.
INTRODUCED BY
DATE fNTRODUCED
DATE ADOPTED
DATE EFFECTIVE
4-1-01
Councilman Dc1u1is Scheessele
April 2, 2001
April 25, 2001
May 15, 2001
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A REVISED SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE FOR THE
TOWN OF INDIAN HEAD, MARYLAND
__ __ __ . WHEREAS, Arti11ll> __ (j@ of t)l~_Ann_ota\ed (;o_de of Maryland _p!ovides_ for theTown
Council of Indian Head to adopt rules and regulations involving matters regarding the subdivision
and development of land within the town and allows for its comprehensive planning; and
WHEREAS, on November 3, 1997, the Town Council oflndian Head adopted an updated
Comprehensive Plan that provides a blue print for the concentration of development in suitable
areas, the protection of sensitive areas, direction of growth from surrounding rural areas to the
Town's existing population center and to ensure economic growth is encouraged within the Town
oflndian Head; and
WHEREAS, to enact the recommendations and suggestions set forth in the
Comprehensive Plan, the Town Council of Indian Head desires to adopt an updated revision to the
Town oflndian Head Subdivision Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, after a Public Hearing before the Indian Head Planning Commission the
recommendation for adoption by the Indian Head Planning Commission, which was duly
advertised, and held on November 20, 2000, and a subsequent Public Hearing before the Town
Council of Indian Head on March 5, 2001, the Town's Governing Body is empowered to introduce
and adopt this ordinance;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of Indian Head,
Maryland, that:
Section I. Upon the effective date of this ordinance, it shall become the Official Subdivision
Ordinance of the Town of Indian Head, Maryland.
Section II. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith be and the same are
hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section Ill. The applicable schedule of fees may be modified from time to time as necessary by
the Governing Body. As of the effective date of this ordinance, the schedule of fees is as follows:
A. Subdivision Plat Fees
I. Subdivision plats: one hundred dollars ($100.00) per plat, plus twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) per lot.
2. Revised plats and minor subdivision plats: same as final plats.
3. Plan Review: The fee for all PROPOSED improvement plans, including
water, sewer, and streets, will be one percent (I%) of the construction costs,
limited to a maximum fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000). These fees will
be collectable with submission of plans to the Town for review.
\
ORDINANCE 4-1-01
PAGE2
4. Stormwater Management Plans: The fee for reviewing said plans submitted
to the Town of Indian Head shall be the total cost incurred by the Town for
consultant review of said plans. The Town will require a deposit for review
of said plans with the amount determined by the Zoning Administrator with
final settlement of cost prior to final plat approval.
5. Forest Stand Delineation & Conservation Plan: The fee for reviewing said
plans submitted to the Town of Indian Head shall be the total cost incurred
by the Town for consultant review of said plans, The Town will require a
deposit for review of said plans with the amount determined by the Zoning
Administrator with final settlement of cost prior to final plat approval.
___ ---6. _ ____criticalAreaE!ans'-'fhefee-for reviewing said plans-submitted-to-the-'l'ewn- -
oflndian Head shall be the total cost incurred by the Town for consultant
review of said plans. The Town will require a deposit for review of said
plans with the amount determined by the Zoning Administrator with final
settlement of cost prior to final plat approval.
Section JV, This ordinance shall be in full force and effect on the 15th day of May, 2001.
INDIAN HEAD TOWN COUNCIL
ctl~~ Warren A. Bowie, Mayor
ATTEST:
Marcia L. Vaughn, Clerk ofC
TOWN OF INDIAN HEAD, MARYLAND
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1 POWERS AND PURPOSE ...................... ..................................................... ........... .............. I
2 JURISDICTION ..................................................................................................................... I
3 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS PROCEDURE FLOW CHART ................................... I
4 PRELIMINARY SKETCH AND CONFERENCE ............................................................. 2
5 THE PRELIMINARY PLAT ................................................................................................ 2
6 IMPROVEMENT PLANS ..................................................................................................... 6
7 TRANSFER OF LAND, PERMITS, BONDS AND AGREEMENTS ............................. 34
8 FINAL PLAT ........................................................................................................................ 38
9 EXCEPTION, PENALTIES, AND APPEALS .................................................................. 41
10 DEFINITIONS ..................................................................................................................... 42
11 INTERPRETATION AND SEVERABILITY ................................................................... 48
ARTICLE2 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION 1 POWERS AND PURPOSE
A. In accordance with Article 66B of the Code of Public General Laws of Maryland,
Maryland Planning and Zoning Enabling Act, as amended, the Planning Commission of
Indian Head, Maryland, is hereby enabled to regulate the subdivision ofland within the
corporate limits of the town.
B. These regulations are enacted to preserve and promote the public health, safety and
· --weffare-of tliefohabitants of the Town of Indian Head ancl the pub1fo-genei-a1iy; ancl to
encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and expansion of the town.
SECTION2 JURISDICTION
A. These rules and regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land as defined herein,
located within the cotporate limits of the town oflndian Head. These regulations shall
be in addition to any promulgated by any other authority, state or county, and in case of
any conflict, the more exacting requirements shall prevail
B. No land shall be subdivided within the corporate limits of the Town ofindian Head until:
SECTION3
(1) the subdivider or his agent shall submit a sketch plat of the parcel to the
Planning Commission through the Town Manager or his designated
representative.
(2) the subdivider obtains approval of the sketch plat and preliminary and
final approval of the plat itself by the Planning Commission; and
(3) the approved plat is recorded in the land records of Charles County.
SUBDIVISION REGULATION PROCEDURE FLOW CHART
(See following page)
Page I of 49
SECTION 4 PRELIMINARY SKETCH AND CONFERENCE
A. General Information
I. Before unde1taking the preparation ofa subdivision plat, the subdivider shall have
prepared a sketch of the property in question, drawn to approximate scale,
showing the boundaries, general topography, important physical features and
other significant information, as well as the proposed plan for development of the
prope1ty, including the proposed street and lot locations, areas to be reserved for
public use and proposed improvements.
B. Development Plans
I.
SECTIONS
The subdivider shall then consult with the Town Manager, Planning Commission,
and/or its staff to ascertain the location of proposed major streets, highways,
parks, playgrounds, school sites and other planned public improvements and to
determine the zoning regulations and other requirements relating to, affecting or
applying to the proposed subdivision. As required, the subdivider shall also
consult with other Town Staff on the proposed street layout and the proposed
facilities for sanitary sewage disposal, storm drainage and water supply to serve
the proposed subdivision. The purpose of these consultations is to assist the
subdivider by furnishing information and advice, in order to expedite matters for
the subdivider, save him unnecessary expense and promote the best coordination
between the plans of the subdivider and those of the Town. The Town Manager,
Planning Commission, or Town Staff shall not undertake to design the
subdivision or perform other services for which a qualified planner is better
suited.
THE PRELIMINARY PLAT
A. General Information
I. The preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision shall comply with the following
requirements and contain the following information:
a. It shall provide all the pertinent information as to existing site conditions, property
ownership, and the like, that may be necessary for the Planning Commission to
properly consider the proposed subdivision. This information shall be accurate
and reliable.
b. It shall show the general plan of ultimate development for the property, covering
the entire tract ofland or so much of it as may be considered to be necessary for
an adequate consideration of the part to be subdivided. This information should
Page 2 of 49
be in sketch form, drawn to scale, but need not be engineered or surveyed.
c. It shall be drawn in pencil at a scale no greater than one inch per 100 feet. This
scale may vary in cases where extensive tracts are involved as determined by the
Planning Commission.
d. It shall include a small scale key map showing the location of the property in the
town, the location and names ofadjacent properties and property owners, adjacent
streams or waterways, and the location, names and present widths of adjacent
streets and alleys.
e. The following title information shall be provided:
(1) Proposed subdivision name, which shall not duplicate nor closely
approximate the name of any other subdivision in the Town.
(2) Names and addresses of owner, subdivider or developer, lien holders,
and the designer, surveyor, or engineer.
(3) Description of subdivision location, by streets, tract, political
subdivision, etc.
( 4) Scale, north point and date.
(5) Approval block for Planning Commission use.
f. The following information as to existing physical conditions shall be
provided:
(!) Boundaries of the land being subdivided, in heavy outline.
(2) Topographic contours, reference to U.S.C.G. Survey Data at five foot
intervals except where the average slope is less than tlll'ee percent, in
which case two foot contours will be required. Contours shall extend
100 feet beyond the subdivision boundary except across a public
road.
(3) Water courses, important trees, wooded areas, buildings, transmission
lines, pipe lines, other utilities, bridges, and any other significant
physical items, with the sizes and grades of any water or sewer lines.
( 4) Locations, widths, and names of all existing roads, streets, alleys, or
other public ways within or adjoining the subdivision those recorded
Page 3 of 49
but unimproved (shown by dotted lines); railroad, utility, or other
rights-of-way or easements; parks or other public spaces;
subdivisions, lots, and property lines, municipal corporation lines;
and the approximate locations and outlines of permanent buildings.
(5) Existing zoning of the tract and adjacent properties.
(6) Location of the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area, location of all habitat
protection areas within the Critical Area including the Critical Area
Buffer, and designation of current Critical Area land use management
- --classification. --------
B. Development Plan
1. The Development Plan shall provide information concerning proposed development
which shall include:
a. Layout, widths, and names of proposed roads, streets, alleys, crosswalks and
easements.
b. Layout, numbering, and approximate dimensions and area of proposed lots
or parcels.
c. Parcels of land intended to be conveyed or temporarily reserved for public
use or for the joint use of property owners with an explanation of the
provisions or conditions of such conveyance or reservation and the proposed
arrangements for ownership and maintenance.
d. Tentative grade on each street.
e. Tentative locations for utilities and drainage facilities, with easements where
necessary.
f. Proposed building lines along all streets, with the amount of setback
indicated.
g. Proposed uses of property and any proposed zoning changes.
h. Outline of any proposed deed restrictions.
1. General description of street and other public improvements proposed to be
installed.
Page4 of 49
C. Improvements Required
1. The minimum improvements that a subdivider will be required to provide and install
in a subdivision, or to enter into agreement to provide and install, prior to the
approval of the final plat thereof, shall be as prescribed in the following. All such
improvements shall conform with the standards, specifications, and other
requirements adopted by the Town oflndian Head, or by such other goverrunental
agency as may have jurisdiction over each facility. Nothing, however, shall be
--c-o-nstruea as profiibffiiig it subdivider from installing improveineiits-Of a higher
standard than the minimum required herein. The required improvements shall be
completed, inspected, and accepted by the proper authorities prior to the approval by
the Planning Commission of the final plat, and its recording; or, in lieu of completing
the improvements as required above, the subdivider shall furnish to the Town
Council satisfactory bond in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of such
improvements, for the purpose of guaranteeing to the town that the subdivider will
complete the installation of the improvements within such reasonable limit of time
as may be designed by the Town Council in each case.
2. The following improvements shall be provided:
a. Roads. All new roads and streets shall be graded and drained, base material
applied, curb and gutter constructed where required, surface treatment
applied, utilities installed and street name signs erected, all in accordance
with the minimum standards of design and construction adopted by the town
for acceptance into the town roads system. (See Town oflndian Head Design
Manual)
b. Water facilities. Every subdivision shall be provided with a community
water supply and distribution system and appropriately spaced fire hydrants.
The source of supply shall be the Town of Indian Head municipal water
system. The local distribution system shall meet the standards for such
systems as identified in the Town oflndian Head Design Manual and shall
become prope1ty of the town without cost to the town and acceptable
arrangements, and agreements shall be made by the subdivider with the
Town.
c. Sewer facilities. Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete
sanitary sewer system connected to the Town oflndian Head sewer system.
It shall be constructed to meet the standards and requirements as identified
in the Town oflndian Head Design Manual and shall become property of the
Town, without cost to the Town.
Page 5 of 49
d. Storm Water Management facilities. Every subdivision of such size as to
require stormwater management facilities, shall be provided with a
stormwater management system and shall identify the location of all such
facilities and proposed drainage easements. Such facilities shall be
constructed to meet the appropriate standards for management of storm water
quantity and quality established in the Town oflndian Head Design Manual
without cost to the town.
e.
- ------------
Reference monuments. Permanent reference monuments shall be placed as
required by the provisions of ArticieT7oftlie ArillotatedCode of Maryland
(1957), as amended. Such permanent reference monuments shall be stone or
concrete at least 36 inches in length and four inches square with suitable
center point and shall be set flush with the ground and to finish grade. A
metal pipe three-quarter inches in diameter and 24 inches in length shall be
located in the ground at all intersections of streets; intersections of streets and
alleys with plat boundary Jines; and at all points on street, alley and boundary
lines where there is a change in direction or curvature and at all lot corners.
Monuments are to be in place when grading is completed.
f.
SECTION6.
A. Improvements.
Utilities. In all subdivisions in residential and commercial zones, all utility
Jines, including telephone, electricity and cable television shall be installed
underground.
IMPROVEMENT PLANS
Plans for the foregoing improvements shall be prepared for approval by the appropriate
public authorities prior to construction. All construction work on improvements required
herein shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Town during and upon completion
of construction. No final plat shall be approved or recorded until all required improvements
shall have been satisfactorily completed and accepted in compliance herewith, or satisfactory
bond posted; and no such bond shall be released until all improvements secured by such
bond have been completed and accepted in compliance herewith. Plans shall show the
proposed locations, sizes, types, grades and general design features of each facility, including
the following:
1. Profile of each street centerline with grades (including projections beyond the
subdivision boundaries where significant), and showing water and sewer lines,
manholes, culverts, streams, etc. Scale: one inch to 100 feet or less horizontal, one
inch to ten feet or less vertical.
Page 6 of49
2. Typical street cross-sections for all streets, at a scale not smaller than one inch to five
feet, showing width of roadway, type of paving locations and widths of curbs,
sidewalks, streets, utilities, etc. Where considerable cuts or fills are required, special
cross-sections shall be prepared to show proposed grading, and their locations shall
be shown on the plan. A grading plan showing existing and proposed contours may
be furnished in lieu of cross-sections.
3. Location plans and profiles for all proposed stormwater management facilities
including proposed wastewater treatment and collection facilities.
4. LocatiO!lplan ofpi·oposeawater disfrifiufion system Slfr1wingpTpe slzesaiid Iocatfons
for valves and fire hydrants.
5. Where appropriate, a site plan showing location of shade trees of a species as
approved by the Planning Commission.
6. Where appropriate, a plan for upgrading existing roads within the planned
subdivision shall be presented.
B. Design Standards
I. The subdivision layout shall conform in all essential respects to the Transportation
Plan and other aspects of the adopted Comprehensive Plan for the Town.
2. The subdivision layout shall be in full compliance with the provisions of the zoning
districts in which it is located.
3. The subdivision layout shall be designed in accordance with the principles and
standards contained in this section with the objectives of achieving development of
the subdivision that is not advantageous to the future residents of the subdivision and
adjoining areas.
4. Suitability ofland.
a. Land subject to periodic flooding shall not be subcliviclecl for residential
occupancy nor for any other use which might involve clanger to health, life
or property or aggravate the flood hazard, and such land within any proposed
subdivision shall be reserved for uses which will not be endangered by
periodic or occasional inundation.
b. A plat for the subdivision of land with poor drainage or other adverse
physical conditions will be considered for approval only if the subdivider
shall agree to make whatever improvements are necessary, in the judgment
Page 7 of 49
of the Planning Commission, to render the land safe and otherwise acceptable
for development.
c. When the proposed subdivision, or portions thereof, are located in the
Chesapeake Bay Critical Area, the proposed layout and location of
improvements shall comply with criteria for development within the Critical
Area as defined in Article IX, Part III of the Town oflndian Head Zoning
Ordinance.
d. All pottions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets,
··· publicfon<IS,-oi· othei· proposed uses, sci fl1afreiiiiiants and landlockeoafras
shall not be created.
5. Street layout.
a. The street layout shall be designed to create desirable building sites while
respecting existing topography, minimizing street grades, avoiding excessive
cuts and fills and preserving trees to the maximum extent possible.
b. Streets shall be spaced to allow for blocks meeting the dimensional
requirements contained herein and to minimize the number of intersections
with existing or proposed major thoroughfares.
c. Where the subdivision adjoins or embraces any part of an arterial route as
designated in the Comprehensive Plan, the layout of such subdivision shall
provide for the platting and dedication of such part of the major thoroughfare
in the location and at the width indicated on such plan.
d. Wherever deemed desirable to the layout of the subdivision and adjoining
areas, the Planning Commission may require the platting and dedication of
one or more collector streets, or parts thereof, to serve the subdivision.
e. Minor residential streets, intended primarily for access to individual
propetties, shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic.
f. Streets shall be laid out to intersect one another at as near to right angles as
topography and the limiting factors of good design will permit, and no street
shall intersect another street at an angle of less than 60 degrees.
g. Proposed streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of
existing, planned or platted streets on adjacent tracts, unless such
continuation shall be prevented by topography or other physical condition or
unless such extension is found by the Planning Commission to be
Page 8 of 49
h.
i.
unnecessary for the coordination of development between the subdivision and
such adjacent tract.
Where the Planning Commission deems it desirable or necessary to providing
access to adjacent tracts not presently subdivided, proposed streets in the
subdivision shall be extended to the boundary lines with such adjacent tracts,
and temporary turnarounds shall be provided at the ends of such streets by
means of temporary easements or otherwise.
Reducing impact of heavy traffic.
Where the subdivision abuts or contains an arterial/route as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan, the Planning Commission may require that measures
be taken to reduce the impact of heavy traffic on the residential lots abutting
or fronting upon such highway and to afford separation of through and local
traffic. The choice of the most appropriate method of accomplishing the
desired purpose in a specific instance shall be made by the Planning
Commission, giving consideration to topography and other physical
conditions, the character of existing and contemplated development in the
subdivision and its surroundings and other pertinent factors.
j. Where land in the proposed subdivision adjoins a railroad line, the street
layout shall make allowance for future grade-separated railroad crossings at
appropriate locations by providing extra street right-of-way widths for such
crossings and by restricting intersecting streets at locations where they would
cause interference with the necessary approaches to such crossings.
k. Cul-de-sac streets, generally not exceeding 300 feet in length, shall be
permitted only where they are necessitated by topographic conditions or
where, in the judgment of the Planning Commission, they are appropriate to
the type of development contemplated.
1. Alleys shall be provided in commercial areas, unless adequate access to
parking and loading areas is provided by other means.
m. Half streets will be prohibited, except where they are essential to the
reasonable development of the proposed subdivision in conformity with the
other requirements of these regulations and where the Planning Commission
finds that it will be practicable to require dedication of the remaining half
when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street adjoins the
proposed subdivision, the remaining half of the street shall be platted within
such subdivision.
Page 9 of 49
n. Private streets will not be permitted in any proposed subdivision.
6. Street design.
a. Minimum right-of-way widths shall be as defined in the Town of Indian
Head Design Manual as follows:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Arterial
Collector Street
Local Street
ServiCe Road ·
Alleys
100 feet
60 feet
50 feet
60 TeeC(foi'non~residentfal development)
16 feet
b. Minimum roadway widths shall be as defined in the Town oflndian Head
Design Manual as follows:
(1) Arterial 48 feet
(2) Collector Street 36 feet
(3) Local Street 32 feet
(4) Service Road 36 feet (for non-residential development)
(5) Alleys 12 feet.
c. Culs-de-sac. Cul-de-sac streets shall have a circular turnaround of not less
than 100 feet in diameter to the street line and with a roadway of not less than
80 feet in diameter, unless the Planning Commission approves a T- or Ybackaround.
d. Street grades.
(1) Street grades shall not exceed five percent for Arterial and collector
streets and eight percent for local streets, service roads and alleys,
except that the Planning Commission may permit a variation of not
greater than two percent from these maximums where topographic
conditions warrant.
(2) Street grades shall be not less than one-half of one percent at the
gutter.
(3) All changes in street grades of more than one percent shall be
connected by vertical curves with a minimum length of 50 feet or 15
times the algebraic difference in the change in grade, whichever is
greater.
Page 10 of 49
e. Curvature. The radius of curvature on the center line shall be not less than
400 feet for Arterial highways, 300 feet for collector streets and I 00 feet for
local streets, service roads and alleys. Between reversed curves, either of
which has a radius of less than 100 feet, there shall be a tangent section at
least 100 feet in length.
f. Intersections. Layout of intersections shall be consistent with standards
established in the Town oflndian Head Design Manual. The design of the
intersection shall provide clear sight distance for oncoming vehicles, and
there shall be a suitable leveling of the street g111de \Vi~~ii1m2~apyr()aching
the intersection.
g. Sidewalks and Curb and Gutters. Concrete sidewalks and curb and gutters
shall be provided along both sides of all proposed streets in the subdivision
unless by the Planning Commission. Their construction shall be consistent
with the standards established in the Town oflndian Head Design Manual.
h. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
requirements established in the Town of Indian Head Design Manual.
7. Blocks.
a. Residential blocks shall normally not exceed 1,300 feet in length, nor be less
than 500 feet in length, between street lines. In any residential block more
than 800 feet in length, a crosswalkway of not less than ten feet in width may
be required where necessary to provide convenient access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities.
b. Residential blocks shall normally be of sufficient width to provide two tiers
of lots of appropriate depth.
c. Blocks for business or industrial use shall be of such length and width as may
be necessary to serve their prospective use, including making adequate
provision for off-street parking and for the loading and unloading of delivery
vehicles.
d. Inegularly shaped blocks indented by culs-de-sac or looped streets and
containing interior parks of playgrounds will be acceptable when they are
properly designed, including making provision for adequate parking and for
the maintenance of the public or joint-use recreation area.
8. Lots.
Page II of 49
a. The lot arrangement, design and orientation shall be such that all lots will
provide satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and the
character of surrounding development.
b. The dimensions and areas of all lots shall comply with the requirements of
the zoning districts in which they are located.
c. Excessive lot depth in relation to lot width shall be avoided. A ratio of depth
to width of two to one shall be considered a desirable maximum.
d. Corner lots shall have extra width-to pei:nlitappropriate building setback
from both streets in accordance with the zoning regulations.
e. Every lot shall abut upon and have access to a public street.
f. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except where
their use is essential to overcoming special topographic problems or to
separating residential development from heavy street traffic.
g. Residential lots fronting or abutting on arterial or collector shall have extra
lot depths and deeper building setbacks.
h. Lots adjoining a railroad line shall have extra lot depth and shall provide for
an appropriate means of buffering such lots from such railroad line.
i. Insofar as possible, side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial
to the street line, except where a variation to this requirement will provide an
improved street and lot layout.
j. The size and shape of lots intended for single-family residential use shall be
sufficient to permit the ultimate provision of a garage on each lot, except that
the Planning Commission may permit the grouping of garages into a
compound serving several such lots.
k. Building restriction lines shall be shown on the plat along each street at least
as required in each case by the applicable zoning regulations. The locations
of these lines shall be clearly indicated by dimensions.
I. Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from an arterial street.
Where driveway access from an arterial street may be necessary for several
adjoining lots, the Planning Commission may require that such lots be served
by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards.
Page 12 of 49
9. Easements.
a. Where alleys are not provided in appropriate locations, easements of not less
than ten feet in width shall be provided where necessary to meet public utility
requirements. Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or
across lots where necessary for the extension of trunk sewers or other primary
utility lines.
b. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by any stream, watercourse or
drainageway, the subdivider shall make adequate provision for the proper
-------------~l;mriage-of sii1;face-water~1nCliidmgtfie p1;oviSion ofeasements along such
streams, watercourses and drainageways.
c. Utility easements in private rights-of-way or in joint-use recreation areas may
be permitted at the discretion of the Planning Commission, if the design
considerations of the proposed subdivision warrant snch easements.
d. No building or structure shall be constructed on any easement without the
written authorization of the Town.
10. Public sites and open spaces.
a. Where the proposed subdivision includes lands proposed for use as parks,
playgrounds, playfields, public landings or school sites under the
Comprehensive Plan, the subdivider shall indicate the location of such lands
on the subdivision plat and shall either dedicate such lands or shall reserve
the right of purchase of such lands by the appropriate jurisdiction for the time
period specified herein. Should the reserved lands not be purchased by the
appropriate jurisdiction within the specified time limit, the subdivider shall
be free to market such lands for an alternate purpose, as specified on the
approved subdivision plat.
b. Park, playground and playfield sites shall be reserved for a period of two
years from the date of recording the subdivision, and school sites shall be
reserved for four years from such date. The reservation shall give the
appropriate agency the right to purchase such land at the appraised raw land
value plus one-half the cost of surface improvements on any streets that are
contiguous to the site.
c. Where deemed essential by the Planning Commission upon consideration of
the type of development proposed in the subdivision, the subdivider may be
required to dedicate other areas or sites of a character, extent and location
suitable to meeting the needs of such development. In lieu of dedicating such
Page 13 of 49
additional areas, they may be reserved for the common use of all property
owners in the proposed subdivision through deed restrictions.
11. Grading and sediment control.
a. No person shall do any grading, stripping, excavating or filling of land or
create borrow pits, spoil areas, quarries, material processing facilities or any
other facility without first obtaining a grading permit from the Town, except
as provided for in this Section.
b. NoTliing -sefforffi-in this Section shall be consfrued tobe in conflict with
paragraph 8-1101 et seq. of the Natural Resources Article of the Annotated
Code ofMaiyland.
c. Subject to compliance with paragraph 8-1101 et seq. of the Natural Resources
A1ticle of the Annotated Code of Maryland, relating to Sediment control plan
approval by the Charles Soil Conservation District, a grading permit shall not
be required for the following:
(1) An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, for retaining walls or for similar structures attendant to the
principal building authorized by a valid building permit. The
resulting fill shall:
(a) Not be placed on a surface having a slope steeper than 20 feet
horizontal to one foot vertical (five percent grade).
(b) Not impair existing surface drainage, constitute a potential
erosion hazard or act as a source of sedimentation to any
adjacent land or watercourse.
( c) Have no final slopes steeper than one foot vertical to three
feet horizontal.
( d) Have all disturbed areas promptly seeded or sodded as soon
as the season permits.
(2) An excavation which:
(a) Is less than four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point, as
measured from the natural ground surface.
(b) Does not result in a total quantity of more than 100 cubic
Page 14 of 49
yards of material on any lot, parcel or subdivision thereof.
(c) Does not impair existing surface drainages, constitute a
potential erosion hazard or act as a source of sedimentation to
any adjacent land or watercourse.
(cl) Has no final slopes steeper than one foot vertical to three feet
horizontal.
(e) Has all disturbed areas promptly seeded or sodded as soon as
. .ff1e season per1nlts. . . - .
(3) A fill which:
(a) Is less than four feet in vertical height at its deepest point, as
measured from the natural ground surface.
(b) Is placed on a surface having a slope not steeper than five feet
horizontal to one foot vertical.
( c) Does not exceed a total of 100 cubic yards of material on any
lot, parcel or subdivision thereof.
(cl) Does not impair existing surface drainage, constitute a
potential erosion hazard or act as a source of sedimentation to
any adjacent land or watercourse.
( e) Has no final slopes steeper than one foot vertical to three feet
horizontal.
(f) Has all disturbed areas promptly seeded or sodded as soon as
the season permits.
( 4) Accepted agricultural land management practices, such as plowing,
and nursery operations, such as the removal and/or transplanting of
cultivated sod, shrubs and trees and tree cutting at or above existing
ground, leaving the stump, ground cover and root mat intact.
(5) The stockpiling, with slopes at a natural angle or repose, of raw or
processed sand, stone and gravel at quarries, concrete, asphalt and
material processing plants and storage yards, provided that approved
sediment and erosion control measures have been employed to protect
against off-site damages.
Page 15of49
( 6) Refuse disposal areas or sanitary landfills operated and conducted in
accordance with the requirements, rules and ordinances adopted by
the Town oflndian Head and the State of Maryland. Exemption from
permit requirements, however, does not exempt these projects from
other aspects of this Section, including inspection as covered in other
parts of this Section.
(7) Grading and trenching for utility installations within:
(a) Highway rights-of-way.
(b) Utility easements immediately adjacent to road or street
rights-of-way or in the space on abutting lot(s) needed to
accommodate the respective house connections; provided,
however, that all grading or trenching involved does not
disturb the natural contour and that if, during the course of
utility operations, any erosion and sediment control measures
previously in place are disturbed or destroyed, the utility
company shall restore or repair such measures to their original
condition.
(8) Grading as a maintenance measure or for landscaping purposes on
existing developed lots or parcels, provided that:
(a) The aggregate of area(s) effected or bared at any one time
does not exceed 3,000 square feet.
(b) The grade change does not alter the drainage pattern.
(c) All bare earth is promptly seeded, sodded or otherwise
effectively protected from erosive actions.
( d) The grading does not involve a quantity of material in excess
of 100 cubic yards.
(9) The construction of single-family residences and/or their accessory
buildings on lots of two acres or more.
d. Hazardous conditions. If the Town determines that an excavation,
embankment or fill created after the effective date of this Section endangers
or adversely affects the safety or stability of any public or private property,
as determined from the guidelines of this Section, said Town shall promptly
notify, in writing, the owner or other person in control of the property upon
Page 16 of 49
which said condition exists. If the correction is not commenced in
accordance with the provisions of this Section within the period of time
specified in said notice, the owner or person in control shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in this Section.
e. Permit requirements.
(I) Prior to the issuance of a grading permit, an applicant shall have
submitted to the Town oflndian Head the following:
(a) An application and plan, including specifications and tim-fog
schedules. There should be submitted six copies. The
requirements for the application and plan are set forth in the
Sections which follow. Separate application shall be required
for each grading permit. Plans, specifications and timing
shall be submitted with each application for a grading permit.
The permit, when issued, shall allow the applicant to make
the improvements according to the application and plan
submitted. Accepted modifications may be made as covered
later in this Section.
(b) The fee for administration and inspection paid to the Town of
Indian Head as covered later in this Section.
(2) Nothing in this Section shall affect the responsibilities of the
Department of Water Resources under Section 8-1101 et seq. of the
Natural Resources Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
(3) Bond will be required as set forth later in this Section.
( 4) Permits issued pursuant to this Section do not relieve the owner of
responsibility for securing required permits for work to be done
which is regulated by any other applicable code, act or county
ordinance. This Section shall not preclude the inclusion in such other
permit of more stringent regulations or requirements concerning the
grading of land.
f. General Plan Format.
(1) The plan shall show the following:
(a) The proposed area of development.
Page 17 of49
(b) The proposed grading to be accomplished.
( c) The necessary provisions for drainage, erosion and sediment
control and vegetative establishment.
(2) The plan shall provide for erosion and sediment control measures
throughout all phases of development.
(a) Phase I: stripping and/or clearing.
- ---------(b) Phase II: rough grading and construction.
(c) Phase III: final grading and vegetative establishment.
(d) Phase IV: maintenance.
(3) A proposed time schedule of the hereinbefore-mentioned phases shall
be submitted with the plan.
g. Minimum application data. The plans and specifications accompanying the
grading permit application shall contain information and data described
below, subject to the provisions that the Town may waive the filing of
pmticular information if, in its judgment, such information would serve no
useful purpose for the particular project and not contravene the purpose of
this Section.
(1) A vicinity sketch in such detail that the property may be easily found
by the inspector. North arrow and scale shall be indicated.
(2) boundary line survey of the site for which the permit is sought and
on which the work is to be performed. On approved and recorded
subdivision lots, a copy of the recorded plat will be submitted.
(3) A plan of the site at a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet,
showing:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the owner,
developer and petitioner.
(b) A timing schedule and sequence indicating the anticipated
starting and completion dates of the development sequence
and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion
of effective erosion and sediment control measures.
Page 18 of49
(c) The estimated total cost of the intended construction, together
with the estimated cost of the grading and/or filling, and the
cost shall be reviewed and verified by the Town.
( d) The location of any buildings or structures, utilities, sewers,
water and storm drains on the site where the work is to be
performed.
(e) The location of any building or structure on land of adjacent
property owners which is within I 00 feet of the site.
-------- --- -------
(f) Elevations, dimensions, location, extent and the slope of all
proposed grading, including building and driveway grades,
utilities, sewer, water and storm drains, all clearly indicated
with finished contours at the same intervals as required or
used for existing topography.
(g) An estimate by professional engineer or professional land
surveyor of the quantity of excavation and fill involved.
(h) Adequate plans of all drainage provisions, erosion and
sediment control measures or other protective devices to be
constructed in connection with or as part of the proposed
work, a map showing the drainage area ofland tributary to the
site and estimated runoff from the area served by any drains.
Complete storm drainage studies shall be submitted for the
site if not previously submitted as required by subdivision
regulations.
(i) A grading plan for borrow pits, quarries and material
processing facilities, which will be based on the findings and
evaluations of the soil investigation repott.
G) An appropriate legend.
(k) A I 00 foot adjacent peripheral strip and existing topography
at a contour interval as follows:
(I) Where the site and peripheral strip contain grades
which average three percent or less, contours must
have at least a one-foot interval.
(2) Where slopes on the site and its peripheral strip
Page 19 of49
average over three percent through and including 15
percent contours must have at least two-foot intervals.
(3) Where the grade on the site and its peripheral strip
average more than 15 percent contours must have at
least five-foot intervals.
(l) Such supplemental reports, data and/or additional information
required to ensure the adequacy of the proposed plan. Such
reports, data and/or additional information may require that
---- ----------the following be prepared by a professional engineer
employed by or under contract with the permittee.
( 4) The professional engineer's recommendation to guide the design,
constrnction and inspection of the proposed facility. The following
shall be considered by the professional engineer in his
recommendation:
(a) Cleaning, grnbbing, stripping, keying and undercutting for the
acceptance of fill.
(b) Compaction requirement for all classes of fill.
( c) Allowable slope angle and bench requirements for cut and fill
slopes.
( d) Allowable soil pressure for foundations on natural ground
and/or fills.
( e) Erosion control during construction (temporary) and during
the life of the facility (permanent).
(f) Groundwater control during construction (temporary) and
during the life of the facility.
(g) Testing and inspection requirements to ensure conformance
with this Section.
(h) Pavement design if included in the project.
(i) The location and handling of excess borrow and/or spoil
material and restoration of borrow pits and/or spoil area.
Page 20 of 49
(5) A record of field observations, field test data, laboratory test data and
project characteristics upon which the professional engineer's
recommendations were based.
h. Plan referral. Prior to issuance of a grading permit, copies of the plan shall
be referred by the Town to the Charles Soil Conservation District for
approval of the proposed erosion and sediment required. Where necessary,
the Soil Conservation District will also serve as a technical authority on
erosion and sediment control. The Soil Conservation District will notify the
Town of its recommendations and/or approval so that the recommendations
.... may be reviewed and the permittee notified of the recorl1:inel1ciatlons and/or
approval in a timely manner.
i. Modifications of plan. Major modifications of the approved grading plans
shall be submitted to the Town and reprocessed in the same manner as the
original plan. Field modifications of a major nature may be authorized by the
Town, provided that written authorization is given to the person performing
work pursuant to this Section, with copies forwarded to the Soil Conservation
District.
j. Fees.
(1) The permit and inspection fee as established by the Town ofindian
Head shall be paid to the Town ofindian Head.
(2) The fee for a grading permit authorizing additional work as set forth
in plan modifications shall be the difference between the fee paid for
the original permit and the fee required for the entire grading and
sediment control project.
k. Bonds.
(1) A grading permit shall not be issued for grading involving the
exposing of more than 1,000 cubic yards or 30,000 square feet of
ground surface unless the permittee shall first post with the Town a
performance bond, executed by the owner and a corporate surety with
authority to do business in this state as a surety. The bond shall be in
a form approved by the Town for the total estimated cost of the
erosion and sediment control and stabilization work authorized by the
permit. Said estimated cost shall be that which is approved by the
Town on consultation with the Soil Conservation District after
reviewing the cost estimates proposed by the applicant's professional
engineer, land surveyor or architect.
Page 21of49
(2) The bond shall include the following provisions:
(a) the applicant shall comply with all of the provisions of this
Section and all other applicable laws and ordinances.
(b) the applicant shall comply with all of the terms and conditions
of the grading permit.
(c) Any extension of completion time shall not release the
applicant or surety on the bond.
( d) Upon default, the applicant and surety shall continue to be
firmly bound under a continuing obligation for payment of
one of the following, at the election of the surety:
(1) All costs and expenses necessary to complete the
work in accordance with the approval plans and
specifications, or any approved modification thereof.
(2) All necessary costs and expenses or liabilities which
may be incurred to stabilize in accordance with a
stabilization plan for erosion control presented by the
surety to and approved by the Town Manager; or
(3) Payment of the full amount of the fund to the Town of
Indian Head to perform the work necessary. If the
cost for restoration of the site to meet the minimum
requirements of this Section, with particular emphasis
on stability, safety, drainage and erosion control,
exceeds the amount of the bond, the pennittee shall
continue to be firmly bound under a continuing
obligation for payment of all excess costs and
expenses incurred by the Town.
(3) The bond shall remain in full force and effect until the completion of
the work to the specifications required. If all work of the permit is
not completed within the time specified therein or as otherwise
modified, or violates any other term or condition, payment in full to
the Town of Indian Head may be ordered. The funds so received
shall be used by the Town for defraying the cost ofrestoration of the
site. After default, the bonding company shall come in and get the
work done (either finish the project or stabilize it). Upon assurance
Page 22 of 49
of a certificate of completion, the bond shall be released.
I. Other security.
(!) In lieu of a performance collateral bond, the applicant may file with
the Town, to be deposited with the Clerk-Treasurer, a cash deposit or
certified check in the amount which would be required by a
performance bond. Upon satisfactory completion of the work
specified in the grading permit, any unused portion of a cash deposit
shall be refunded to the applicant.
(2) In lieu of a performance collateral bond, a public utility franchised by
the General Assembly of Maryland to operate in Charles County may
submit a letter of guaranty in a form approved by the Town Manager.
m. Authority of permit. The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an
authorization to do only the work set forth in the application for the permit
or in the site plans and specifications submitted and approved as part of the
application. All work performed by the person to whom the permit is issued
or by his successor shall be in accordance with the requirements of this
Section. Application for a permit shall include the implied right of entry for
restoration of the site upon default.
n. Failure to complete work. If at any time the Town finds that all work of the
permit is not completed within the time specified therein or as otherwise
provided for in this Section violates any other term or condition, the cash
deposit shall be forfeited or, if a bond has been posted, payment in full to the
Town oflndian Head will be ordered. The funds so received will be used by
the Town for defraying the cost of contracting, including engineering and
administration, for the restoration of the site to meet the minimum
requirements of this Section with particular emphasis on stability, pollution,
safety and erosion control.
o. Floodplains. If the land area for which the grading is proposed lies within the
50-year floodplain of any stream or watercourse the Town shall deny a
grading permit or grading within said area regulated by the Subdivision
Regulations of the Town oflndian Head unless such grading is authorized by
permit by the Department of Water Resources in accordance with its rules
and regulations.
p. Conditions of approval. In granting any permit pursuant to this Section, the
Town may impose such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent
creation of a nuisance or unreasonable hazard to persons or to public or
Page23 of 49
private property. Such conditions may include but need not be limited to the
following:
( 1) Improvement of any existing grading to meet the standards required
under this Section for new grading and for sediment control.
(2) Designation of easements for drainage facilities and for the
maintenance of slopes or erosion control facilities.
(3) Adequate control of dust by watering or other control methods
acceptable fo the Town ana it1 ccniformance wifft applicable air
pollution ordinances.
q. Time limits.
(I) The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of the work
required to be done pursuant to the grading with the time limit
specified in the grading permit.
(2) Where the applicant is unable to complete the work within the
specified time, within 30 days of the expiration of the permit he shall
present, in writing, to the Town a request for an extension, and where,
in the sole discretion of the Town, such an extension is warranted, it
may grant an additional time.
(3) If operations cease for a period of 90 consecutive days, permanent
erosion and sediment control measures must be employed as set for
later in this Section.
( 4) All permits issued for sand, gravel or clay pits and rock quarries or
any other mining or material processing operations involving
excavation and/or stockpiling of soil, rock or other materials shall
lapse one year after termination of active, productive (i.e., actually
removing material, whether sold at a profit or not and whether
stockpiled or sold) and continuous operations as determined by the
Town. Said permits shall be reviewed annually by the Town for
compliance in accordance with the approved grading plan. If active,
productive and continuous operations are not conducted on the site
within 90 days of the issuance of said permit, the Town shall require
the erosion and sediment control measures as set forth in these
regulations.
r. Liability. Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this
Page 24 of49
Section, nor the compliance with the provisions hereto or with any condition
imposed by the Town here-under shall relieve any person from any
responsibility for damage to persons or property, including public utilities or
services, otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Town
for damage to persons or property.
s. Responsibilities of permittee.
(I) During grading operations, the permittee shall be responsible for the
prevention of damage to any public utilities or services within the
limits of grading and along any routes oflravelofequlpment: The
Town of Indian Head shall not be responsible for damage to
properties for failure of any work done pursuant to this Section.
(2) No person shall grade on land so close to the property line as to
endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or any other
public or private property without supporting and protecting such
property from settling, cracking or other damage which might result.
Grading can take place on adjacent property if grading rights are
secured from the property owner. Storm drains must terminate in an
acceptable outfall.
t. Removal of debris. No debris is to be deposited in floodplains, watercourses,
public streets, highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfares, and the
permittee shall promptly remove all soil, miscellaneous debris or other
materials spilled, dumped or otherwise deposited in floodplains or
thoroughfares during transit or operation.
u. Maintenance of protective measures. The owner of any property on which
grading or other work has been done pursuant to the provisions of this
Section, or any other person, firm or corporation in control of such property,
shall maintain and/or promptly repair or restore all graded surfaces, erosion
control measures, vegetative and/or other protective measures if disturbed or
destroyed during the course of operations. Such repair and/or restoration
shall be in accordance with the approved plans and specifications as required
by this Section until permanent measures are accepted by the Town.
v. Basic design standards. All grading plans and specifications shall include the
following terms and conditions:
(1) The development shall be fitted to the topography and soils so as to
create the least erosion potential.
Page 25 of 49
- ------------- - ---------------··
(2) The natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever
possible.
(3) Only the smallest practical area shall be exposed for the shortest
practical period of time.
( 4) Erosion control practices, such as interceptor ditches, beams, terraces,
contour ripping, soil erosion checks and sediment basins, shall be
installed to minimize soil and water losses.
(5) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
critical areas exposed during the time of development.
(6) During and after development, provisions shall be made to effectively
accommodate the increased runoff caused by changeable soil and
surface conditions and not cause siltation of the receiving stream.
(7) Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed in the
development as soon as the season permits.
w. Steep slopes. In order to prevent abnormal or excessive grading, the
following additional requirements shall pertain to those areas where steep
slopes exist:
(1) All roads and streets shall be placed as close to the contour as
possible to minimize cutting or filling.
(2) The construction of all structures shall be preceded by the installation
of storm drainage system(s) and stabilization measures.
(3) In the case of a single lot development within such areas where no
central storm drainage system exists, runoff from driveways, roofs
and other improved surfaces shall be diverted and carries to an
acceptable outlet by one or a combination of the following methods:
filtration beds, subsurface dry wells, storm drainage.systems and/or
underground conduit systems or other adequate or protected outlets.
( 4) The extent of cutting and filling that will be permitted on any lot will
be based on the soil conditions at the site and as determined by the
Town upon recommendation of the Soil Conservation District or the
Department of Water Resources. Construction on piling and/or
suppmis shall be permitted.
Page 26 of 49
x. Vegetation. Vegetation erosion and sediment control measures shall include
but not be limited to the following:
(I) Temporary vegetative stabilization. Areas where grading or cutting
and filling operations are carried out in several stages that expose soil
for prolonged period of time (up to one year) to erosion shall be
temporarily stabilized by seeding. The necessary steps to be followed
to attain an adequate erosion control coverage with temporary seeding
shall be as follows:
- -ca:r- Necessa1y erosion control practices.
(b) Seedbed preparation.
(c) Lime and fertilizer, as required.
( d) Seeding.
( e) Mulching and mulch anchoring, as required.
(2) Temporary mulch stabilization. The necessary steps to attain
effective erosion control with mulch for short periods of time (less
than six months) shall be as follows:
(a) Necessary erosion control practice.
(b) Mulching placed on a friable soil.
( c) Mulch anchoring, as required.
(3) Mulching final grade. The necessary steps to protect soil from
erosion after final grading where permanent seeding is delayed until
the next season shall be as follows:
(a) Installation of erosion control practices as previously
provided or required.
(b) Application of required lime and fertilizer.
( c) Preparation of final seedbed.
( d) Mulching, as required.
Page 27 of 49
(4)
(e) Mulch anchoring, as required.
(f) Permanent seeding shall be established during the first season
following mulching.
Permanent vegetative stabilization. Adapted grasses, legumes and
other plants are available for stabilizing exposed areas. The final
choice of species should be determined by considering such factors
as adaptability to climate, soils, terrain and degree of maintenance.
Steps necessary to establish permanent vegetative stabilization are as
follows:
(a) Install required erosion control practices.
(b) Apply required lime and fertilizer.
(c) Prepare adequate seedbed.
( d) Seed or sod.
( e) Apply mulch and anchor for seed and anchor for sod.
y. Structures. Structural erosion and sediment control measures shall include
but not be limited to the following:
(I) Diversions. The number of diversions and the physical extent and
spacing is dependent upon the land slope, soil and runoff. The
surface runoff shall be collected and conveyed laterally along the
diversion at nonerosive and nonscouring velocities and discharged
into a protected area or outlet channel.
(2) Bench terraces.
(3) Outlet channels. Outlet channels are constructed for the disposal of
storm runoff from diversions, bench terraces and other structures.
The design is based upon the runoff from predicted storm frequency
and includes the vegetative or structural measures required to protect
the cham1el from scour and erosion.
(4) Waterway stabilization structures. Structural devices such as drop
structures, grade stabilization structures and channel liners should be
utilized to dissipate the energy of flowing water by holding the
waterway slopes an velocities within nonscouring limits.
Page 28 of 49
(5) Channel bank stabilization. Channel bank stabilization provides a
barrier that will withstand the erosive forces exerted by flowing water
or create a bank roughness that will reduce the erosive power by
dissipating the energy of the water as it moves along the bank line.
Methods commonly used include riprap, rock cribs (gabions), groins,
jetties, fencing, piling, etc.
(6) Stream channel improvement. Stream channel improvement may
require straightening, realignment or the construction of a new
channel to designed cross-section and grade as necessary. 'J'l1e desLgn
shall include considerations regarding the stability of the bed and
banks of the proposed channel under the predicted runoff conditions.
(7) Sediment basins. Sediment basins are temporary earth-fill-type dams
constructed downstream from a development area which serve to
regulate runoff and trap sediment. Sediment shall be removed
mechanically as the basin behind the dam becomes filled. The
structure can be removed once stability is reached in the development
area.
(8) Installation and maintenance. The installation and maintenance of the
specified erosion and sediment control measures shall be
accomplished in accordance with the procedures of this Section.
(9) Cut and fill slopes. The face of all such slopes shall be planted or
otherwise protected from erosion prior to the release of the permit
obligations. Responsibility shall remain on the permittee until such
planting is well establish. Other exposed areas susceptible to erosion
shall be similarly protected.
z. Approval for clearing and grading. Approval for clearing and grading shall
be obtained from the Town, subject to the granting of temporary easements
and other conditions deemed necessary by said Town, in order to inspect and
enforce the performance of the specified erosion and sediment control
measures provided for in this Section.
aa. Fill classifications. The grading and plans and specifications shall specify
and delineate the use and extent of fills in accordance with the following
classifications:
(1) Type I fill: load-bearing fills proposed for support of buildings, walls
and other structures, the function thereof which would be especially
impaired by settlement.
Page 29 of 49
(2) Type II fill: load-bearing fills proposed for support of roadways,
pavements, utility lines and structures which would not be especially
impaired by moderate settlement.
(3) Type III fill: common fills proposed for landscaping or for other nonload-
bearing usage.
bb. Materials. All load-bearing fills shall meet the following requirements:
(I) No inclusion of organic or other deleterious materials which may be
stibject fo decay shall be permitted. All fills shall also be free of
inclusion of ice or snow.
(2) No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension
greater than eight inches shall be bmied or placed in any load-bearing
fill within two feet of finished grade or within two feet of foundation
base elevation. When such material is placed in fills, it shall be done
under the direction and supervision of an engineer.
cc. Ground preparations.
(1) The natural ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by
removing all organic surface materials, noncomplying fill and
unsuitable soils in accordance with the following provisions, except
as otherwise approved by the Town and based on the
recommendations of the professional engineer.
(2) Prior to placing Type I and Type II fills, the ground smface, if within
five feet of the finished grade or foundation base elevation, shall be
compacted so as to achieve a density of not less than 90 percent of
maximum density as defined under this Section within the top six
inches.
(3) No fill shall be placed on frozen ground.
dd. Compaction. All fills will be compacted in accordance with the following
prov1s10ns:
(I) All Type I and Type II fills shall be compacted to a minimum of 95
percent and 90 percent respectively, of maximum density as
determined in the laboratory of ASTM test method D1557-66T, also
known as the "Modified Proctor Test". Type III fill shall be
compacted sufficiently so as to be stable and to prevent an erosion
Page 30 of 49
hazard.
(2) In-place (field) density shall be determined by ASTM test or
American Society of Highway Officials equivalent tests, method
DI 556-64T, met method or by equivalent tests approved by the
Town.
(3) Fills shall be placed in approximately horizontal layers, each layer
having a loose thickness of not more than eight inches.
ee. Structural rock. Fills constructed predominantly of large rock, such as
sandstone and iron concretions, will be permitted only if the specifications
for such fill are prepared by and construction done under the direction and
supervision of an engineer.
ff. Maximum slope for fills.
(1) No fill shall be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in
slope than two horizontal to one vertical.
(2) The Town may require that the fill be constructed with an exposed
surface with a grade flatter than two horizontal to one vertical or may
require such other measures it deems necessary or stability vegetative
establishment and maintenance and safety.
(3) Fills toeing out on natural slopes at the grade steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical shall not be made unless approved by the
Town.
gg. Existing features. Existing features which would add value to development
of natural or man-made assets of the Town, such as trees, watercourses, falls,
beaches, vistas, historic or architecturally significant buildings and similar
irreplaceable assets, should be preserved, so far as possible, through
harmonious and careful development.
hh. Maximum slope for cuts.
(1) Cuts shall not be more steep in slope than two horizontal to one
vertical.
(2) The Town shall require at any time that the excavation be made with
a cut face with a grade flatter than two horizontal to one vertical, or
said Town may require such other measures as it deems necessary for
Page31 of49
stability, vegetative establishments and safety.
ii. Cut and fill slopes: terraces.
(1) Cut and fill slopes in excess of30 feet but not more than 40 feet in
vertical height shall be terraces at approximately mid-height.
Terraces in slopes with a vertical height greater than 40 feet shall be
made at equal vertical intervals not more than 20 feet apart.
Depending on soil conditions, terraces may be required of closer
intervals by the Town as it deems necessary for stability, vegetative
establishmeril arid maintenance and safety. Bench terraces shall be .
a minimum of five fee wide with an absolute minimum invert
gradient of one percent if not sodded or one-half percent if sodded or
one-half percent if paved and with a 10-to-one lateral slope towards
the toe of the upper bank and must convey water with minimum sixinch
freeboard to an acceptable outlet.
(2) Cuts and fills shall be set back from property lines and buildings shall
be set back from cut or fill slopes in accordance with diagrams
entitled "Slope Setback From Property Line" and "Building Setback",
which diagrams shall permanently be kept on file in the office of the
Town.
(3) Fill placed above the top of an existing or proposed surface with a
slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical shall be set back
from the top of the slope a minimum distance of six feet.
( 4) The setbacks established by this Section are minimum and, depending
on soil conditions, may be increased by the Town if deemed
necessary for safety or stability or to prevent possible damage from
water, soil or debris.
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the Town may reduce the
required setback where the necessity for the setbacks may be
eliminated or reduced by the construction of retaining walls or if the
owner has a letter of authorization to extend slopes onto the adjacent
property.
jj. Inspections.
(1) Scope. All projects shall be inspected, and reports shall be filed by
the Town. The Town shall require inspection and, where necessary,
compaction control by an engineer of a soil testing agency approved
Page 32 of 49
by the Town.
(2) Inspection schedule. Prior to initiating any operations subject to this
Section, the permittee shall submit to the Town for its approval a
proposed inspection and construction control schedule.
(3) Notifications to inspect.
(a) After commencing initial grading operations, the permittee
shall require inspections by the Town at the following stages
in the development of the site or of each subdivisiol1-thereof:
(I) Upon completion of stripping, the stockpiling of
topsoil, the construction of temporary erosion control
facilities and the disposal of all unsuitable materials
and preparation of this ground to receive fill but prior
to begilllling any placement.
(2) Upon completion of rough grading but prior to
placing topsoil, permanent drainage or other site
development improvements.
(3) Upon completion of final grading, permanent drainage
and erosion control facilities but prior to any seeding,
sodding or planting.
( 4) Upon completion of the installation of all vegetative
measures and all other work in accordance with the
grading permit.
(b) The Town may make additional inspections as such Town
may deem appropriate.
( 4) Inspection procedure. No work approved in accordance with this
Section shall proceed until the Town inspects the site and approves
the work previously completed or notifies the permittee otherwise.
Upon notification from the permittee, said Town shall inspect the site
and notify the permittee of its approval or rejection within 24 hours,
exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays. If the inspector does
not make an inspection within the specified time period, work may
proceed without presumption of approval at the risk of the permittee.
The Town shall have the right to waive inspections, except the final
inspection, as necessary.
Page 33 of 49
( 5) Inspection reports.
(a) When required by the Town, inspection and testing shall be
performed under the direction of a professional engineer, who
shall certify all inspection reports and test results. Such
reports shall include certification by the engineer of the
adequacy of:
( 1) Cleaned areas and benched or keyed surfaces prepared
to receive fills.
(2) Removal of unsuitable materials.
(3) Construction of erosion control drainage devices,
buttress fills, underdrains, retaining walls and other
grading appurtenances.
( 4) The degree of compaction where tests are performed.
(b) All certified inspection reports and certified test results shall
be periodically submitted to the Town during the performance
of the work.
(6) Final reports. The Town shall maintain permanent files on their
inspections. Upon completion of permitted work, the Town may
require the following for their files and shall also require copies for
the Charles Soil Conservation District:
(a) An as-built plan and survey by a professional land surveyor
or professional engineer at the same scale as the original plan
and showing all improvements and final grades.
(b) Certification by the owner that all grading, drainage, erosion
control measures and facilities and vegetative measures have
been completed in conformance with the approved plans and
specifications.
(c) A report summarizing the inspection reports, field and
laboratory tests and location tests.
(7) Notification of completion. The permittee or his agent shall notify
the Town when the grading operation is ready for final inspection.
Final approval shall be given in a timely manner when all work,
Page 34 of 49
kk.
II.
SECTION?
including installation of all drainage structures and erosion protective
devices, have been completed as well as the required vegetative
stabilization and the required reports have been submitted.
Notice of violation: violations and penalties. If at any stage the work does
not conform to the permit, to the plans and specifications, or to any
instructions of the Town, a written notice to comply shall be given to the
permittee. Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and
the time within which corrections shall be made. Upon failure to comply
within the time specified, the permittee shall be considered in violation of this
Section, in which case lhe bond, if any, shall be in default, and the
appropriate penalties imposed.
Prevalence of more restrictive standards. If any provisions of this Section
and any other provision of law impose overlapping or contradictory
regulations or contain any restrictions covering any of the same subject
matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards
or requirements shall govern.
TRANSFER OF LAND, PERMITS, BONDS, AND AGREEMENTS
A. Bonding or Guarantee oflmprovements
1. All offsite public improvements must be bonded or guaranteed as follows:
a. If the subdivider proceeds with the installation of required onsite
improvements, then, upon receipt of a report from each of the appropriate
officials that such improvements have been completed in accordance with the
improvement plans the Planning Commission will recommend to the Mayor
and Town Council that they accept the roads and other improvements, and
the Planning Commission will consider an application for approval of the
Final Plat; or
b. If the applicant has elected to post a performance bond for onsite
improvements, it is to ensure the actual construction and installation of such
improvements within a two-year period and according to other requirements
to be specified in each case by the Town. In addition, the subdivider will
sign a certificate of agreement to ensure the construction and installation of
all improvements within a two-year period. Failure to comply with any or all
of the specified requirements, or failure to construct or install the specified
improvements within the two-year period, will result in the forfeiture of the
posted bond, unless an extension request for a period not greater than two
years is granted by the Town.
Page 35 of 49
c. A Final Plat may be presented to the Planning Commission for approval prior
to improvements being completed or bonded subject to the following: i<'l) A Developer's Agreement shall be executed and recorded at the time
of final plat approval. This Agreement is to be written in a manner
prescribed below and is subject to the review and approval of the
Town Attorney and the Town Manager prior to final signature. The
Agreement shall contain the following:
(a) Identify parties involved.
(b) Establish ownership of land.
( c) Outline development intention.
( d) Specify development terms including following:
(!) Identify land and plans.
(2) Developer agrees to construct infrastructure.
(3) Improvements will be in accordance with approved
plan (attachment).
( 4) Developer agrees to pay all fees/charges.
(5) Specify bond terms.
(6) Developer agrees to execute all conveyance
documents at no cost to Town.
(7) Town will assume ownership and operations of public
use areas under specific conditions.
(8) Address hydrant installation.
(9) Agree that no use/occupancy permits will be issued
until infrastructure improvements completed.
(10) Developer will repair existing streets/roads damaged
during construction.
(11) Developer will complete all improvements within two
Page 36 of 49
years.
(a) Specify bond terms.
(b) Conveyance will be free of charges.
(12) Developer will maintain open/recreation spaces until
a maintenance agreement is reached.
(13) Developer will maintain streets until a maintenance
·agreement is reached.
(14) Special provisions (such as tree removal, playground,
etc.)
(15) Developer acknowledges and agrees that the Town
can specify and impose restrictions.
(16) Developer agrees that the Agreement is binding on
them, heirs, successors, and assigns.
d. Construction of the public improvements under this Agreement shall not
cease for a period of more than one year at a time.
e. No sale or contract of sale of any or all lots shown herein shall be made until
necessary improvements have been:
(1) Satisfactorily completed under a Developer's Agreement; or,
(2) Satisfactorily guaranteed by a Developer's Agreement, supported by
a surety bond, certified check, cash, or irrevocable letter of credit or
other security as approved by the Town.
(3) No building permit may be issued for any construction in this
development until these requirements have been complied with.
f. Failure to comply with the time limits and requirements stated herein shall
render the recorded plat null and void.
g. A performance bond shall be posted as a condition of granting appropriate
permits for all off-site improvements necessary for the completion of the
subject project, or portion of that project. The bond for off-site
Page 37 of 49
SECTIONS
improvements must be also completed within the specified two-year period,
unless an extension is granted. Ifthere is a performance bond posted with a
state agency for the off-site work, a copy of that bond agreement will address
this requirement. The following procedures and standards shall apply when
a bond to the County Commissioners is required for subdivision
improvements:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A written request for a determination of the amount of bonding
required shall be filed with the Town Manager, if the bond is to be
reduced from the amount shown as the Improvement Plan bond
amount. An explanation for any reduction or change inboncl phasing
is required, and must be found acceptable by the Town.
Upon the determination of the necessary amount of bonding, the bond
must be posted in a form satisfactory to the Mayor and Town
Council.
The bond will be approved by the Mayor and Town Council ifthe
bond is secured through a bonding company, is in the proper form,
and is accompanied by the required power of attorney and certificate
from the Insurance commissioner that the surety is licensed to do
business in Maryland as an insurer.
If any other type of bonding arrangement is desired, a written request
must be made to the Town. The written request should be
accompanied by a financial statement and any other information
which might be helpful in determining whether or not to accept the
bonding arrangement.
After consideration of the request for bonding, the applicant will be
notified of the Town's decision. If the bonding is approved, the Town
will prepare the necessary documents which will be submitted to the
applicant for execution.
Upon receipt, the executed document will be refell'ed to the Town for
review and final approval. If the bond is approved it will be returned
to the Plalllling Commission to show that the bond has been accepted.
A copy of the approved bond will be forwarded to the applicant.
FINAL PLAT
A. General Information
Page 38 of 49
I. If the subdivider proceeds with the installation of required improvements, then, upon
receipt of a report from each of the appropriate officials that such improvements have
been completed in accordance with these Regulations and the improvements plans,
the Planning Commission shall recommend to the Town Board of Commissioners
that they accept the roads and other improvements, and the Planning commission
shall consider an application for approval of the final plat.
2. If the subdivider follows that alternative procedure of posting bond as provided
above, and installing the improvements later, then the Planning Commission shall
receive and consider the final plat before completion of the improvements.
3. In the case of a Planned Development, a Detailed Planning Application shall be
required, as detailed in the Town oflndian Head Zoning Ordinance, in lieu of the
final plat.
4. A final plat may include all of the property covered by the preliminary plat, or may
be limited to any portion thereof that is intended to be developed as a unit.
Additional final plats may be submitted later, covering additional units of the
property, provided the preliminary plat is still valid or its approval has been
extended. Every final plat shall be substantially in accordance with the approved
preliminary plat, including such changes or additions as may have been required by
the Planning Commission as a condition to its approval, and it shall conform in every
respect with the requirements specified herein.
5. The subdivider shall file with the Planning Commission at least two weeks prior to
a regularly schedule meeting, a final plat drawn with ink on linen or comparable
material acceptable to the County Clerk, together with an application in writing for
the approval thereof.
6. Upon receipt by the Planning Commission of reports from the responsible officials
as to the satisfactory installation of required improvements or the posting of bond
therefor, then the Planning commission shall approve said final plat within 30 days,
and shall endorse the fact of such approval on each of the several prints by the
signature of its Chairman or his designee, in the space to be provided therefor. No
final plat shall be approved however, unless it is found by the Planning Commission
to conform with the preliminary plat as approved and to be in conformity otherwise
with the requirements of these Regulations. Upon approval, the subdivider, at his
expense, shall submit the plat in the following form and quantities: (a) three print
copies on linen or on comparable material acceptable to the County Clerk, and (b)
paper print copies in number as specified by the Town.
The Planning Commission shall then file three prints for record with the Town of
Indian Head and shall distribute other prints to official agencies as may be needed.
Page 39 of 49
One signed paper copy shall be returned to the subdivider. Approval of the final plat
by the Planning Commission shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an
acceptance of the dedication of any street or other proposed public way or space
shown on said plat, but the showing of such ways or spaces shall be deemed to be an
offer of dedication which may be accepted through any subsequent appropriate act.
Fees to partially cover the cost of considering, examining, and checking the several
plats and plans, required herein and for recording the final plat, shall be collected by
the Planning Commission at the time of filing such plats, in accordance with the
schedule of charges adopted by the Town Council.
Approval of the plat may be revoked by resolution of the Commission at any time
prior to the approval of the final plat, upon a finding by the Commission that the plat
does not comply with these Regulations, any other applicable laws or regulations, or
with the Masters Plan or any portion thereof, as it may be developed or amended.
Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. It shall
be a guide to the preparation of the final plat.
B. Development Plan.
The final plat of the subdivision shall comply with the following requirements and contain
the following information:
I. General style and form.
a. It shall be legibly and accurately drawn on tracing linen or on comparable
material acceptable to the County Clerk in sheets 18 or 24 in size, and at a
scale of one inch to 50 feet or one inch to I 00 feet, depending upon the size
and nature of the subdivision; however, if the final plat shows only one lot or
parcel of land, it shall not be necessary for the plat to be drawn on tracing
linen, and if the one lot or parcel of land so shown contains a large areas, the
Planning Commission may exempt the plat from the requirement that its
scale be no greater than one inch to I 00 feet.
b. Location by town election district, county and state.
c. Names and addresses of the owners of record, the subdivider, lien holders, if
any, and the engineer or surveyor. All signatures appearing on the plat shall
be accompanied by printed names, and corporate seals where applicable.
Page 40 of 49
d. Scale, date and north point.
e. A vicinity or location map.
2. Graphic information.
a. Exact boundaries of the area included within the subdivision with dimensions
to hundredths of a foot and bearings to seconds. These boundaries shall be
determined by an accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and
closed with an error of closure of not to exceed one in I 0,000.
b. Bearings and distances to the nearest recorded property owners or other
monuments which shall be located or accurately described on the plat.
c. The accurate locations and descriptions of all permanent monuments.
d. Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions or the locations and
ownerships of adjoining unsubdivided property.
e. Exact location, width, and name of each existing or recorded road or street
adjoining or intersecting the boundaries of the tract.
f. The exact location and width of every road, street, alley easement, or other
public or private way within the tract, with the length and bearing of every
tangent, lengths of arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature, and any
other necessary engineering data; with the names of such ways, and the
purposes of easements or other ways.
g. Accurate location of every lot line with its dimension to hundredths of a foot
and bearing to seconds, and accurate area computations of each lot.
h. Building setback lines drawn to scale and dimensioned to street lines.
i. Blocks lettered in alphabetical order, and lots numbered in numerical order
within each block.
j. Accurate outlines of any areas dedicated or reserved for public use, or for any
other purpose except sale, with the purpose indicated.
k. Accurate location of any municipal or district line traversing or closely
related to the tract.
I. Existing and relocated courses of any water courses traversing the tract, with
Page41of49
the right-of-way or easement lines provided therefor.
m. Location of Chesapeake Bay Critical Area boundary and delineation of
Critical Area buffer for all sites located in the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area.
C. Certificates.
1. Owner's certificate, signed, acknowledging ownership of the property and agreeing
to the subdividing thereof as shown on the plat, signed by the owner or owners and
any and all lien holders; also offering for dedication all streets and other ways and
places intended for public use.
2. Certificate of the engineer or surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey
made by him, that it is accurate to the best of his knowledge, that all monuments
indicated thereon actually exist and their location and descriptions are correctly
shown, and that all requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and of other
applicable laws have been fully complied with.
3. A brief summary of the deed restrictions applying to the plat.
4. Approval block for Planning Commission's use.
SECTION 9 EXCEPTIONS, PENALTIES, AND APPEALS
A Exceptions
1. The general principles and standards of subdivision design stipulated herein may be
varied by the Planning Commission; (a) in the case of a Planned Development to be
developed in accordance with the Town Comprehensive Plan, safeguarded by
appropriate restriction, which complies with the Town Zoning Ordinance, and which,
in the judgment of the Planning Commission makes adequate provision for all
essential community requirements, or (b) in the case of unusual physical conditions -
provided, however, that no modifications shall be granted which would conflict with
the Comprehensive Plan, or with the intent and purpose of these Regulations.
2. In the case of a subdivision of five or fewer lots, the Planning Commission may
exempt the subdivider from those requirements of the regulations pertaining to the
contents of the preliminary plat, and from other provisions of these Regulations
where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardship may result from
strict compliance, especially in those cases where the subdividing or the land is for
division among members of the family of the subdivider.
Page42 of 49
B. Penalties
I. Any person, corporation, association, partnership, or the agent of any such person,
who sells or agrees to sell, or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or exhibition
of or by other use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by
the Indian Head Planning Commission and recorded in the Land Records as required
by these Regulations, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of$100.00 for each lot or parcel
so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold, and the description of such
lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document
used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from
such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. The Town Council may enjoin
such transferor sale or agreement of sale by action for injunction brought in any court
of equity jurisdiction, or may recover said penalty by civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
2. Any person, corporation, association, partnership, or the agent of any such person,
who shall violate a provision of this Ordinance, or shall fail to comply with any
requirements hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than $100.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding I 0 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
C. Appeals
1. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission denying approval
of a final plat, may, within 30 days thereof, note in writing an appeal from said
decision to the Town Council. Such appeals shall be promptly heard and after
hearing, the Town Council, by majority vote, shall have the power to either affirm
the decision of the Planning commission or remand the plat with its views and
comments to the Commission for its final action within 30 days.
SECTION 10 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used
herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section. Unless the context
clearly indicates to the contrary, words use in the present tense include the future tense;
words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these
regulations."
In administering these regulations a "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an
incorporated association of persons such as a clnb; "shall" is always mandatory, a "building"
includes a "structure"; a "building" or "structure" means any part thereof; "used" or
"occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the works
"intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
Page 43 of 49
A. For the purpose of these Regulations, the following additional terms are defined as follows:
1. Acceptable Outfall - That point as determined by the Town where stonnwater can be
released to a channel without causing scouring, erosion or resulting sedimentation
to the receiving channel or it floodplain. Where necessary, the outlet shall include
structural and vegetative measures to assure nonerosive velocities.
2. Alley - A way which afford generally a secondary means of vehicular access to
abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation
3. Atterial Street -A route for which the major function is movement oflarge volumes
of vehicular through traffic.
4. ASTM - The American Society for Testing and Materials.
5. Bedrock-The solid, undisturbed rock in place either at the ground surface of beneath
surface soil deposits.
6. Bench Terrace -A relatively flat area (i.e., less than two percent grade) constructed
on sloping land to planned dimensions and grades. "Bench terraces" are applied
along the contour with the length and width controlled by the natural contour and the
required erosion limitations.
7. Block -A tract ofland bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public
parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines
of the Town.
8. Bond - Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral,
property, or instrument of credit in an amount an form satisfactory to the Mayor and
Town Council. All bonds shall be approved by the Mayor and Town Council
wherever a bond is required by these regulations.
9. Building - A structure having one or more stories and a roof, which is used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
10. Building Line - A line within a lot, so designated on a plat of subdivision between
which line and the street line of any abutting street no building or structure may be
erected.
11. Certification -A signed written statement that specific constructions, inspections or
tests, where required, have been performed and that such comply with the applicable
requirements.
Page44 of49
12. Collector Street -A street which is intended to collect traffic from the local streets
within a neighborhood or a portion thereof and to distribute such traffic to major
thoroughfares, in addition to providing access to properties abutting thereon.
13. Compaction - Densification of a soil or rock fill by mechanical or other acceptable
procedures.
14. Comprehensive Plan - the Master Plan adopted by the Town oflndian Head.
15. Critical Area - All lands and waters within or adjacent to the Town oflndian Head
as defined in Section 8-1807 of the Natural Resources Article, Annotated Code of
Maryland. They include:
(A) all waters of and lands under the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries to the
head of tide as indicated on the State wetlands maps and all State and private
wetlands designated under Title 16 of the Environment Article, Annotated
Code of Maryland;
(B) all land and water areas within 1,000 feet beyond the landward boundaries of
State or private wetlands and the heads of tides designated under Title 16 of
the Environment Article, A11t1otated Code of Maryland; and
(C) modification to these areas through inclusions or exclusions proposed by the
Town of Indian Head and approved by the Commission as specified in
Section 8-1807 of the Natural Resources Article, A11t1otated Code of
Maryland.
16. Crosswalkway - A public way intended for pedestrian use and excluding motor
vehicles, which cuts across a block in order to furnish improved access to adjacent
streets or properties.
17. Cul-de-Sac -A minor street with one end open for vehicular traffic and with the other
end permanently terminated by a turnaround or backaround for vehicles.
18 Cut/Excavation - See "Excavation/Cut".
19. Developer - A person, partnership, corporation, firm or governmental agency
undertaking or proposing the construction of a building, a project consisting of
interrelated buildings or other construction, and who is primarily financially
responsible for the proposal.
20. Diversion -A channel, ditch or ridge constructed across a slope so as to intercept and
Page45 of 49
divert surface runoff.
21. Drainageway/Watercourse - See "Watercourse/Drainageway".
22. Easement - A grant of the use of a parcel of land to the public, a corporation or a
person for one or more designated purposes without including title to the land.
23. Embankment - See "Fill/Embankment".
24. Engineer - See "Professional Engineer".
25. Erosion - The process by which the ground surface is worn away by the action of
wind or water.
26. Escrow - A deposit of cash with the Town in lieu of an amount required and still in
force on a performance or maintenance bond.
27. Excavation/Cut - Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced or relocated, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
28. Existing Grade - The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavating or filling.
29. Fill/Embankment - A deposit of soil, rock or other materials placed by man.
30. Finished Grade -The final grade or elevation of the ground surface conforming to the
proposed design.
31. Floodplain - that area which would be inundated by storm runoff or floodwater
equivalent to that which would occur with a flood of 50 year recurrent frequency
after total development of the watershed; said area being defined by an elevation plus
one foot, below which no development may take place.
32. Grading - Any stripping, excavating, filling, including hydraulic fill, stockpiling or
any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its excavated or filled
condition.
33. Grading Permit - A permit issued to authorize work to be performed.
34. Inspector - The person that is appointed by the Town as the Grading and Sediment
Control Inspector, building Inspector or Engineer.
35. Load-bearing Fill - Any facility, earthwork or fill placed in a controlled manner to
Page 46 of 49
support structural foundations or vehicular traffic, the instability of which would
constitute a public hazard or nuisance.
36. Lot - A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose of
building development, whether immediate or future.
37. Lot Frontage - The width of the lot measured horizontally along the front street line.
38. Lot, Double-Frontage - A lot extending through the block from one street to
another.
3 9. Lot Improvement - Any building, structure, or improvement on the land on which
they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property , or any part
of such betterment. Certain lot improvements shall be properly bonded as
provided in these regulations.
40. Major Thoroughfare - A street or highway so designated in the Major
Thoroughfare Plan of the Indian Head Comprehensive Plan.
41. Local Street - A street intended to serve and provide access exclusively to the
properties abutting thereon. Also called "secondary road".
42. Natural Ground Surface - The ground surface in its original state before grading,
stripping, excavation or filling.
43. Permittee - Any person to whom a permit is issued.
44. Person - Includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated
association, an agency or any other similar entity whatsoever.
45. Planning Commission -The Town oflndian Head Planning Commission.
46. Preliminary Plat - The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these
regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be
submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.
47. Professional Architect - A person who has been duly registered and licensed to
practice professional architecture and/or landscape architecture under
requirements of state law.
48. Professional Engineer -An engineer duly registered by the State of Maryland to
practice professional engineering.
Page 47 of 49
49. Regulated Grading - Any grading performed with the approval of and in
accordance with established criteria.
50. Right-of-Way -A strip ofland used or intended to be used as a street, sidewalk,
sanitary or storm sewer, drainageway or other use. "Right-of-Way", for land
plotting purposes, shall be separate and distinct from lots adjoining such right-ofway
and shall not be included in the dimensions or areas of such lots.
51. Sediment - Soils or other surface materials transported by wind or surface water
as a product of erosion.
52. Sidewalk - A passageway for pedestrians, excluding motor vehicles.
53. Site - That po1iion of any lot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots
or parcels ofland, where grading is performed or permitted.
54. Slope - The inclined exposed surface of a fill, excavation or natural contour.
55. Soil - All earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock, including but
not limited to the decomposed zone of bedrock which can be readily excavated by
mechanical equipment.
56. Steep Slope - A slope over 15 percent grade, which is characterized by increased
runoff, erosion and sediment hazards.
57. Stripping - Any activity which removed the vegetative surface cover, including
tree removal, clearing, grubbing and storage or removal of topsoil.
58. Structural Rock Fills - Constructed predominately of rock materials for the
purpose of supp01iing structures.
59. Subdivider - Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate or ttust or any other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or
proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined herein, and
including any agent.of the subdivider.
60. Subdivision - The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and, when
appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land
subdivided whether immediate or future, or transfer of ownership or of building
development.
a. Minor - The division of a single tract or parcel of land or part thereof into
four or less lots.
Page 48 of 49
61.
62.
63.
SECTION 11.
b. Major - The division of a tract or parcel ofland into five or more lots.
Town - The incorporated Town oflndian Head, Maryland.
Tributary Streams - Those perennial and intermittent streams in the Critical Area
which are so noted on the most recent U.S. Geological Survey 7-112 minute
quadrangle maps (scale I :24,000) or on more detailed maps or studies at the
discretion of the Town oflndian Head.
Watercourse and/or Drainageway - Any natural or artificial watercourse, including
but not limited to streams, rivers, creeks, ditches, channels, canals, conduits,
culverts, drains, waterways, gullies, ravines or washes, in which water flows in a
definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and including
any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or
floodwater.
INTERPRETATION AND SEVERABILITY
a. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
b. Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these regulations be declared
invalid by a co mt of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
regulations in its entirety or of any patt thereof other than that so declared to be invalid. The
Town Council oflndian Head, Maryland, hereby declares that it would have adopted this
ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
invalid.
Page49 of49