Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-11]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The Charter, the ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Mount
Airy, of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Council of the
Town of Mount Airy, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of the Charter
and Chapters 1 through 112, together with an Appendix, and which are in
effect on November 15, 2003, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the “Code of the Town of Mount Airy,” hereinafter known and
referred to as the “Code.”
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance of the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after November 15, 2003.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form, serially numbered No. 1, has been
filed in the office of the Clerk and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk
of the Town of Mount Airy by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the Town,
to be made available to persons desiring to examine same during all times
while the Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Council
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the “Code of the Town of Mount Airy,
Maryland” shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
1. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Adoption of Code, adopted
12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 144.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Publication and filing.
The Clerk of the Town of Mount Airy, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. Further, the Code shall be made
available on-line at www.generalcode.com. The enactment and publication
of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code
for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the
Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in the Clerk's office for the use of the public. All changes
in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date
of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code,
shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such
changes or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code books
by either electronic updates to the on-line code or printed supplements to
the hardcopy version to be incorporated therein upon printing and issuance.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Council,
which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of
Mount Airy to be misrepresented thereby. Any violation of this section shall
be punishable as a misdemeanor, the penalty for which shall be a fine not
to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and repeal of ordinances provided for in §§ 1-12
of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to November 15, 2003.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provisions or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
E.
Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, high way, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
F.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Town's indebtedness.
G.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for revision as part of the Code,
certain grammatical changes and other nonsubstantive minor changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. In addition, chapter and section
number references to the ordinances may have been renumbered for
consistency. It is the intention of the Council that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-15. Deposit of copies with state agencies.
Pursuant to § 9A of Art. 23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland, a copy
of the Code of the Town of Mount Airy containing the Charter shall be
deposited with the Maryland Department of Legislative Reference.
§ 1-16. Emergency measure.
Upon the affirmative vote of four members of the Council, the provisions
of § C2-13B of the Charter are suspended and this measure is declared to
be an emergency measure effective upon approval of the Mayor or passage
over his veto.
The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J.
Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries
or compensation of officers and employees, establishing workdays and
working hours of certain employees and providing for holidays and
vacations for employees and keeping of employment records.
K.
All legislation pertaining to vehicles and traffic and all amendments
thereto.
L.
M. All ordinances pertaining to zoning or Zoning Map changes.
§ 1-13 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 1-16
1:6
ARTICLE II
Commissions
[Adopted 8-14-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-82]
§ 1-17. Appointment to Town commissions; resignation; alternate
members.
§ 1-18. Rules of procedure for Town commissions.
Commission members are appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the Council for a specific term, or until their successors are appointed.
Members are eligible for reappointment or appointment to another
commission. Members may resign before their term expires.
A.
Members missing four meetings in a row without excuse shall be
considered to have resigned; members missing six meetings within a
one-year period without excuse shall be considered to have resigned.
Except for commissions meeting irregularly or as needed, such as the
Elections, Board of Appeals and the Ethics Commission, if a commission
does not meet for six consecutive months, all members shall be
considered to have resigned, but may request or be considered for
reappointment.
B.
An alternate member to each commission may be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the Council, who may serve in the absence
of a regular member of the commission.
C.
Commission agendas should be delivered to representatives of the news
media who regularly report on commissions and posted at least one
week prior to the meeting, or as soon as practical, with actions taken
and minutes posted after approval.
A.
Meetings shall be operated in a manner that respects the public as well
as commission members, and allows the commission to focus on agenda
tasks. Meetings shall be operated in a manner that allows citizen input
and ensures full discussion of all issues, with reference to Robert's
Rules of Order for guidance. Citizens should be permitted to speak on
agenda items after commission consideration but should not interrupt
commission member consideration or discussion unless requested and
permitted. Citizens should also be afforded the opportunity to address
the commission during the meeting on items not on the agenda.
B.
Commissions should report annually on progress to the Mayor and
Town Council, on or before the June Council meeting unless otherwise
provided in the enabling ordinance.
C.
2. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Ratification of Changes to the Charter, adopted 12-2-1985 by
Res. No. 85-8, was repealed 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-1.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:7
The Mayor or Town Council may request commissions to study, make
recommendations or offer advice on issues related to their duties
established by ordinance.
D.
The Town Council may by resolution adopt general rules providing
guidelines for the operation of Town commissions.
E.
§ 1-18 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 1-18
1:8
ARTICLE III
Access to Public Records
[Adopted 11-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-10]
§ 1-19. Requests to inspect or obtain copies of records. [Amended
12-5-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-6]
For the purposes of responding to requests for public records, the Town
Clerk shall be the Town’s Public Information Officer. Anyone requesting to
inspect or obtain copies of records maintained by the Town of Mount Airy
is required to make the request upon the Town Clerk for records on a form
to be updated from time to time and made available by the Town Clerk
at Town Hall. The form shall require that the person making the request
identify him or herself or organization, the address to where the documents
to be produced in response may be mailed, delivered or otherwise made
available or, if the request is made for production by means of an electronic
medium, the format and means of production and/or any electronic mailing
address to which the documents are to be sent, and shall provide notice
of the types and manner of calculating fees as set forth in § 1-23 below
for which the person making the request shall be responsible to pay as a
condition precedent to receipt of the documents requested. No Town official
or employee shall make any inquiry as to the reason or purpose for such a
request. A request should be honored when made whenever practicable. In
order not to disrupt Town business unduly, such requests may be held for a
period not to exceed 30 days during which time the Town Clerk shall either
provide the record involved or deny the request under the provisions of §
10-614 of the State Government Article of the Maryland Code. In the event
that a request cannot be honored when made, the Town Clerk is to proceed
as promptly as reasonable to confer with the applicant as to a convenient
time to inspect or receive a copy of such records.
§ 1-20. Inspection or acquisition of minutes.
Requests to inspect or obtain minutes of Council meetings or of any board
or commission which have been approved and accepted may be made
orally and shall be honored when made whenever practicable unless the
pertinent minute book is temporarily unavailable. Persons requesting to
inspect minutes may be required to sign an acknowledgment as to the fact
of inspecting.
§ 1-21. Inspection or acquisition of ordinances.
Requests to inspect or obtain copies of ordinances may be made orally and
shall be honored when made whenever practicable.
§ 1-22. Listening to tape recordings of meetings.
Meetings of the Town Council and various boards and commissions are tape
recorded. Persons desiring to listen to a tape must do so at the Town Hall
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-22
1:9
on Town equipment after scheduling a mutually convenient time for such a
purpose.
§ 1-23. Preparation of copies; fees. [Amended 12-5-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-6]
Generally. No charge will be made for the first two hours required to search
for and prepare a copy of a record for inspection. Fees for photocopying
or scanning for production by electronic medium are $0.25 per page which
shall be paid by the applicant as a condition precedent to production of the
documents requested. The applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing
the Town at cost for any CD-ROM, flash drive, jump drive or any other mass
storage device if production of documents is requested by electronic means.
For time spent by Town staff, to include the Town Clerk, in excess of two
hours, the applicant shall pay a sum for such excess time based upon the
hourly wage rate of the lowest salaried office employee and shall in addition
reimburse the Town the actual amounts charged to the Town, if any, by
the Town Attorney in responding to the document request, to include the
time taken to redact from documents to be produced information exempt
from production pursuant to the State Government Article of the Maryland
Code, § 10-611 et seq. If the Town Clerk believes that more than two
hours will be required to search for and prepare the requested record, then
the Town Clerk shall promptly advise the applicant of that fact with an
estimate of anticipated costs which shall require signature by the applicant
agreeing to payment to the Town of the estimated charges or the actual
charges associated with responding to the request, whichever shall be
less, as a condition precedent to receipt of the documents requested. The
applicant may withdraw the request without charge before signing the
estimate. Upon execution of the estimate by the applicant, the Town Clerk
shall commence obtaining and/or copying the documents to be produced.
Charges are to be paid in full as a condition precedent to receipt of the
documents requested. An applicant who withdraws his or her request after
signing the estimate required by this section shall be responsible for
payment of the fees authorized to be charged as set forth herein actually
incurred by the Town as of the Town’s receipt of the withdrawal or as
reflected in the estimate signed by the applicant, whichever shall be less,
even if the request is withdrawn by the applicant after signing the estimate.
An applicant making request for production shall be responsible for
payment of the charges authorized by this section associated with
responding to a prior request by the applicant or some other applicant
seeking production of the same documents if the Town has not been
compensated for the charges associated with such previous request. An
applicant may request a waiver of fees as provided for in state law. If plats
or other records larger than the Town’s copying equipment are requested,
the applicant may inspect the same, but will have to make satisfactory
arrangements for commercial reproduction for paper copies.
§ 1-24. Denials of requests.
§ 1-22 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 1-24
1:10
A temporary denial may be issued if the custodian of the record believes
that inspection would cause substantial injury to the public interest. In
that event, the Town will file a petition in court within 10 days in order
to resolve the matter.
A.
By state law, certain records may not be disclosed and access to other
records may be denied. In the event a Town employee has any question
as to the propriety of any requested disclosure, the matter should be
promptly reported to the Mayor for a decision or, in the event of his
absence, to the office of the Town Attorney. Every effort will be made
to decide the question presented by the close of the next succeeding
business day.
B.
§ 1-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-24
1:11

ARTICLE IV
Fees
[Adopted 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
§ 1-25. Development fees.
The following assessments and fees shall be payable to the Town for
development of real property:
Capital improvement assessments as authorized in § 47-8 of the Code:
(1) Residential (new): $2,000 per unit.
Commercial/Industrial (new): $2,500 or $0.35 per square foot,
whichever is greater.
(2)
Conversion of existing building to commercial or industrial use:
$0.25 per square foot.
(3)
A.
Inspection, testing and review fees as authorized in § 47-9 of the Code:
Final site plan inspection (prior to issuance of use and occupancy
permit): residential, $100; commercial/industrial, $100.
(1)
Sidewalks, curbs and gutters and driveways (inspection on each as
being constructed): residential, $15 each; commercial/industrial,
$15 each.
(2)
Water and sewer main installation and testing: residential, $50;
commercial/industrial, $50.
(3)
Review of all plans by Town Engineer: residential, $30 per hour;
commercial/industrial, $30 per hour.
(4)
B.
Inspection and acceptance fees as authorized in § 98-28A of the Code.
The costs of inspection shall be borne by the developer and shall be
part of the public works agreement payable at the rate of 8% of the
estimated cost of the improvements.
C.
Sewer hookup fees as authorized by § 91-32 of the Code. The
connection charge shall be $1,700, plus the sum of $2,500 to be
allocated to sewer expansion and replacement funds for a total of
$4,200.
D.
Water connection charges as authorized by § 109-20 of the Code. The
connection charge shall be $1,700 per equivalent dwelling unit.
E.
Well exploration and development fee as authorized by § 109-25.1 of
the Code. The well exploration and development fee shall be $1,500 per
equivalent dwelling unit.
F.
Water benefit charge as authorized by § 109-26 of the Code. The water
development charge shall be $3,000 per connection, and the additional
G.
§ 1-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-25
1:13
water charge for the Mount Airy Volunteer Fire Company shall be
$1,500.
Additional charge for improvements, repairs and acquisitions as
authorized by § 109-26.1 of the Code. The additional water charge for
construction, reconstruction, improvements and repairs of streets and
roads shall be $2,000.
H.
Additional charge for capital improvements as authorized by § 109-26.2
of the Code. The additional water charge for construction,
reconstruction, improvements and repairs of capital projects shall be
$3,000.
I.
Additional charge for park improvements as authorized by § 109-26.3 of
the Code. The additional water charge for construction, reconstruction,
improvements and repairs of parks shall be $1,500.
J.
§ 1-25 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 1-25
1:14
Chapter 3
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
§ 3-1. Section 3 plan.
The Town agrees to implement the following specific affirmative action
steps directed at increasing the utilization of business concerns located
within the Section 3 covered area or owned by Section 3 area residents:
Chapter 4
BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 13.
To identify eligible business concerns for community development block
grant-assisted contracts through the Chamber of Commerce, the Urban
League, local advertising media, including public signage, project area
committees, citizen advisory boards, lists available through the local
Housing and Urban Development program official; regional planning
agencies and all other appropriate referral sources.
A.
To maintain a list of eligible business concerns for utilization in
community development block grant-funded procurements, to ensure
that all appropriate project area business concerns are notified of
pending contractual opportunities and to make available this list for
general Town procurement needs.
B.
To require all bidders on contracts to submit a written Section 3 plan,
including utilization goals and the specific steps planned to accomplish
these goals.
C.
To ensure that contracts which are typically let on a negotiated rather
than a bid basis in areas other than Section 3 covered project areas are
also let on a negotiated basis, whenever feasible, when let in a Section
3 covered project area.
D.
To maintain records, including copies of correspondence, memoranda,
etc., which document that all of the above affirmative action steps have
been taken.
E.
To appoint the Mayor as the executive official of the Town as Equal
Opportunity Officer to coordinate the implementation of this Section 3
plan.
F.
§ 1-25 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 4-1
3:15
§ 4-1. Establishment; terms; appointments; composition.
There is hereby created a Beautification Commission of the Town of Mount
Airy which shall consist of seven members, at least five of whom shall be
residents of the Town. All members of the Commission shall be appointed
for terms of three years commencing from July 1 of the year of appointment
or until their successors are appointed; provided, however, that with respect
to the members of the Commission first appointed, three shall be designated
to serve for the initial terms of three years, two shall be designated to serve
for the initial terms of two years, and two shall be designated to serve for
the initial terms of one year, or until their successors are appointed. All
appointments, including those required by any vacancies, shall be made by
the Mayor with the approval of the Council. All members of the Commission
shall serve without compensation except that they may be reimbursed for
actual expenses incurred to the extent authorized in the budget.
§ 4-2. Officers; rules and regulations; meeting place.
The Commission shall select from among its members a Chairman to serve
until the succeeding June 30 and such additional officers as it may deem
advisable. The Commission is empowered to adopt all necessary rules and
regulations for the conduct of its business and shall hold such meetings
as may from time to time be deemed necessary. The Commission's regular
place of business shall be in the Town Hall of the Town of Mount Airy,
but both regular and special meetings of the Commission may be held
elsewhere at the discretion of the Commission.
§ 4-3. Powers and duties.
§ 4-4. Annual report.
The Commission shall submit to the Council of the Town of Mount Airy
an annual report on or before July 1 of each and every year summarizing
its activities, together with any recommendations relating generally to the
beautification and improvement of Town property for the ensuing year.
§ 4-5. Expenditures.
No expenditures may be made by the Commission except to the extent
authorized in the annual budget of the Town or as may otherwise be lawfully
approved in advance by the Council of the Town of Mount Airy.
The Commission shall study, investigate and make recommendations
to the Council of the Town from time to time concerning appropriate
means and methods of beautifying and improving Town property,
working in cooperation with the Board of Recreation and Parks.
A.
The Commission shall undertake such other studies, programs and
recommendations as may be requested from time to time upon motion
of the Town Council.
B.
§ 4-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 4-5
4:16
Chapter 5
CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 13.
§ 5-1. Establishment; membership; terms.
There is hereby established the Mount Airy Community Public Cable
Television Commission. The Commission shall consist of five members to be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The
original appointment shall be made in such manner that the term of one
member shall expire on July 1, 1984, the term of another is to expire on
July 1, 1985, the term of another is to expire on July 1, 1986, the term of
another is to expire on July 1, 1987, and the term of the remaining member
is to expire on July 1, 1988. Their successors shall be appointed for terms
of five years from the date of expiration of their respective terms of office,
except that any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the
unexpired term and any member of the Commission shall be eligible for
reappointment.
§ 5-2. Officers; quorum; compensation.
The Mayor shall name one member, so appointed, as Chairman of the
Commission and shall name from time to time all successor Chairmen of
the Commission as vacancies in that office occur. Three members of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum. The members of the Commission
shall not be entitled to compensation for their services but may be
reimbursed for actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of
their duties, provided that funds for such reimbursement shall have been
authorized in the budget of the Town. The Mayor and President of the
Council shall serve as nonvoting ex officio members of the Commission,
shall be entitled to be present at all Commission meetings and to participate
in its deliberations.
§ 5-3. Powers and duties.
The Commission is created for the purpose of studying the feasibility
of granting cable television franchise or franchises to serve the
community of the Town of Mount Airy, to prepare and submit to the
Council of the Town of Mount Airy for its approval or disapproval
recommendations for the adoption of regulations and amendments
thereto as hereafter set forth, to prepare and submit to the Council of
the Town of Mount Airy for its approval or disapproval procedures for
the oversight of the operation of any community cable television system
and to perform such studies and make such reports to the Council as it
A.
§ 4-5 CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION § 5-3
5:17
may deem expedient, or as the Council may request, relating generally
to the subject of cable television systems.
The Commission is hereby granted and shall have and may exercise all
powers necessary or convenient for carrying out the aforesaid general
purposes, including but without limiting the generality of the
aforegoing, the following rights and powers:
To prepare regulations governing the award by the Town of a
cable television franchise or franchises, together with regulations
covering the operation and oversight of the operation of any such
franchise or franchises.
(1)
Following approval and adoption of such regulations as hereafter
set forth, to solicit bids for the award of a cable television franchise
or franchises.
(2)
To recommend, following receipt of such bids, to the Council the
award of such a franchise or franchises based upon the following
factors as related to bidders: their relative financial strength,
technical competence, accessibility to management, time provided
for installation, proposals as to the duration of the length of the
franchise, renegotiations proposals, proposed rates and charges,
installation methods, general qualifications to render proper and
efficient cable television service to viewers and subscribers within
the Town, proposals for methods of resolving subscriber complaints
and such other factors as the Commission may consider desirable
and in the public interest. Such recommendations shall be advisory
only and no award of a franchise shall be made except by resolution
of the Council.
(3)
Subject to budget authorization and with the approval of the Mayor,
to contract for such technical advice, assistance and services as the
Commission may require.
(4)
To perform such other duties as may be requested of it from time
to time by resolution of the Council or by written request of the
Mayor.
(5)
B.
Before any regulations shall be submitted by the Commission to the
Council for adoption, the Commission shall hold a public hearing
thereon and notice of the time and the place of such public hearing
shall be published one or more times as the Commission deems best in a
newspaper of general circulation with the Town of Mount Airy, together
with a summary of the proposed regulations. Thereafter, such proposed
regulations shall be submitted to the Council of the Town of Mount Airy
which may by ordinance adopt the same, subject to such changes and
amendments therein as the Council may deem appropriate. After the
adoption of such amendments by the Council of the Town of Mount Airy,
all further amendments or supplements to the same shall be made in
accordance with the same procedure herein specified for the original
C.
§ 5-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 5-3
5:18
Chapter 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 13.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 25.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 8-1. Creation; membership; terms; appointments; compensation.
This is hereby created the Economic Development Commission of the Town
of Mount Airy, which shall consist of no fewer than five and no more
than nine members. All members of the Commission shall be appointed
for terms of four years commencing from the first day of July of the year
of appointment or until their successors are appointed; provided, however,
that with respect to the members of the Commission first appointed, three
shall be designated to serve for initial terms of four years, three shall be
designated to serve for initial terms of three years, and three shall be
designated to serve for initial terms of two years.
§ 8-2. Chairman; adoption of rules; place of business.
The Economic Development Commission, on or before the first day of July
in each and every year, shall select from among its members a Chair to
serve until the succeeding June 30 and such additional officers as it may
deem advisable. The Commission is empowered to adopt all necessary rules
and regulations for the conduct of its business and shall hold such meetings
as may from time to time be deemed necessary. The Commission's regular
place of business shall be in the Town Hall of the Town of Mount Airy,
but both regular and special meetings of the Commission may be held
elsewhere at the discretion of the Commission.
adoption of such regulations, except a public hearing thereon shall not
be required.
The Economic Development Commission shall be advised by a liaison
who shall be a member of the Town Council, and may be advised by
representatives from the Mount Airy Planning and Zoning Commission
and any other Town commissions, as may be appropriate.
A.
The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, shall make all
appointments, including those required by any vacancies. It is not
required that members be residents of the Town, but shall have either
residency, some business or economic interest, or both in the Town and/
or nearby region. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, except that they may be reimbursed for actual expenses
to the extent authorized in the budget.
B.
§ 5-3 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 8-3
8:19
§ 8-3. Powers and duties.
§ 8-4. Annual report.
The Commission shall submit to the Council of the Town of Mount Airy
an annual report on or before July 1 of each and every year summarizing
its activities, together with any recommendations relating generally to
economic development plans for the ensuing year.
§ 8-5. Expenditures.
No expenditures may be made by the Economic Development Commission
except to the extent authorized in the annual budget of the Town or was
may otherwise be lawfully approved in advance by the Council of the Town
of Mount Airy.
The Economic Development Commission shall study, investigate and
make recommendations to the Town Council from time to time
concerning future and present economic development, marketing of the
Town to allow it to be positioned to welcome commercial and industrial
development which is compatible with the residential communities, and
the desirability of infrastructure improvements, grants opportunities,
public-private partnerships and other means to create economic and
commercial opportunities within the Town.
A.
The Economic Development Commission shall guide and advise the
Mayor and Council seeking methods to provide services for a growing,
modern population; to reduce commuting to promote the ability to
work closer to home; and to promote creation of community allowing
the provisions of services and job creation which are compatible with
residential communities.
B.
The Economic Development Commission shall promote building of
partnerships to encourage commerce and economic development,
which may be public/private, regional, intergovernmental and/or
private.
C.
The Economic Development Commission shall advise the Mayor and
Council on creative methods to promote and sustain economic
development, including through zoning, land use, planning, master
planning and public property development.
D.
The Economic Development Commission shall advise the Mayor and
Council, the Mount Airy Planning and Zoning Commission, and other
Town commissions, as may be appropriate, on coordination of efforts
with governmental and other entities, including Chamber of Commerce
chapters, within the state, counties, the region and other
municipalities.
E.
The Economic Development Commission shall undertake such other
studies, programs, projects and recommendations as may be
appropriate or requested from time to time by the Town Council.
F.
§ 8-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 8-5
8:20
Chapter 10
ELECTIONS
§ 8-5 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 8-5
8:21

ARTICLE I
Ballot Preparation; Poll Watchers
[Adopted 3-10-1980 by Ord. No. 114; amended in its entirety
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
§ 10-1. Printing of ballots; records.
Promptly following the citizens' meeting for nominations for elective office,
the Board of Supervisors of Elections shall cause to be prepared a means
for citizens' voting either by ballot or electronic means. If paper ballots are
used, the number of ballots printed shall not be less than the total number
of registered voters, which ballots shall list the names of the nominees in
alphabetical order, together with a space for voters to vote for candidates
not listed thereon. All said ballots shall be delivered to the Town Clerk and
accounted for by him or her until the opening of the polls on the election
day, at which time they shall be delivered to the Board of Supervisors of
Elections. If an electronic voting device is used, the names of the nominees
shall be listed in alphabetical order, with a means for the voters to vote
for candidates not listed thereon. The Board shall cause to be prepared the
total number of ballots and/or electronic ballots for each election and shall
preserve said record for at least six months after the election for which it
was prepared. All surplus ballots shall be destroyed by the Board within 10
days following the election, and the Board shall keep a record of the number
of ballots so destroyed and preserve the same for at least six months after
the election for which it was made.
§ 10-2. Poll watchers.
Each candidate shall have the right to designate in writing one person
at a time who is a registered voter of the Town to serve as a poll watcher
on his or her behalf. A poll watcher may not be a candidate nor the
spouse, ancestor, sibling or descendant of a candidate for office in the
election.
A.
Such watcher shall be entitled to be in the polling area in such a
position as to enable him or her to see each person as he or she offers
to vote. Poll watchers may not wear, inside the polling place, buttons,
hats or any other article of clothing, or carry inside the polling place
any signs or other article, with any campaign message or candidate's
name on it.
B.
Following the closing of the polls it shall be the duty of the Board of
Supervisors of Elections, upon request of any watcher, to exhibit any
electronic tally sheet and/or ballot cast in such a manner that the same
may be read and examined by a watcher, but said Board shall not permit
the ballots to be taken from their hands. It shall be unlawful for any
watcher to inquire or ascertain for what candidate or candidates any
voter may intend to vote or has voted or to attempt to assist any person
in the preparation of casting a vote, and any watcher attempting to do
so may lawfully be ejected by the Board.
C.
§ 10-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-3
8:23
§ 10-3. Voter registration.
In addition to the other requirements for eligibility to vote in Town
elections as set forth in the Town Charter, the Town Code or other
applicable law, in order to be eligible to vote in the 2012 and 2014 Town
elections, on or before the registration deadline for eligibility to vote in
the 2012 presidential primary and the 2014 gubernatorial primary in
the State of Maryland a voter must:
Be registered to vote with the Board of Elections of either
Frederick or Carroll County; or
(1)
Be on the Town's supplemental voter registration list as set forth in
Subsection C, below.
(2)
A.
Except as set forth in Subsection A above with respect to the 2012
and 2014 Town elections, in addition to the other requirements for
eligibility to vote in Town elections as set forth in the Town Charter,
the Town Code or other applicable law, in order to be eligible to vote in
Town elections, at least 28 days prior to the election a voter must:
Be registered to vote with the Board of Elections of either
Frederick or Carroll County; or
(1)
Be on the Town's supplemental voter registration list as set forth in
Subsection C, below.
(2)
B.
In addition to registration for municipal elections as provided for by
state law, the Town shall maintain a supplemental voter registration
list. For that purpose, the Town Clerk may continuously register voters
during the regular business hours at the Town offices. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary, and with the
exception of the 2012 and 2014 elections in which no supplemental
registration shall take place beyond the registration deadline for
eligibility to vote in the 2012 presidential primary and the 2014
gubernatorial primary in the State of Maryland as set forth in
Subsection A above, no person may so register within 28 days prior to
any scheduled Town election.
C.
Persons shall be eligible for registration, provided that they meet the
constitutional qualifications of a voter as provided for by state law, as
now or hereafter in force, and reside within the Town limits.
D.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall have supervision over
supplemental registrations and shall be responsible for the preparation
or approval of all forms for registration and the format of the
supplemental registration list.
E.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall have the duty of keeping
the supplemental registration list current by removing therefrom the
names of persons known to have died, to have moved outside of the
Town limits or to have become constitutionally unqualified to vote. Said
F.
§ 10-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 10-3
8:24
Board shall give notice of the removal of any voter, as required by state
law.
§ 10-3 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-3
8:25

ARTICLE II
Absentee Ballot Voting
[Adopted 1-7-1980 by Ord. No. 112]
§ 10-4. Absentee ballot voting authorized.
Any qualified voter registered in the Town is entitled to vote in any general
or special Town election by absentee ballot.
§ 10-5. (Reserved)3
§ 10-6. Application to vote by absentee ballot. [Amended 3-4-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-1]
Anyone desiring to vote by absentee ballot may apply to the Town Clerk
or the Clerk's designated representative. The application must be made
in writing and may be delivered in person, by mail or by messenger. The
application shall state the voter's home address. Thereupon, the Town
Clerk, or designated representative, upon being satisfied that the applicant
is a registered voter, shall personally deliver, send by messenger or mail
to the applicant one of the ballots so prepared, upon which the Town
Clerk shall affix, by a stamp to be provided by the Board of Supervisors
of Elections, the legend "Absentee Ballot." The Town Clerk or designated
representative shall also provide a plain envelope for the completed ballot,
one letter of instructions and one outer envelope. The outer envelope shall
contain the statement, "I, (TOWN CLERK shall enter voter's name), do
hereby swear or affirm I am a voter legally qualified to vote in the election
to be held for the Town of Mount Airy on (date of election); that I am
legally registered in the Town of Mount Airy; that the within ballot was
by me secretly marked, enclosed and sealed in this ballot envelope; that I
am not now disqualified from voting." The voter shall sign this statement.
Said envelope shall also contain on its face a statement to the effect that
the ballot shall only be counted if it is delivered in person or by messenger
to the Town Clerk, the Clerk's designated representative or the Board of
Supervisors of Elections on or before the close of the polls on the date of
the election or is mailed to the attention of the Board of Supervisors of
Elections, Town Hall, Town of Mount Airy, in sufficient time to have actually
been received prior to the close of polls on the election date.
§ 10-7. Opening or unfolding absentee ballots. [Amended 8-5-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-11]
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall not open or unfold the absentee
ballots at any time prior to the closing of the polls and the beginning of
the tallying of the votes. Following the closing of the polls, the Board of
Supervisors of Elections shall separately count and certify all absentee
ballots received prior to the closing of the polls. No such ballot shall be
3. Editor's Note: Former § 10-5, Preparation of ballots, was repealed 3-4-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-1.
§ 10-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-7
8:27
rejected except for the unanimous vote of the entire Board. All such ballot
envelopes and ballots shall be kept separate and apart from ballots cast at
the regular voting places and shall be preserved for at least six months from
the date of the election.
§ 10-8. Voting for persons who have ceased to be candidate.
Any absentee ballot voted for a person who has ceased to be a candidate
shall not be counted for such candidate but such vote shall not invalidate
the remainder of such ballot.
§ 10-9. Death of persons voting by absentee ballot.
Whenever the Board shall determine that any person who has voted by
absentee ballot died before the day of the election the Board shall not count
the ballot.
§ 10-10. Rejection of envelopes containing more than one absentee
ballot. [Amended 3-4-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-1]
If there is more than one absentee ballot in the envelope, all shall be
rejected.
§ 10-11. Voting rights of persons submitting absentee ballots.
[Amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
Any person who has obtained an absentee ballot and envelope may
nonetheless vote in person, provided that he shall present said absentee
ballot and envelope and that the same are destroyed in the presence of at
least two members of the Board of Supervisors of Elections, which fact shall
be noted by the Town Clerk on a list to be maintained by him of all absentee
ballots issued. If a person has been issued an absentee ballot and it is not
returned, they are denied the right to vote at the polling place.
§ 10-12. Validity contests.
Contests concerning the validity of any absentee ballot shall be decided by
the Board of Supervisors of Elections. No ballot shall be rejected except
by unanimous vote of the entire Board. Any candidate or absentee voter
aggrieved by any decision or action of the Board shall have the right of
appeal to the Circuit Court for Carroll County to review such decision. Such
appeal shall be governed by the Maryland Rules of Procedure.
§ 10-13. Number of absentee ballots limited.
Under no circumstances shall the Town Clerk deliver or mail more than one
absentee ballot or envelope to the same person.
§ 10-7 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 10-14
8:28
§ 10-14. Unlawful application of ballots.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to apply for or seek an absentee ballot in any
name other than his own or to attempt in any manner to obtain more than
one absentee ballot. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
§ 10-15. Rules and regulations; voting hours. [Added 3-4-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-1; amended 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8]
§ 10-16. Tie votes. [Added 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8]
Polls shall open no later than 7:00 a.m. and close no earlier than 8:00
p.m.
A.
The Board is authorized to adopt, in writing, reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with the Charter or this article, with
respect to the duties imposed upon it by law.
B.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall apply the following
procedures if two or more candidates for Council receive the same
number of votes for the same office:
If the tie is among two candidates who received the most votes,
or in a three-person race among two candidates who received the
second most votes, the tied candidate will be certified elected,
except that no more persons may be certified elected than the
number of positions available in the election.
(1)
If the tie is among three candidates who received the most votes
cast in a three-person race, those tied candidates shall be certified
as elected, except that no more persons may be certified elected
than the number of positions available in the election.
(2)
If the tie is among candidates for which fewer positions are
available than those receiving the same votes, but for whom at
least one position would be available, those candidates with the
same vote totals shall participate in a special run-off election to be
held no later than the fourth Tuesday in May under the same rules
governing the general election, except that the ballots shall contain
only the names of the tied candidates. In other respects the special
election shall be held at times and under rules and regulations to
be provided by the Council and/or Board. Absentee ballots shall
be permitted. Candidates elected shall take the oath of office at a
public meeting no later than the first Monday in June.
(3)
A.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall apply the following
procedures if two or more candidates for Mayor receive the same
number of votes:
If the tie is among two or more candidates receiving the most votes,
those candidates receiving the most votes shall participate in a
special run-off election to be held no later than the fourth Tuesday
(1)
B.
§ 10-14 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-16
8:29
§ 10-17. Electioneering. [Added 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8;
amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
No person shall canvass, electioneer or post any campaign material, or
other handouts of any kind, in any polling place or within a radius of 100
feet from any entrance and exit of the building where votes are cast.
§ 10-18. Nonpartisan elections. [Added 9-3-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-8]
Candidates shall not run for office as the representative of or nominee of
any political party.
§ 10-19. Instructions to voters for general election. [Added
9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8; amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-11]
Instructions to voters, including a sample copy of the ballot listing the first
and last names of all nominated candidates and the offices sought, shall
be published in a local newspaper of general circulation within the Town
of Mount Airy at least two weeks before a general Town election. Such
instructions shall also be posted prominently at the polling place.
§ 10-20. Instructions to voters for special election. [Added 9-3-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-8; amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
The date and times for any special election as well as the location of the
polling place, along with instructions to voters, including a sample copy of
the ballot listing the first and last names of all nominated candidates and the
offices sought, shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation
within the Town of Mount Airy at least two weeks before the date and time
of the special election. Instructions shall also be posted prominently at the
polling place.
§ 10-21. Voter assistance. [Added 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8;
amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
in May under the same rules governing the general election, except
that the ballots shall contain only the names of the tied candidates.
In other respects the special election shall be held at times and
under rules and regulations to be provided by the Council and/or
Board. Absentee ballots shall be permitted. The candidate elected
shall take the oath of office at a public meeting no later than the
first Monday in June.
Instructions. The Board of Elections or elections clerks, if requested by
the voter, shall instruct each such voter, before he or she enters the
voting booth, regarding the casting of such voter’s ballot, and shall give
the voter opportunity to personally operate a voting device if requested.
A.
§ 10-16 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 10-21
8:30
Physical assistance. The Board of Supervisors of Elections or elections
clerks shall provide reasonable assistance to voters who, due to
physical infirmity, have difficulty voting, but may not leave the polling
place in order to do so.
B.
Assistance to certain persons. Any voter who requires assistance to
vote by reason of blindness, disability, or inability to read or write the
English language may be given assistance by a person of the voter’s
choice, not to include the voter’s employer or agent of that employer
or any candidate for office. A voter may not be accompanied into a
voting booth or voting machine by any person over the age of 11 years
unless assistance is requested and is required by reason of blindness,
disability or inability to read or write the English language.
C.
Assistance in casting votes. Assistance in casting votes shall be given to
voters who declare under penalty of perjury that by reason of blindness,
disability or inability to read or write the English language they are
unable, without assistance, to cast their vote. The only assistance that
shall be given is to cast the vote as the voter shall direct, without any
prompting or suggestion.
D.
Ballots shall not be taken from the polling place except by the Board of
Supervisors of Elections.
E.
§ 10-21 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-21
8:31

ARTICLE IIA
Provisional Ballots
[Adopted 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
§ 10-21.1. Provisional ballot voting.
For the purposes of this article and section, the term "provisional
ballot" means a ballot that is cast by an individual but not counted until
the individual's qualifications to vote have been confirmed by the Town
Board of Supervisors of Elections.
A.
An individual is eligible to cast a provisional ballot if:
The individual declares in a written affirmation submitted with the
provisional ballot that the individual is a registered voter and is
eligible to vote in the Town election; and
(a) The individual's name does not appear on the election registry;
An election official asserts that the individual is not eligible to
vote; or
(b)
The individual does not have the necessary government-issued
identification, and:
Registered by mail and has not previously met the
identification requirements; or
[1]
[2] Where there is a challenge to the voter's identity.
(c)
(1)
B.
An individual eligible to cast a provisional ballot pursuant to Subsection
B above shall be issued and may cast a provisional ballot at the polling
place on the day of a Town election.
C.
Before an individual is permitted to cast a provisional ballot:
The individual shall complete and sign a provisional ballot
application prescribed by the Town's Board of Supervisors of
Elections, which shall be completed and signed by the individual
seeking to vote under the penalties of perjury, and which shall be
attached to or printed on a provisional ballot envelope into which
the ballot shall be placed and sealed pursuant to Subsection F
below; and
(1)
The election official issuing the provisional ballot shall give the
individual written information advising the individual that, and
describing how, the individual will be able to ascertain whether the
vote was counted and, if it was not counted, the reason it was not.
(2)
D.
The provisional ballot application shall at a minimum contain:
(1) The name and address of the individual issued a provisional ballot;
E.
§ 10-21.1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-21.1
8:33
An oath, under the penalties of perjury, by the individual seeking to
vote stating that he or she is qualified to vote in the Town election
and that the other information provided by the individual in the
application is true and complete;
(2)
The name and address of the person(s), including any election
judge(s), making challenge to the individual's right to vote; and
(3)
A statement of the nature of the challenge to the individual's right
to vote signed by the person making challenge under the penalties
of perjury.
(4)
A provisional ballot shall be accompanied by instructions, prescribed by
the Town Board of Supervisors of Elections, for marking and returning
the ballot, and shall be marked "provisional ballot."
F.
When voted, a provisional ballot shall be enclosed and sealed in an
envelope designated "provisional ballot," and which shall have printed
on it the provisional ballot application to be completed and signed by
the individual seeking to vote under the penalties of perjury.
G.
The Town Board of Supervisors of Elections shall promptly, but in no
event more than 24 hours after the polls close, or within 24 hours
after the County Board of Elections Office next opens after the polls
close in the event that the County Board of Elections is closed during
that twenty-four-hour period, make a determination as to whether a
provisional ballot that has been cast shall be counted. A provisional
ballot shall be counted only if a majority of the members of the Town
Board of Supervisors of Elections agree that the vote should be
counted. Each individual casting a provisional ballot shall then
promptly, but in no event more than the twenty-four-hour period
specified above, be sent written notification of the action taken on the
provisional ballot and the reasons therefor. The Board of Supervisors
of Elections' determination on whether to count a provisional ballot
shall be subject to further challenge as set forth in § 10-27 below after
announcement of final election results.
H.
Whether to announce election results before and/or after making
determinations as to whether provisional ballots shall be counted shall
be in the sound discretion of the Chairman of the Town Board of
Supervisors of Elections, except that election results announced before
determinations and/or counting of provisional ballots shall be
preliminary only and only the final announcement of election results
after the counting of all provisional ballots that the Board has
determined should be counted shall trigger the forty-eight-hour periods
for applications for recount or contest as set forth respectively in
§§ 10-26 and 10-27.
I.
The Town Board of Supervisors of Elections, using forms approved by
the Board, shall create and maintain a full record of provisional ballot
voting, including:
J.
§ 10-21.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 10-21.1
8:34
(1) The provisional ballot application;
The action taken with regard to the provisional ballot; and the
reasons therefor;
(2)
Any provisional ballot that is rejected by the Board of Supervisors
of Elections sealed inside the provisional ballot application
envelope;
(3)
The envelope and ballot for any provisional ballot accepted and
counted, with provisional ballots accepted and counted kept
segregated from the remainder of the ballots counted;
(4)
A record of the vote of the Board of Supervisors of Elections as to
whether the ballot should be counted; and
(5)
A copy of the notice to each individual voting by provisional ballot
as to the action taken on the ballot and the reasons therefor.
(6)
A voter casting a provisional ballot may receive assistance under the
circumstances, and subject to the conditions, set forth in § 10-21 above.
K.
Public access to provisional ballot applications prior to announcement
of final election results shall be prohibited. Public access after
announcement of final election results shall thereafter be permitted,
except that provisional ballots rejected by the Board of Supervisors of
Elections shall remain in their sealed envelopes.
L.
§ 10-21.1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-21.1
8:35

ARTICLE III
Write-In Candidates
[Adopted 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8; amended in its entirety
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
§ 10-22. Write-in candidacy and voting.
§ 10-23. (Reserved)
Eligible voters may cast a write-in vote for any qualified Town citizen to
hold an elective office in the Town of Mount Airy.
A.
Any individual declaring him- or herself as a write-in candidate must
comply with all campaign rules and regulations established by the
Town.
B.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall make every reasonable
attempt to determine voter intent. The Board of Supervisors of
Elections after review shall make a final determination of the intent of
the voter as written on the ballot or as recorded electronically.
C.
§ 10-22 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-23
8:37

ARTICLE IV
Challenges
[Adopted 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8; amended in its entirety
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
§ 10-24. Standard for Board of Supervisors of Elections in
tabulating written ballots.
§ 10-24.1. Standard for Board of Supervisors of Elections in
tabulating electronic votes.
With respect to write-in candidates, the objective intent of the voter in
incorrectly writing in candidates shall be judged with reference to other
active candidates, including write-in candidates.
When the Board finds by a majority vote that it is unable to determine
the objective intent of the voter, the vote for that office shall not be
counted. In the event that paper ballots are used, ballots containing
votes not counted shall be kept separate from the rest of the ballots.
A.
Marking of ballots.
Ballots validly marked in favor of a candidate whose name appears
on a ballot must be counted as a vote in favor of that candidate.
(1)
Ballots validly marked in favor of a write-in candidate must contain
at least the first and last name of the candidate in order to be
eligible to be counted as a vote in favor of that candidate, except
that the Board of Supervisors of Elections shall attempt to comply
with the objective intent of the voter as expressed by the ballot, as
provided in Subsection D of this section.
(2)
B.
Overvotes. Ballots which are marked in favor of more candidates than
specific offices available must not be counted as valid ballots for that
specific office or offices, if multiple positions are available.
C.
Incorrectly marked ballots; objective intent of the voter. The Board
of Supervisors of Elections shall attempt to comply with the objective
intent of the voter as expressed by the ballot, to the extent that
objective intent can be reasonably ascertained. If a majority of the
Board of Supervisors of Elections is unable to determine the objective
intent of the voter from the markings on the ballot, the vote for that
office shall not be counted. A majority ruling of the Board shall
constitute the Board's decision to count the vote in favor of a candidate.
Ballots containing votes incorrectly marked shall be kept separate from
the rest of the ballots.
D.
§ 10-24 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-25
8:39
§ 10-25. Challenge of right to vote. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No.
2018-20]
Subject to the provisions concerning provisional ballot set forth in Article
IIA, § 10-21.1 above, when the right of any person to vote shall be
challenged, the challenge shall be made immediately before such person
enters the voting booth. The person, to include any election judge(s),
challenging an individual's right to vote shall assign the reason for the
challenge under penalties of perjury. The challenged voter shall respond
truthfully under penalty of perjury. A challenged voter shall be allowed to
vote only if a majority of the members of the Town Board of Supervisors of
Elections agree that his/her vote should be cast.
§ 10-26. Recount of ballots.
§ 10-27. Election contests and appeals.
Within 48 hours after the results of the election are announced, any
candidate defeated on the fact of the returns may petition the Board
of Supervisors of Elections for an appeal from and review of the action
and decision of the Board in counting the ballots and for a recount of
the ballots cast, or review of all electronic voting device records.
A.
The petition shall be filed with an affidavit or affidavits made from
personal knowledge by candidates, watchers, challengers or other
persons, setting forth acts of fraud, mistake, error or irregularity in
making the count of the votes by the Board, or setting forth that some of
the returns and tally sheets show on their faces ambiguity, error, fraud,
mistake or miscalculations by the Board.
B.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections, after receiving the petition, shall
review the issues raised and may respond accordingly, including to
review the ballots, tabulations, and all electronic voting device records,
but if required to resolve the issues raised, shall proceed without
answering to recount the ballots.
The review and recount of ballots shall be completed within 72
hours after the petition has been filed, under such procedures as
the Board shall prescribe.
(1)
The recount shall be conducted in the presence of the candidates
or their representatives.
(2)
The petitioner shall pay the cost of the recount unless the result
of the election is reversed by the recount, in which case the costs
shall be borne by the Town. Costs may include but are not limited to
reimbursement to the Town for the time of employees or temporary
staff that may be assigned or employed to assist with the recount,
and may also include the time of the Board of Supervisors of
Elections and election clerks to the extent they assist with the
recount.
(3)
C.
§ 10-25 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 10-27
8:40
Contests concerning voting or the validity of any vote in any election
shall be decided by the Board of Supervisors of Elections.
A.
No vote nor the results of any election shall be rejected on a contest or
appeal except by the unanimous vote of the Board.
B.
Any candidate or voter who wishes to contest the results of an election
or any matter relating to the validity of a vote shall file a petition with
the Board of Supervisors of Elections within 48 hours after the election
results are announced. The petition shall be signed under oath and shall
set forth a complete statement of all facts on which the candidate or
voter relies to support such election contest.
C.
Upon receiving the petition, the Board shall notify all candidates
potentially affected by the contest that a contest has been submitted.
D.
The Board of Supervisors of Elections shall conduct a factual
investigation of the contest and shall decide the contest no later than 10
calendar days after the receipt of the notice of election contest by the
Board. The Board must make all reasonable efforts to render a decision
within 10 days. Only if the Board fails to render a decision within 10
days, the contest shall be deemed denied.
E.
Any candidate or voter aggrieved by any decision of the Board of
Supervisors of Elections shall have the right to appeal such decision to
the Circuit Court of Carroll County. Such appeal must be filed within
three business days after the final decision of the Board of Supervisors
of Elections which is being appealed.
F.
In the event of a timely Circuit Court appeal, the incumbent office
holder shall continue to hold office until his or her successor is duly
qualified following a decision of the Court. If the Circuit Court appeal is
withdrawn or dismissed, the final decision of the Board of Supervisors
of Elections which is or was being appealed shall stand.
G.
§ 10-27 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 10-27
8:41
Chapter 13
ETHICS
§ 13-1. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Town of Mount Airy Public Ethics
Ordinance."
§ 13-2. Applicability.
§ 13-3. Ethics Commission.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all Town of Mount Airy:
(1) Elected officials;
(2) Employees;
Persons appointed to commissions or boards pursuant to the Code
of the Town of Mount Airy; and
(3)
Persons appointed to task forces, boards or advisory committees
pursuant to § C4-4B(1) of the Town Charter.
(4)
A.
There is a Town of Mount Airy Ethics Commission that consists of four
members and an alternate appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council. The terms of members shall be staggered. On
or as soon as practicable after the effective date of this chapter, the
Mayor, with the Town Council's advice and consent, shall appoint new
members plus an alternate, and/or extend or shorten the terms of the
members and/or alternate as of the effective date of this chapter, such
that the terms of members of the commission shall expire respectively
on August 1, 2013, April 1, 2014, June 1, 2015, and August 1, 2016
and the term of the alternate shall expire on May 1, 2015. Commission
members and the alternate shall thereafter serve four-year terms or
until their successors are appointed, and the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Council, shall thereafter appoint or reappoint members
and an alternate upon the expiration of the respective terms of the
position for which appointment is being made. All appointees shall
be residents of Mount Airy. Successors will fill the unexpired term
of the departing member. No member may participate in any matter
concerning that member's conduct. The members so appointed shall
select from among their number a Chair who shall preside at all
meetings of the Commission whenever present and a Vice Chair who
shall preside in the absence of the Chair. The Chair or Vice Chair, if
presiding, shall be entitled to participate in all discussions and debates
of the Commission but who shall not cast any vote with respect to the
issuance of an advisory opinion or a determination as to any complaint
unless necessary at the time in order to constitute a quorum for
conducting business or break a tie of voting members present.
A.
§ 10-27 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-3
8:42
The Commission shall:
(1) Devise, receive, and maintain all forms required by this chapter;
Develop procedures and policies for advisory opinion requests and
provide published advisory opinions to persons subject to this
chapter regarding the applicability of the provisions of this chapter
to them;
(2)
Develop procedures and policies where necessary for the
processing of complaints filed pursuant to Subsection G below in
order to make appropriate determinations regarding complaints
filed by any person alleging violations of this chapter; and
(3)
Conduct a public information program regarding the purposes and
application of this chapter.
(4)
Administer, review, and make determinations on complaints filed
under Subsection G below and carry out any other duties and
responsibilities contained in the Town of Mount Airy Public Ethics
Ordinance.
(5)
Issue a report to the Town Council annually summarizing its
activities to the extent they are matters of public record.
(6)
B.
The Commission may seek advice from the Town Attorney or other
counsel if expenditures are approved in accordance with the Charter.
C.
The Commission shall certify to the State Ethics Commission on or
before October 1 of each year that the Town is in compliance with
the requirements of State Government Article, Title 15, Subtitle 8,
Annotated Code of Maryland, for elected local officials.
D.
The Commission shall determine if changes to this chapter are required
to be in compliance with the requirements of State Government Article,
Title 15, Subtitle 8, Annotated Code of Maryland, and shall forward
any recommended changes and amendments to the Town Council for
enactment.
E.
The Commission may adopt other policies and procedures to assist in
the implementation of the Commission's programs established in this
chapter.
F.
Filing of complaints and prehearing dispositions.
Any person, who shall be referred to as the "complainant," may
file a notarized, written, signed complaint with the Commission
alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter. The Town
official, employee or appointee against whom the complaint is
directed shall be referred to as the "respondent." The Commission
will acknowledge to the complainant receipt of the complaint as
soon as practicable along with written notice of the confidentiality
provisions set forth in Subsection K below. If such a complaint is
(1)
G.
§ 13-3 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-3
8:43
not notarized or is not signed, the Commission shall summarily
dismiss the complaint and inform the complainant in writing of
the dismissal and the reasons for the dismissal. The Commission
may issue a complaint on its own motion alleging a violation of
this chapter. Any complaint, unless summarily dismissed, shall be
provided by the Commission to the respondent along with written
notice of the confidentiality provisions set forth in Subsection K
below.
Any complaint not summarily dismissed shall be reviewed by the
Commission as soon as practicable. If the complaint is dismissed as
without merit on its face, the complainant and respondent shall be
notified of the dismissal in writing.
(2)
If the Complaint is not summarily dismissed or dismissed as
without merit on its face, the Commission, with the assistance
of the Town Attorney or other counsel if the expenditures are
approved in accordance with the Charter, shall collect evidence
relating to the allegations of the complaint. As soon as practicable
thereafter, the Commission shall make a preliminary determination
as to whether there has been a violation of this chapter by the
respondent.
(3)
If after investigation and accumulation of the evidence, and upon
a preliminary review thereof, the Commission determines that the
evidence does not merit further proceedings because the evidence
does not establish a violation of this chapter by the respondent, the
complaint shall be dismissed without further proceedings by the
Commission in a signed order. An order of dismissal shall be sent
to the complainant and to the respondent.
(4)
If, within 15 days after receipt of the complaint as provided for in
Subsection G(1), the respondent takes action to cure all alleged
violations, the complaint shall be closed by a signed order,
reviewed by the Town Attorney or other counsel, as long as the
Commission finds that the action cures all alleged violations and
determines that such action is not contrary to the purposes of this
chapter.
(5)
If at any time prior to issuing findings of fact and conclusions of law
the respondent and Commission mutually agree to any action that
may be available to cure all alleged violations, the complaint shall
be closed by a signed order if the Commission finds such action is
not contrary to the purposes of this chapter, Settlements by mutual
agreement may include remedies not specifically stated in § 13-9.
(6)
If the complaint is not summarily dismissed pursuant to Subsection
G(1) or dismissed without merit pursuant to Subsection G(2) or
otherwise closed as provided in Subsection G(4), (5) or (6), the
Commission shall, as soon as practicable, after appropriate notice,
hold a hearing on the complaint.
(7)
§ 13-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-3
8:44
Hearing.
As soon as practicable, but not less than 15 days, before the
hearing, the Commission shall make available for inspection and
copying all evidence gathered by the Commission during its
investigation and/or which has been submitted to the Commission,
to include any such evidence that may tend to establish that the
respondent has not committed a violation of this chapter.
(1)
At the hearing, the Commission will present evidence relating to
the complaint and may recommend such disposition of the
complaint as appears appropriate. The respondent may be
represented by counsel, and the proceeding shall be conducted
in accordance with provisions of the Maryland Administrative
Procedures Act to the extent that act is consistent with this chapter.
(2)
H.
Post-hearing disposition.
After consideration of all the evidence and any legal and
professional advice, the Commission shall, within 30 days of the
conclusion of the hearing, or as soon as practicable, make findings
of fact and conclusions of law with respect to each of the alleged
violations, and advise the complainant and respondent.
(1)
The Commission may, after issuing findings of fact and conclusions
of law, enter into a consent order with the respondent that cures all
alleged violations, prohibits future violations, and is not contrary
to the purposes of this chapter. Such consent order shall be part
of the public record upon the conclusion of the matter, and the
complainant shall be notified.
(2)
If the Commission concludes that the respondent has not violated
any of the provisions of this chapter, the Commission shall enter
an order dismissing the complaint and shall advise the complainant
and respondent.
(3)
If the Commission decides that the respondent has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter, the Commission may take actions as
provided for in § 13-9.
(4)
If the Commission, in the course of considering a complaint, finds
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent
may have committed a criminal offense, the matter shall be
referred promptly to an appropriate prosecuting authority.
(5)
I.
Judicial review and judicial relief.
If aggrieved by the final order of the Commission, the respondent
may request judicial review in accordance with the provisions of
the Maryland Administrative Procedure Act.
(1)
The final order of the Commission shall be stayed automatically
until the time for seeking judicial review has expired. If a timely
(2)
J.
§ 13-3 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-3
8:45
§ 13-4. Conflicts of interest.
appeal for judicial review is filed, the final order shall be further
stayed until the final disposition of the matter by the court.
The Commission may seek judicial relief as provided in § 13-9 of
this chapter.
(3)
Confidentiality of proceedings.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary,
following the filing of a complaint and unless and until the matter
is either referred for criminal prosecution or there has been a
finding of a violation by the Commission, the proceedings, meetings
and activities of the Commission in connection with the complaint
shall be conducted in a confidential manner. Except as set forth in
Subsection K(1)(a) through (c) below, the Commission, its staff, and
the complainant and respondent shall not disclose any information
relating to the complaint, to include the identities of the
complainant and respondent. As set forth in Subsection G(1) above,
complainant and respondent shall be provided written notice of the
confidentiality provisions of this subsection. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, release of otherwise confidential information may, and
in the case of Subsection K(1)(c) below shall, be made at any prior
time under the following circumstances:
If the Commission grants a release in writing upon request
of the respondent, the respondent may make disclosure of
otherwise confidential information concerning the complaint
as set forth in the written release issued by the Commission.
(a)
If release of otherwise confidential information has been
agreed to in writing by the respondent expressly waiving the
confidentiality of the information concerning the complaint,
the Commission, its staff and/or the complainant may make
disclosure of otherwise confidential information.
(b)
The identity of the complainant shall be disclosed to the
respondent, at the request of the respondent, at any time.
(c)
(1)
K.
In this section, "qualified relative" means a spouse, parent, child, or
sibling.
A.
All Town officials, employees and appointees described in § 13-2 above
are subject to this section.
B.
Participation prohibitions. Except as permitted by Commission
regulation or opinion, an official, employee or appointee may not
participate in and must recuse himself or herself from:
Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty that
does not affect the disposition or decision of the matter, any matter
(1)
C.
§ 13-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-4
8:46
in which, to the knowledge of the official or employee, the official
or employee, or a qualified relative of the official or employee has
an interest.
Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty
that does not affect the disposition or decision with respect to the
matter, any matter in which any of the following is a party;
A business entity in which the official or employee has a direct
financial interest of which the official or employee may
reasonably be expected to know;
(a)
A business entity for which the official, employee, or a qualified
relative of the official or employee is an officer, director,
trustee, partner, or employee;
(b)
A business entity with which the official or employee or, to the
knowledge of the official or employee, a qualified relative is
negotiating employment or has any arrangement concerning
prospective employment.
(c)
If the contract reasonably could be expected to result in a
conflict between the private interests of the official or
employee and the official duties of the official or employee, a
business entity that is a party to an existing contract with the
official or employee, or which, to the knowledge of the official
or employee, is a party to a contract with a qualified relative;
(d)
An entity, doing business with the Town, in which a direct
financial interest is owned by another entity in which the
official or employee has a direct financial interest, if the official
or employee may be reasonably expected to know of both
direct financial interests; or
(e)
A business entity that:
The official or employee knows is a creditor or obligee of
the official or employee or a qualified relative of the official
or employee with respect to a thing of economic value; and
[1]
As a creditor or obligee, is in a position to directly and
substantially affect the interest of the official or employee
or a qualified relative of the official or employee.
[2]
(f)
(2)
A person who is disqualified from participating under Subsection
C(1) or (2) above shall disclose the nature and circumstances of the
conflict and may participate or act if:
The disqualification leaves a body with less than a quorum
capable of acting;
(a)
The disqualified official or employee is required by law to act;
or
(b)
(3)
§ 13-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-4
8:47
The disqualified official or employee is the only person
authorized to act.
(c)
The prohibitions of Subsection C(1) and (2) do not apply if
participation is allowed by regulation or opinion of the Commission.
(4)
Employment and financial interest restrictions.
Except as authorized pursuant to Subsection D(2) below, an official
or employee may not during his or her service to or employment
with the Town also:
Be employed by or have a financial interest in any entity that
has not been disclosed to and approved by any applicable
appointing authority and the Commission pursuant to
Subsection D(2)(c)[2] below and:
That regularly has matters for consideration, decision or
recommendation by the Town office, agency, board,
advisory committee, commission or other body on or in
which the official serves as would, upon recusal by the
official on each such matter, regularly prevent the official
from fulfilling his or her responsibilities to the Town and
would, without recusal on each such matter, regularly
impair the appearance of impartiality or independence of
judgment of the official; or
[1]
That regularly has matters for consideration, decision or
recommendation by the Town that relate to the employee's
scope of duties for the Town as would, upon recusal by
the employee on each such matter, regularly prevent the
employee from fulfilling his or her responsibilities to the
Town and would, without recusal on each such matter,
regularly impair the appearance of impartiality or
independence of judgment of the employee; or
[2]
That is negotiating or has entered into a contract with
the Town office, agency, board, advisory committee,
commission or other body on or in which the official
serves; or
[3]
That is negotiating or has entered into a contract with the
Town the award of which relates to the employee's scope
of duties to the Town or the performance of which is or will
be supervised or administered by the employee on behalf
of the Town.
[4]
(a)
(1)
This prohibition does not apply to:
An official or employee who is appointed to a regulatory or
licensing authority pursuant to a legislative requirement or
other criteria applicable to the authority that persons subject
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 13-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-4
8:48
to the jurisdiction of the authority be represented in
appointments to the authority;
Appointment to service without pay on a purely advisory
committee where the appointing authority has determined it
to be advantageous to obtain advice on matters from such a
committee comprised in whole or in part of members who hold
business interests in the matters about which the committee is
to provide advice;
(b)
Subject to other provisions of law, an official or employee in
regard to a financial interest or employment held at the time of
appointment or acquired thereafter, provided:
The financial interest or employment is publicly disclosed
to the appointing authority if applicable and to the
Commission; and
[1]
The appointing authority if applicable and Commission
authorize the simultaneous holding of his or her position
with the Town and the financial interest or employment
upon a finding that:
Said interest or employment will not regularly require
recusal by the official or employee so as to impair
the performance of his or her duties to the Town
and without recusal would regularly impair the
appearance of impartiality or independence of
judgment of the official or employee; and
[a]
Said interest or employment is not with an entity that
is negotiating or has entered into a contract with the
Town office, agency, board, advisory committee,
commission or other body on or in which the official
serves or is to serve; or the award of which relates
to the employee's or prospective employee's scope of
duties to the Town or the performance of which is or
will be supervised or administered by the employee or
prospective employee on behalf of the Town.
[b]
[2]
(c)
An official or employee whose duties are ministerial, if the
private employment or financial interest does not create a
conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest,
as permitted by and in accordance with regulations adopted by
the Commission; or
(d)
An official or employee who terminates employment, or divests
himself or herself of any financial interest, without transfer of
such to a straw purchaser with intent of future transfer back
to the official or employee or to a person related by blood or
marriage, of the type prohibited in Subsection D(1)(a) above
before undertaking his or her duties for the Town.
(e)
§ 13-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-4
8:49
Post-employment limitations and restrictions.
A former official or employee may not assist or represent any party
other than the Town for compensation in a case, contract, or other
specific matter involving the Town if that matter is one in which the
former official or employee significantly participated as an official
or employee.
(1)
A former member of the Town Council may not assist or represent
another party for compensation in a matter that is the subject
of legislative action in which the former member significantly
participated for a period of two years after leaving office.
(2)
E.
Contingent compensation. Except in a judicial or quasijudicial
proceeding, a current official or current employee may not assist or
represent a party for contingent compensation in any matter before or
involving the Town.
F.
Use of prestige of office.
An official or employee may not intentionally use the prestige of
office or public position for the private gain of that official or
employee or the private gain of another.
(1)
This subsection does not prohibit the performance of usual and
customary constituent services by an elected local official without
additional compensation.
(2)
G.
Solicitation and acceptance of gifts.
An official or employee may not solicit any gift. A "gift," as used
throughout this chapter, includes the transfer of any right,
property, thing or service of any value for which the recipient has
not furnished identifiable and adequate consideration.
(1)
An official or employee may not directly solicit or facilitate the
solicitation of a gift, on behalf of another person, from an individual
regulated lobbyist.
(2)
An official or employee may not knowingly accept a gift, directly or
indirectly, from a person that the official or employee knows or has
the reason to know:
Is doing business with or seeking to do business with the Town
office, agency, board, advisory committee, or commission with
which the official or employee is affiliated;
(a)
Has financial interests that may be substantially and materially
affected, in a manner distinguishable from the public generally,
by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of
the official or employee;
(b)
(3)
H.
§ 13-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-4
8:50
Is engaged in an activity regulated or controlled by the
official's or employee's governmental unit; or
(c)
Is a lobbyist with respect to matters within the jurisdiction of
the official or employee.
(d)
Notwithstanding Subsection H(3), an official or employee may
accept the following:
Meals and beverages consumed in the presence of the donor
or sponsoring entity;
(a)
Ceremonial gifts or awards that have insignificant monetary
value;
(b)
Unsolicited gifts of nominal value that do not exceed $20 in
cost or trivial items of informational value;
(c)
Reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, and scheduled
entertainment of the official or the employee at a meeting
which is given in return for the participation of the official or
employee in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting;
(d)
Gifts of tickets or free admission extended to an elected local
official to attend a charitable, cultural, or political event, if the
purpose of this gift or admission is a courtesy or ceremony
extended to the elected official's office;
(e)
A specific gift or class of gifts that the Commission exempts
from the operation of this subsection upon a finding, in writing,
that acceptance of the gift or class of gifts would not be
detrimental to the impartial conduct of the business of the
Town and that the gift is purely personal and private in nature;
(f)
Gifts from a person related to the official or employee by blood
or marriage, or any other individual who is a member of the
household of the official or employee; or
(g)
Honoraria for speaking to or participating in a meeting,
provided that the offering of the honorarium is in not related in
any way to the official's or employee's official position.
(h)
(4)
Subsection H(4) does not apply to a gift;
That would tend to impair the impartiality and the
independence of judgment of the official or employee receiving
the gift;
(a)
Of significant value that would give the appearance of
impairing the impartiality and independence of judgment of
the official or employee; or
(b)
Of significant value that the recipient official or employee
believes or has reason to believe is designed to impair the
(c)
(5)
§ 13-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-4
8:51
§ 13-5. Financial disclosure by local elected officials and
candidates.
impartiality and independence of judgment of the official or
employee.
Disclosure of confidential information. Other than in the discharge
of official duties, an official or employee may not disclose or use
confidential information, that the official or employee acquired by
reason of the official's or employee's public position and that is not
available to the public, for the economic benefit of the official or
employee or that of another person.
I.
Participation in procurement.
An individual or a person that employs an individual who assists
a Town agency in the drafting of specifications, an invitation for
bids, or a request for proposals for a procurement may not submit a
bid or proposal for that procurement or assist or represent another
person, directly or indirectly, who is submitting a bid or proposal
for the procurement.
(1)
The Commission may establish exemptions from the requirements
of this section for providing descriptive literature, sole source
procurements, and written comments solicited by the procuring
agency.
(2)
J.
Required disclosures - general.
This section applies to all local elected officials and candidates to
be local elected officials. In this section, "immediate family" means
a spouse or dependent child.
(1)
Except as provided in § 13-5C(3)(a) below, a local elected official
or a candidate to be a local elected official shall file the financial
disclosure statement required under this section:
(a) On a form provided by the Commission;
(b) Under oath or affirmation; and
(c) With the Commission.
(2)
A.
Deadlines for filing statements: local elected officials.
An incumbent local elected official shall file a financial disclosure
statement annually no later than April 30 of each year for the
preceding calendar year.
(1)
An individual who is appointed to fill a vacancy in an office for
which a financial disclosure statement is required and who has not
already filed a financial disclosure statement shall file a statement
for the preceding calendar year within 30 days after appointment.
(2)
B.
§ 13-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-5
8:52
An individual who, other than by reason of death, leaves an office
for which a statement is required shall file a statement within 60
days after leaving the office.
(3)
The statement shall cover:
The calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the
individual left office, unless a statement covering that year has
already been filed by the individual; and
(a)
The portion of the current calendar year during which the
individual held the office.
(b)
(4)
Deadlines for filing statements: candidates to be local elected officials.
Except for an official who has filed a financial disclosure statement
under another provision of this section for the reporting period, a
candidate to be an elected local official shall file under a financial
disclosure statement each year beginning with the year in which
the certificate of candidacy is filed through the year of the election.
(1)
A candidate to be an elected local official shall file a statement
required under this section;
In the year of candidacy, upon being nominated or when a
candidate declares himself or herself to be a write-in candidate
and/or begins campaigning for elective office; and
(a)
In all other years for which a statement is required, on or
before April 30.
(b)
(2)
A candidate to be an elected official:
May file the statement required under § 13-5C(2)(a) of this
chapter with the Town Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors
when nominated or when a candidate declares himself or
herself to be a write-in candidate and/or begins campaigning
for elective office, or may file the statement with the
Commission prior thereto; and
(a)
Shall file the statements required under § 13-5C(2)(b) with the
Commission.
(b)
(3)
If a candidate fails to file a statement required by this section
within 10 calendar days after written notice is provided by the
Town Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors, the candidate is
deemed to have withdrawn the candidacy.
(4)
The Town Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors may not accept
any certificate of candidacy unless a statement has been filed in
proper form.
(5)
Within 10 calendar days of the receipt of a statement required
under this section, the Town Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors
(6)
C.
§ 13-5 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-5
8:53
shall forward the statement to the Commission or the office
designated by the Commission.
Public record.
The Commission or office designated by the Commission shall
maintain all financial disclosure statements filed under this section.
(1)
Financial disclosure statements shall be made available during
normal office hours for examination and copying by the public
subject to reasonable fees and administrative procedures
established by the Commission.
(2)
If an individual examines or copies a financial disclosure statement,
the Commission or the office designated by the Commission shall
record:
The name and home address of the individual reviewing or
copying the statement; and
(a)
The name of the person whose financial disclosure statement
was examined or copied.
(b)
(3)
The Commission or the office designated by the Commission shall
provide the official with a copy of the name and home address
of the person who reviewed the official's financial disclosure
statement.
(4)
D.
Retention requirements. The Commission or the office designated by
the Commission shall retain financial disclosure statements for 10 years
from the date of receipt at which time they shall be destroyed pursuant
to the Town's approved Records Retention and Disposal Schedule.
E.
Contents of statement. The disclosure statements required by this
section shall contain:
Interests in real property.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in real property wherever located.
(a)
For each interest in real property, the schedule shall include:
The nature of the property and the location by street
address, mailing address, or legal description of the
property.
[1]
(b)
(1)
Interests in corporations and partnerships.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of all interests in any corporation, partnership, limited liability
partnership, or limited liability corporation except those that
are publicly traded in which the interest held is less than 5% of
the ownership.
(a)
(2)
F.
§ 13-5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-5
8:54
Interests in business entities doing business with the Town.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in any business entity that does business with the
Town, other than interests reported under Subsection E(2).
(a)
For each interest reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity;
[1]
The nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions to and encumbrances on the interest;
[2]
With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in
part, at any time during the reporting period, a description
of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received in exchange for the interest, and, if
known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was
transferred; and
[3]
With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
The date when, the manner in which, and the identity
of the person from whom the interest was acquired;
and
[a]
The nature and the amount of the consideration given
in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than
by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at
the time acquired.
[b]
[4]
(b)
(3)
Gifts.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
each gift in excess of $20 in value or a series of gifts totaling
$100 or more received during the reporting period from or
on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any one person who does
business with or is regulated by the Town.
(a)
For each gift reported, the schedule shall include:
[1] A description of the nature and value of the gift; and
The identity of the person from whom, or on behalf of
whom, directly or indirectly, the gift was received.
[2]
(b)
(4)
Employment with or interests in entities doing business with Town.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of all offices, directorships, and salaried employment by the
individual or member of the immediate family of the individual
(a)
(5)
§ 13-5 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-5
8:55
held at any time during the reporting period with entities doing
business with the Town.
For each position reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity;
[1]
The title and nature of the office, directorship, or salaried
employment held and the date it commenced; and
[2]
The name of each Town agency with which the entity is
involved.
[3]
(b)
Indebtedness to persons or entities "doing business with" Town.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of all liabilities, excluding retail credit accounts, owed at any
time during the reporting period to persons or entities "doing
business with" the Town, which for the purposes of this
subsection shall mean persons or entities that are or become
regulated by, are in contract with or that are seeking a contract
with or other benefit from the Town but shall not include
persons or entities that perform regular and routine banking
services or extend credit by means of a credit card to the Town
and the person required to make disclosure under this section:
[1] Of the individual; or
Of a member of the immediate family of the individual if
the individual was involved in the transaction giving rise
to the liability.
[2]
(a)
For each liability reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
The identity of the person to whom the liability was owed
and the date the liability was incurred;
[1]
The amount of the liability owed as of the end of the
reporting period;
[2]
The terms of payment of the liability and the extent to
which the principal amount of the liability was increased
or reduced during the year; and
[3]
[4] The security given, if any, for the liability.
(b)
(6)
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of the
immediate family members of the individual employed by the Town
in any capacity at any time during the reporting period.
(7)
(8) Sources of earned income.
§ 13-5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-5
8:56
§ 13-6. Financial disclosure by employees and appointed officials.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of the name and address of each place of employment and of
each business entity of which the individual or, except as set
forth in Subsection F(8)(b) below, a member of the individual's
immediate family was a sole or partial owner and from which
the individual or member of the individual's immediate family
received earned income, at any time during the reporting
period.
(a)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection F(8)(a) above, a
dependent child's employment or business ownership need not
be disclosed if the child's employer or business is not "doing
business with" the Town as that term is defined in Subsection
F(5)(a) above.
(b)
A statement filed under this section may also include a schedule of
additional interests or information that the individual making the
statement wishes to disclose.
(9)
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, the financial
disclosure required by this section need not disclose interests in
publicly traded mutual funds unless such funds are comprised
primarily of interests in a specific sector that is regulated by the
Town.
(10)
For the purposes of Subsection F(1), (2) and (3) above, the following
interests are considered to be the interests of the individual making the
statement:
An interest held by a member of the individual's immediate family,
if the interest was, at any time during the reporting period, directly
or indirectly controlled by the individual.
(1)
An interest held by a business entity in which the individual held a
30% or greater interest at any time during the reporting period.
(2)
An interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any time during
the reporting period;
The individual held a reversionary interest or was a
beneficiary; or
(a)
(b) If a revocable trust, the individual was a settlor.
(3)
G.
The Commission shall review the financial disclosure statements
submitted under this section for compliance with the provisions of this
section and shall notify an individual submitting the statement of any
omissions or deficiencies.
H.
The Town Ethics Commission may take appropriate enforcement action
to ensure compliance with this section.
I.
§ 13-5 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-6
8:57
§ 13-7. Lobbying.
This section only applies to the following appointed officials and
employees;
(1) All Town employees;
(2) All appointees to boards, advisory committees, and commissions.
A.
A statement filed under this section shall be filed with the Commission
under oath or affirmation.
B.
On or before April 30 of each year during which an official or employee
holds office, an official or employee shall file a statement disclosing
gifts received during the preceding calendar year from any person that
contracts with the Town, or bids on a contract with the Town, has
business before the Town, or is regulated by Town, including the name
of the donor of the gift and the approximate retail value at the time or
receipt.
C.
An official or employee shall disclose employment and interests that
raise conflicts of interest or potential conflicts of interest in connection
with a specific proposed action by the employee or official sufficiently
in advance of the action to provide adequate disclosure to the public.
D.
The Commission shall maintain all disclosure statements filed under
this section as public records available for public inspection and
copying as provided in § 13-5D of this chapter.
E.
A person shall file a lobbying registration statement with the
Commission if the person:
Personally appears before a Town official or employee with the
intent to influence that person in performance of the official duties
of the official or employee; and
(1)
In connection with the intent to influence, expends or reasonably
expects to expend in excess of $20 on a single gift or $100 or more
on a series of gifts in a given calendar year on food, entertainment,
or other gifts for officials or employees of Town of Mount Airy.
(2)
A.
A person shall file a registration statement required under this section
on or before the later of January 15 of the calendar year or within
five days after first performing an act that requires registration in the
calendar year.
B.
Registration contents.
The registration statement shall identify:
(a) The registrant;
(b) Any other person on whose behalf the registrant acts; and
(1)
C.
§ 13-6 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-7
8:58
§ 13-8. Exemptions and modifications.
The subject matter on which the registrant proposes to make
appearances specified in Subsection A of this section.
(c)
The registration statement shall cover a defined registration period
not to exceed one calendar year.
(2)
Within 30 days after the end of any calendar year during which a person
was registered under this section, the person shall file a report with the
Commission disclosing;
The value, date, and nature of any food, entertainment, or other gift
provided to a Town official or employee; and
(1)
If a gift to a single official or employee of the Town of Mount Airy
exceeds $20 in value, or a series of gifts totaling $100 or more
given in one calendar year, the identity of the official or employee.
(2)
D.
The Commission shall maintain the registrations and reports filed under
this section as public records available for public inspection and
copying for four years after receipt by the Commission.
E.
The Commission may upon application grant exemptions and
modifications to the provisions of §§ 13-4 and 13-6 of this chapter
to employees and to appointed members of Town Boards, Advisory
Committees, and Commissions if the Commission finds that the
applicant has established by a preponderance of the evidence that
an exemption or modification would not be contrary to the essential
purposes of this chapter and that:
Relative to the disclosure requirements set forth in § 13-6:
A disclosure would constitute an unreasonable invasion of
privacy;
(a)
The impact of complete nondisclosure is minimal or may be
mitigated and thus be rendered minimal by partial disclosure
or that the invasion of privacy may be mitigated to an
acceptable level as determined by the Commission by means of
redacting certain of the information that would be considered
private and yet would disclose enough information such that
the impact of nondisclosure would be minimal; and
(b)
A disclosure would, were others similarly situated required to
make the same or similar disclosure, significantly reduce the
availability of qualified persons for public service.
(c)
(1)
Relative to conflicts of interest and the provisions of § 13-4 of this
chapter:
The impact of granting an exemption or modification is
minimal;
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 13-7 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-8
8:59
§ 13-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
The risk of the applicant being improperly influenced in
making decisions and/or in the performance of his/her duties is
minimal; and
(b)
Not granting an exemption or modification would significantly
reduce the availability of similarly situated qualified persons
for public service.
(c)
The Commission may:
Assess a late fee of $2 per day up to a maximum of $250 for a
failure to timely file a financial disclosure statement required under
§ 13-5 or 13-6 of this chapter;
(1)
Assess a late fee of $10 per day up to a maximum of $250 for
a failure to file a timely lobbyist registration or lobbyist report
required under $13-7 of this chapter; and
(2)
Issue a cease and desist order against any person found to be in
violation of this chapter.
(3)
A.
Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the
Commission may:
Issue an order of compliance directing the respondent to cease and
desist from the violation;
(1)
(2) Issue a reprimand;
Recommend to the appropriate authority other appropriate
discipline of the respondent, including censure or removal if that
discipline is authorized by law.
(3)
Pursue other remedies as provided for in the Code of the Town of
Mount Airy.
(4)
B.
If the Commission finds that a respondent has violated § 13-7 of this
chapter, the Commission may:
Require a respondent who is a registered lobbyist to file any
additional reports or information that reasonably related to the
information that is required under § 13-7 of this chapter;
(1)
(2) Impose a fine not exceeding $5,000 for each violation; or
Suspend the registration of an individual registered lobbyist if the
Commission finds that the lobbyist has knowingly and willfully
violated § 13-7 of this chapter or has been convicted of a criminal
offense arising from lobbying activities.
(3)
C.
Upon request of the Commission, the Town Attorney may file a petition
for injunctive or other relief in the circuit court of Carroll County, or
D.
§ 13-8 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 13-9
8:60
§ 13-10. Severability.
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the ruling shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
in any other court having proper venue for the purpose of requiring
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the court may;
(1) Issue an order to cease and desist from the violation;
Except as provided in Subsection D(4) below, void an official action
taken by an official or employee with a conflict of interest
prohibited by this chapter when the action arises from or concerns
the subject matter of the conflict and if the legal action is brought
within 90 days of the occurrence of the official action, if the court
deems voiding the action to be in the best interest of the public; or
(2)
Impose a fine of up to $5,000 for any violation of the provisions
of this chapter, with each day upon which the violation occurs
constituting a separate offense.
(3)
Notwithstanding Subsection D(2) above, a court may not void any
official action appropriating public funds, levying taxes, or
providing for the issuance of bonds, notes, or other evidences of
public obligations.
(4)
In addition to any other enforcement provisions in this chapter, a
person who the Commission or a court finds has violated this chapter:
(1) Is subject to termination or other disciplinary action; and
May be suspended from receiving payment of salary or other
compensation pending full compliance with the terms of an order
of the Commission or a court.
(2)
E.
A Town official or employee found to have violated this chapter is
subject to disciplinary or other appropriate personnel action, including
removal from office, disciplinary action, suspension of salary, or other
sanction.
F.
Violation of § 13-7 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor subject to a
fine of up to $10,000 or imprisonment of up to one year.
G.
A finding of a violation of this chapter by the Commission is public
information.
H.
§ 13-9 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 13-10
8:61
Chapter 19
INFRACTIONS, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Misdemeanors and infractions — See Charter,
§ C12-5.
Fines and penalties — See Ch. A115.
§ 19-1. Violations of Town ordinances designated infractions.
§ 19-2. Repeal of misdemeanor provisions.
Those portions of any ordinances of the Town of Mount Airy enacted before
January 5, 1981, which provide that a violation of the same shall constitute
a misdemeanor are hereby repealed.
§ 19-3. Issuance of citations. [Amended 12-2-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-29]
Violation of any ordinance of the Town of Mount Airy, including violation
of any zoning or land use ordinance or regulation, shall be a municipal
infraction and shall be punishable in accordance with § 3 of Article
23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland, unless the same shall be
specifically designated as a misdemeanor or felony by another section
of this Code.
A.
Citations may be issued to the individual committing the infraction as
well as the property owner or business entity for which the individual
works, if the infraction is committed at said property or within the
individual’s scope of employment for the business. Such citations may
be individually prosecuted. [Added 11-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-38]
B.
Citations for municipal infractions may be issued by any police officer,
the Mayor and any member of the Council.
A.
Police officers retained, contracted for or hired by the Town shall
enforce all applicable laws, including the Town of Mount Airy Code,
ordinances and resolutions, except as otherwise provided by any other
provision of the Code or Charter, by issuing citations for municipal
infractions, citations for parking violations, or by taking other action as
may be appropriate to enforce the Town of Mount Airy Code and laws.
B.
The Mayor or appropriate Council member may, with the consent of the
Council, designate specific Town staff who shall be authorized to issue
citations for municipal infractions, citations for parking violations, or
to take other action to enforce the Town of Mount Airy Code and laws
as may be appropriate, subject to review by the Mayor or appropriate
Council member.
C.
§ 13-10 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 19-4
8:62
§ 19-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-39]
Chapter 25
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation and Park Board — See Ch. 31.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 98.
Zoning— See Ch. 112.
Except as provided for by any other provision of this Code, the amount
of the infraction fine assessed for violation of any zoning ordinance or
subdivision regulation shall be $100 for the first offense, and $200 for
the second and subsequent offenses occurring within six months of the
first offense. For violation of all other ordinances, except as otherwise
provided, the fine shall be $50 for the first offense, and $100 for the
second and subsequent offenses occurring within six months of the first
offense.
A.
Each day of an ongoing violation, or separate incident where
applicable, shall be considered a separate violation.
B.
Fines which are not paid or otherwise resolved within 30 days of
issuance of the citation shall be doubled.
C.
The Town may, in addition to a fine, issue an order by the Mayor, seek
a court order to enforce the ordinance, or seek an abatement order or
other order as appropriate from the court.
D.
§ 19-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 19-4
8:63

ARTICLE I
Establishment; Members; Powers and Duties
§ 25-1. Reestablishment; jurisdiction.
By authority of Article 66B, § 3.01, of the Annotated Code of Maryland (1973
Edition), there is hereby reestablished a Mount Airy Planning Commission,
hereinafter referred to as the "Commission." Its territorial jurisdiction shall
extend over the incorporated area of the Town of Mount Airy.
§ 25-2. Membership; terms; quorum; compensation. [Amended
7-1-1985 by Ord. No. 141; 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-8]
§ 25-3. Powers, functions and duties.
The Commission shall have all the powers, functions and duties provided for
in Article 66B, § 3.01, of the Annotated Code of Maryland (1973 Edition).
The Commission shall consist of seven members, each to serve for
five years or until his or her successor takes office, except that the
terms of members first appointed are staggered such that the first
person appointed serves for one year, the second appointed for two
years, the third appointed for three years, the fourth appointed for four
years and the fifth member appointed serves for a term of five years.
The sixth member appointed shall serve three years, and the seventh
member appointed shall serve five years. An alternate member may be
appointed who may take part in Commission discussions and who shall
serve in the absence or recusal of any of the seven regular members.
[Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-29]
A.
The presence of four members shall constitute a quorum for any
meeting.
B.
All members shall serve with such compensation as the Mayor and
Council deem appropriate and may be removed by the Mayor and
Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. All
members shall be eligible for reappointment.
C.
§ 25-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 25-3
8:65

ARTICLE II
Adequacy of Facilities
[Added 4-3-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-1; amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2; 4-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-2]
§ 25-4. Certification of facilities. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-30]
The Planning Commission ("the Commission") shall review the
adequacy of public facilities at the development plan submission stages
as set forth in Subsection B below. Notwithstanding anything contained
herein to the contrary, review of adequacy of facilities shall not be
required for site plans for any lot contained within a commercial or
industrial subdivision that received preliminary plan approval prior to
April 3, 1989, except for those uses specified in § 25-11. As used herein,
the term "public facilities" or "facilities" shall mean the following:
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
(1) Water;
(2) Sewer;
(3) Schools (for residential, non-senior housing only);
(4) Roads and traffic control devices;
(5) Fire and rescue services;
(6) Police services; and
(7) Parks and open space.
A.
The Commission shall determine the adequacy of public facilities at
the concept plan stage for site plans, subdivision plans and minor
subdivision plans as applicable, and again, with respect to water and
sewer capacity only, when the Town extends water and/or sewer
capacity to a development plan and water and sewer allocation
applicant on the waiting list established pursuant to § 109-19.51 of
the Town Code (hereinafter throughout this chapter, "the waiting list").
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
B.
The Commission shall consider whether, based on projected financial
data, revenues to be generated from the building of the proposed
development project, to include expected tax revenues and impact fees,
will be sufficient to provide required services to such project.
C.
In addition, the Commission shall consider whether, based on any
information provided by a state or county agency, the proposed
development project is consistent with applicable governmental
environmental standards, including those which address protection of
sensitive lands, protection of water supplies or conservation areas,
protection of natural resources and protection of air and water quality,
D.
§ 25-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 25-4
8:67
§ 25-5. Adequate facilities. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-31]
The Planning Commission shall approve the adequacy of public facilities
for a proposed development project if each of the following facilities are
adequate according to the below standards for each facility. The Planning
Commission shall consider the cumulative impact of all existing and
approved development, which shall include existing development;
development approved at the preliminary plan stage; development
approved that is under construction or for which a permit could be issued
at any time; and future connections from the proposed development. The
Planning Commission shall also consider existing or future approved
development in the surrounding region, including Carroll and Frederick
Counties, to the extent such development is considered likely to impact any
of the below public facilities. The Planning Commission may, in reviewing
adequacy, also seek the advisory opinion of staff, experts, Town commissions
or others as appropriate.
and may, if recommended by a state or county agency, require
appropriate protection of environmental resources, creation of
additional open space or reductions in housing density than would
otherwise be permitted on site or subdivision plans.
Upon receipt of written responses from all applicable review agencies
concerning adequacy of such facilities, the Commission shall
determine, as set forth below, whether each facility is adequate for
the proposed development project. The Commission shall base its
conclusion on objective factual information, including such written
responses and any other reasonably reliable information available to
the Commission. In addition, the Commission may employ, at the cost
of the developer, a licensed professional to review the proposed
development project and provide relevant information concerning the
adequacy of facilities to assist the Commission in reaching an informed
decision. In the event the Commission has not made a determination of
inadequacy, written responses from applicable review agencies shall be
updated six months after the responses have been completed.
E.
In the event a reviewing agency shall fail to provide a written response
addressing the adequacy of facilities for a proposed development
project within 45 days of being requested to do so by the Commission,
the Commission may:
Postpone consideration of the project for no more than 30 days to
allow such agency to respond;
(1)
Engage a private licensed professional, at the cost of the developer,
to review the applicable portion of the project; or
(2)
Review data that is available and apply the standards noted below
to determine whether adequacy exists.
(3)
F.
§ 25-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 25-5
8:68
Water. To the extent the municipal water system is certified as having
sufficient available capacity to provide maximum day demand and meet
peak-hour demand in addition to fire flow to each "equivalent dwelling
unit" or projected usage per lot of the proposed development project
without exceeding 80% of overall system capacity, and if the
distribution system is capable of providing normal required pressure
as well as minimum residual pressure to existing, approved, and the
proposed development project, considering all of the following factors:
(1) Existing conditions for water usage and availability;
Future connections from development approved at the preliminary
plan stage;
(2)
Future connections from buildings under construction or recorded
lots from previously approved preliminary plans for which a permit
could be issued at any time in the future;
(3)
(4) Future connections from the proposed development project; and
Any additional water source to be provided by the developer and
which has been tested and certified as required by the Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Mount Airy.4
(5)
A.
Sewer. If the Town sanitary sewer system is certified as to its ability to
provide the sewerage capacity necessary for the proposed development
project, without exceeding 80% of overall system capacity, considering:
Existing conditions and capacities of the municipal wastewater
treatment plant or overall sanitary sewer system;
(1)
Future connections from development approved at the preliminary
plan stage;
(2)
Future connections from buildings under construction or recorded
lots from previously approved preliminary plans for which a permit
could be issued at any time in the future; and
(3)
(4) Future connections from the proposed development project.
B.
Schools. If, according to the local enrollment figures for each
enrollment district and each school in such enrollment district, as
determined and certified by the Board of Education for the county in
which the proposed development project will occur, each school within
such applicable enrollment district will not exceed 100% capacity
according to local functional capacity standards utilized by the
applicable school system, considering:
(1) Existing population from existing homes;
C.
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
§ 25-5 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 25-5
8:69
Projected population from future building from residences
approved at the preliminary plan stage;
(2)
Projected population from future building from residences under
construction or recorded lots from previously approved preliminary
plans for which a permit could be issued at any time in the future;
(3)
Ratings and projections from residences in the proposed
development project.
(4)
Roads.
All streets or intersections designated by the Commission as
serving or affected by the proposed development project (which
may include roads or intersections not immediately adjacent to or
within the immediate vicinity of the proposed development project)
shall have a rating of A or B (for roads maintained exclusively by
the Town) or rating of C or better (for roads which are maintained
by county or state governments), considering:
(a) Effects of existing traffic;
Traffic projected to be generated from future residential,
commercial or industrial projects which have received
preliminary plan approval;
(b)
Traffic projected to be generated from residential, commercial
or industrial projects under construction or recorded lots from
previously approved preliminary plans for which a permit
could be issued at any time in the future; and
(c)
(d) Traffic from the proposed development project.
(1)
The Commission shall require that all streets and intersections
which are designated by the Commission as serving the proposed
development project be certified as to their adequacy by a licensed
firm hired by the Town at the expense of the developer. The
Commission may also require county certification or state
certification whenever a county or state road is within the
designated area and serving the proposed development project.
The firm preparing the certification shall use the methodology in
the current edition of the "Highway Capacity Manual" for the rating
of all streets or, if in effect, the methodology as determined by the
Town's traffic impact study (TIS) guidelines.
(2)
If the existing level of service of the affected street or intersection
is less than the rating of A, B or C as applicable, but not below
level of service D, then such street or intersection will still be
considered adequate, provided the proposed development project
will not degrade such street or intersection by more than 2% based
on the volume-to-capacity ratio. Any degradation in excess of 2%
shall be deemed inadequate or approaching inadequate.
(3)
D.
§ 25-5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 25-5
8:70
Fire and rescue services. Services are adequate if the Chief of the
Mount Airy Volunteer Fire Department, or his or her designee, shall
certify that:
Projected number of late and no responses is less than 15%, and
the total number of no responses is less than 4%, measured on a
quarterly basis;
(1)
Using an average over the previous 12 months, response time is
eight minutes or less from time of dispatch to on-scene arrival with
adequate apparatus and personnel 90% of the time;
(2)
All bridges and roads for the most direct route or acceptable
secondary route to the proposed development project are adequate
to support fire and emergency response apparatus; and
(3)
There exists sufficient water flow, from hydrants or other
acceptable water sources, for use by emergency response
apparatus to serve the proposed development project.
(4)
E.
Police services. Services are adequate if the Mayor or the person
designated by the Mayor to certify police services adequacy certifies
that the ratio of police personnel to population will not exceed 1,000
people for one officer, including Sheriff patrols and additional state
police or county patrols serving the Town, and also certifies that police
services are adequate to provide services to existing residences and
businesses as well as the proposed development.
F.
Parks and open space.
Parks and open space provisions are adequate if the Parks
Department certifies that the ratio of parks and open space acreage
to population will meet or exceed at least three acres per 100
persons, considering:
(a) Existing population from existing homes;
Projected population from future building from residences
approved at the preliminary plan stage;
(b)
Projected population from future building from residences
under construction or from recorded lots from previously
approved preliminary plans for which a permit could be issued
at any time in the future;
(c)
Projected population from residents in the proposed
development project.
(d)
(1)
Until such time as the Town's inventory of parks and open space
meets the three acres per 100 persons standard, the Planning
Commission may waive strict application of the park and open
space adequacy standard, provided that each development project
that is granted a waiver under this subsection provides at least
(2)
G.
§ 25-5 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 25-5
8:71
§ 25-6. Facilities approaching inadequate. [Amended 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-32]
The Planning Commission may approve a proposed development project for
a residential subdivision but allow building only on a phased-in schedule
that will permit building to begin 24 months from the date of approval,
but which, after building is permitted to begin, may allow no more than 10
homes the first year, 15 homes the second year, and 20 homes the third year
if any of the following facilities are approaching inadequate according to the
below standards for each facility:
three acres of park and open space per 100 persons, or a prorata
portion thereof, of projected population from residents in the
proposed development project.
Water. To the extent the municipal water system is certified as having
sufficient available capacity to provide maximum day demand and meet
peak-hour demand in addition to fire flow to each "equivalent dwelling
unit" or projected usage per lot of the proposed development project
without exceeding 88% of overall system capacity, and if the
distribution system is capable of providing normal required pressure
as well as minimum residual pressure to existing, approved, and the
proposed development project, considering all of the following factors:
(1) Existing conditions for water usage and availability;
Future connections from development approved at the preliminary
plan stage;
(2)
Future connections from buildings under construction or recorded
lots from previously approved preliminary plans for which a permit
could be issued at any time in the future;
(3)
(4) Future connections from the proposed development project; and
Any additional water source to be provided by the developer and
which has been tested and certified as required by the Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Mount Airy.5
(5)
A.
Sewer. If the Town sanitary sewer system is certified as to its ability to
provide the sewerage capacity necessary for the proposed development
project, without exceeding 88% of overall system capacity, considering:
Existing conditions and capacities of the municipal wastewater
treatment plant or overall sanitary sewer system;
(1)
Future connections from development approved at the preliminary
plan stage;
(2)
B.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
§ 25-5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 25-6
8:72
Future connections from buildings under construction or recorded
lots from previously approved preliminary plans for which a permit
could be issued at any time in the future; and
(3)
Ratings and projections from residences in the proposed
development project.
(4)
Schools. To the extent new schools are planned under the Board of
Education's capital improvement plans as approved by the applicable
county government to be funded, to be open for students within five
years from the date building begins, then if according to enrollment
figures certified by the Board of Education for the county in which
the proposed development project will occur, each elementary school
proposed to serve the projected school population will exceed 100%
capacity but not greater than 105% capacity, and each middle and
high school will exceed 100% but not greater than 110% capacity,
once the proposed development project is fully built, according to local
functional capacity standards utilized by the applicable school system,
considering:
(1) Existing population from existing homes;
Projected population from future building from residences
approved at the preliminary plan stage;
(2)
Projected population from future building from residences under
construction or recorded lots from previously approved preliminary
plans for which a permit could be issued at any time in the future;
(3)
Ratings and projections from residences in the proposed
development project.
(4)
C.
Roads.
If any streets or intersections which are designated by the
Commission as serving or affected by the proposed development
project will have ratings that reach or exceed level C (for roads
maintained exclusively by the Town) or ratings of D (for roads
maintained by county or state governments) considering:
(a) Effects of existing traffic;
Traffic projected to be generated from future residential,
commercial or industrial projects which have received
preliminary plan approval;
(b)
Traffic projected to be generated from residential, commercial
or industrial projects under construction or recorded lots from
previously approved preliminary plans for which a permit
could be issued at any time in the future; and
(c)
(d) Traffic from the proposed development project.
(1)
D.
§ 25-6 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 25-6
8:73
§ 25-7. Inadequate facilities. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-33]
The Commission shall require that all streets and intersections
which are designated by the Commission as serving the proposed
development project be certified by a licensed firm hired by the
Town at the expense of the developer. The Commission may also
require county certification or state certification whenever a
county or state road is within the designated area and serving the
proposed development project. The firm preparing the certification
shall use the methodology in the current edition of the Highway
Capacity Manual for the rating of all streets or, if in effect, the
methodology as determined by the Town's traffic impact study (TIS)
guidelines.
(2)
If a proposed development project is approved subject to the
phasing requirements of this section, and during such phase-in
period the facilities that were approaching inadequate are
improved such that they would then be certified as adequate, the
proposed development project may be permitted to proceed
without phasing restrictions upon approval by the Commission.
(3)
Except as set forth in Subsection A(1) below, the Planning Commission
may not approve, and must deny on the basis of inadequate facilities,
any proposed development project if any of the facilities listed in § 25-6
are not adequate according to the standards therein, or if any of the
facilities listed in § 25-7 are of a lower service level than the standard
of "approaching inadequate" subject to the provisions of § 25-7B. Any
plan denied under this section may be resubmitted 12 months after the
date of denial. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
Notwithstanding Subsection A above, the Planning Commission
shall approve a development project plan pending water and sewer
capacity availability for the sole purpose of the development
project's placement on the waiting list where the plan would
otherwise be approved and Water and Sewer Allocation Permits
issued but for the applicant's inability to demonstrate that the
proposed allocation of water and/or sewer to the project is less
than or equal to the net available capacity yield applicable to
the allocation category from which the allocation is to be made
pursuant to § 109-19.5F(2) of the Town Code.
(1)
A.
If a facility is deemed inadequate or approaching inadequate but is
scheduled to be improved to provide a higher service level under any
relevant capital improvement program of the Town, state, county or any
relevant agency thereto within six years from the date of submission
of the plan for the proposed development project, the Planning
Commission may conditionally approve the proposed development
project but defer a final decision of the adequacy of facilities for up to
three years pending reconsideration of the adequacy of facilities.
B.
§ 25-6 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 25-7
8:74
§ 25-8. Mitigation.
§ 25-9. Expiration of approval. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-35]
If a financial analysis demonstrates that revenue, including but not
limited to tax revenues and impact fees, considering existing sources
as well as that to be generated from the proposed development project,
would be sufficient to permit improvement for police and fire and
rescue services to an adequate level of services, the preliminary plan
may be conditionally approved. In that event, final plan approval shall
be deferred for at least six months and until such time as the analysis
demonstrates that improvement to an adequate level of services can be
accomplished.
C.
If a financial analysis demonstrates that revenue, including but not
limited to tax revenues and impact fees, considering existing sources
as well as that to be generated from the proposed development project,
would be available for a specific capital improvement and would be
in sufficient amount to allow improvement to a higher service level
within two years from the date construction is scheduled to begin, the
preliminary plan may be conditionally approved in part, deferring a
final decision of the adequacy of facilities for up to three years pending
reconsideration of the adequacy of facilities.
D.
Mitigation through capital improvement plan. The developer or
applicant whose plan is subject to denial or delay under this article shall
have the opportunity to provide infrastructure funds, improve facilities
directly with Town approval, or donate necessary facilities in order to
mitigate the existing inadequacy of facilities and permit consideration
for approval or delayed approval, as appropriate.
A.
Adequate public facilities test shall apply. Even if the developer or
applicant seeks to mitigate inadequate facilities as provided in
Subsection A above, no exception shall be granted under this article
and the mitigation must allow the project to meet the standards
outlined in this chapter in order to be approved; and the developer or
applicant must also enter into a development agreement with the Town
on terms and conditions acceptable to the Town Council. [Amended
7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-34]
B.
Approved plans.
A preliminary plan approved under this section shall expire at the
end of four years from the date of approval, unless:
The applicant has previously recorded a plat containing at
least 20% of the total lots contained within the approved
preliminary plan for the proposed development project; or
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 25-7 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 25-9
8:75
§ 25-10. Permit limitations. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-36; 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
Any approvals, conditional approvals, partial approvals, delays in permit
issuance or phasing in of allowed permits under this article shall be subject
to any other valid limitations imposed by the Town Council, Planning
Commission, or any other authorized governmental authority, including but
not limited to permit limitations or other conditions imposed by the Town.
The applicant has submitted, prior to the expiration of such
four-year period, a request for extension of the approval for the
plan.
(b)
If the applicant submits a request for extension of the plan, the
facilities shall be tested as required under § 25-5, and, if adequate,
the preliminary plan approval shall be extended for up to four
additional years.
(2)
A preliminary plan receiving conditional approval shall expire at the
end of five years from the date of conditional approval, subject to
extension for another five-year period; except that approval of adequate
facilities shall expire four years from the date of approval of adequacy
of facilities.
B.
The Town Council may consider, before the beginning of each fiscal
year, whether public facilities are adequate under the standards
contained within this chapter, and determine the maximum permits
per subdivision that may be issued per subdivision for the next year
after Planning Commission subdivision approval. This determination
may apply within the Town, in one or both counties, depending on
the adequacy of the specific public facilities, timing of the provision of
public facilities to address inadequacies, and approved development in
the region, among other factors.
The Town Council shall receive a report from the Planning
Commission, based on information from the Town Planner, Town
Engineer and other staff, regarding the adequacy of all public
facilities tested herein;
(1)
If one or more facilities are inadequate, the Town Council may
determine, based on recommendations from staff, that limited or no
additional permits shall be issued for any new development during
the next five-year period, depending on the level of inadequacy and
timing of any improvements to address the inadequacy;
(2)
If one or more facilities are approaching inadequate, the Town
Council may determine, based on recommendations from staff, that
permits shall be limited for any new development during the next
five-year period until the inadequacy is addressed.
(3)
The Town Council's determination shall focus only on the number
of permits that may be issued subsequent to Planning Commission
(4)
A.
§ 25-9 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 25-10
8:76
§ 25-11. Required site plan approval for existing commercial or
industrial lots.
Notwithstanding the general exemption from adequate facilities testing
afforded to commercial or industrial lots in existence on the effective date
of this article, if the use depicted on a site plan for any industrial or
commercial proposed development project is designated by Town staff as
a "large water user," then such site plan shall require testing of adequate
facilities in accordance with § 25-5. For purposes of this § 25-11, the term
"large water user" shall refer to any proposed use which, according to
water use projections adopted by the Carroll County Health Department,
will generate an average daily water consumption rate of greater than 2,500
gallons per day.
approval, and shall be independent of the Planning Commission's
authority to approve subdivisions and plats within the Town.
B. The Town Council may revise permit limitations annually.
Permits shall be issued on an annual, twelve-month basis, which shall
begin to run on the day the first building permit is issued and must not
be issued in advance.
C.
§ 25-10 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 25-11
8:77
Chapter 26
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 13. Debt policy — See Ch. 53.
§ 26-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings set forth in this section:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — Any public improvement undertaken by the
Town, including construction or reconstruction in whole or in part of any
road, bridge, street, building or water, sewer or storm drain facility or any
similar structure or facility necessary in carrying out the activities of the
Town government.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES — Includes all types of services required by the
Town but not furnished by its own employees except professional services
which are in their nature unusual and not subject to competition and shall
not include capital improvements.
PURCHASING AGENT — The Mayor or such other person as may be
designated as such in the Town Charter or by the Town Council.
SUPPLIES — Includes all commodities, materials, equipment and all other
articles or things furnished to be used by any department or Town official
or employee, except supplies of an unusual or noncompetitive nature which
shall not be subject to competitive bidding.
§ 26-2. Emergency purchases.
An emergency for purposes of this chapter, shall be deemed to exist
when a breakdown in equipment, machinery and/or a threatened
curtailment of essential services or a dangerous condition develops,
or when any unforeseen circumstance arises causing curtailment or
diminution of an essential service.
A.
In cases of emergency, the head of the appropriate department or
the purchasing agent may purchase directly the required supplies or
services. The department head or purchasing agent shall, however,
whenever practicable, obtain three competitive telephone bids and
order from the lowest responsible bidder. A written record shall be
prepared as promptly as possible concerning the circumstances of the
emergency and a tabulation of any bids and the amount expended and
shall be presented to the Council at its next meeting.
B.
§ 25-11 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 26-2
8:78
§ 26-3. Procedure where cost exceeds $30,000. [Amended 4-2-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-8; 3-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-2]
All supplies, contractual services and capital improvements, where the
estimated cost exceeds $30,000 shall be purchased by formal written
contract from the lowest responsible bidder after public notice, as
determined by the purchasing agent, inviting proposals. The following
procedures shall be observed:
§ 26-4. Procedure where cost exceeds $3,000 up to and including
$30,000. [Amended 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-24; 4-2-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-9; 3-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-2]
Where the estimated cost of a contract for supplies, services and/or capital
improvements exceeds $3,000 up to and including $30,000, the following
procedure applies:
The purchasing agent shall endeavor to reduce emergency purchases
to a minimum by use of service contracts or other arrangements for
standby services.
C.
The purchasing agent shall cause appropriate written specifications to
be prepared.
A.
Advertisement to prospective bidders shall be given in at least one
issue of a newspaper having general circulation in the Town at least 15
days before the date for the opening of bids. Such advertisement shall
include a general description of the supplies or contractual services
involved or the capital improvement to be undertaken and shall state
where bid forms and specifications may be obtained and state the place
and time for opening bids.
B.
Each bidder shall accompany his bid with a statement under oath that
he has not been a party with any other bidder to bid a fixed or uniform
price. Failure to so provide such a statement shall invalidate the bid.
C.
Bids shall be opened publicly by the purchasing agent who shall present
all bids to the Council at its next meeting. No bid may be withdrawn
within 30 days of the bid opening.
D.
The Council, by motion, shall award the contract to the lowest
responsible bidder, except that the Council may reject all bids, parts of
all bids or all bids for any one or more items included in the proposed
contract whenever, in its judgment, the public interest will be served
thereby.
E.
F. All contracts shall be signed on behalf of the Town by the Mayor.
The purchasing agent shall cause appropriate written specifications,
such as a list of items and/or services, to be prepared.
A.
§ 26-2 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 26-4
8:79
§ 26-5. Procedure where cost is $3,000 or less. [Amended 10-7-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-24; 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
When the cost of a contact for supplies, services or capital improvements
is $3,000 or less, the purchasing agent may contract for the same without
Council approval. Whenever practical, the purchasing agent shall obtain
telephone prices from at least two sources. A report of all such purchases
shall be made to the Council at its next meeting.
§ 26-6. Sale of any items, including supplies, equipment and other
materials. [Amended 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-24]
§ 26-6.1. Cooperative procurement procedures and use agreements.
[Added 10-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9]
The purchasing agent shall follow the procedures in § 26-3, or,
alternatively, may solicit informal bids by personal contact and/or by
telephone. When practical and when circumstances reasonably allow,
considering general availability of the items or services being
purchased, sources available for the purchases and past experience
with the vendor or manufacturer, at least two, preferably three, bids
shall be obtained, which, so long as already budgeted by the Town
Council, the purchasing agent may award the contract or reject bids as
set forth in § 26-3. Nothing in the section shall be read to negate the
need for purchases to be budgeted by the Town Council. Following any
award, a written contract or purchase order shall be signed on behalf
of the Town by the Mayor or designated purchasing agent. Bids may not
be withdrawn within 30 days from the date of the bid.
B.
The purchasing agent is authorized to exchange or trade-in obsolete
equipment or surplus supplies in part of full payment for new supplies
or equipment. All proposed trade-ins must be approved by the Council.
A.
The purchasing agent may sell any Town owned items, including
supplies, equipment and other materials which are determined to be
surplus, obsolete or no longer needed. Such sale may be made, for
items of $200 of value or more, only by the acceptance of sealed bids,
which may be opened and accepted only after advertisement in at least
one newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least 15 days prior
to the date of opening of the bids and sale.
B.
This provision shall not apply to materials sold to the general public,
including commemorative items, collectible items, items marked with
the Town Seal or name or items sold on behalf of the Historical Society.
C.
The Town may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer
cooperative procurement agreements with one or more other public
entities when the best interests of the Town would be served thereby.
A.
The Town may contract with any contractor who offers goods, services,
insurance, or construction on the same terms as provided other state,
B.
§ 26-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 26-6.1
8:80
§ 26-6.2. Sole source procedures. [Added 3-5-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-2]
local or municipal governments or agencies thereof who have arrived
at those terms through a competitive procurement procedure similar to
the procedure used by the Town.
The Town may contract directly with other public entities for goods
or services when such goods or services were obtained through
competitive procurement procedures.
C.
The Town may contract with any public entity to provide or receive
any work or services of the type the Town or such other public entity
performs for its jurisdiction
D.
The Town may enter into agreements or memoranda of understanding
with other public entities for the common use or lease of facilities upon
terms agreed upon between the parties.
E.
Where the Town requires supplies, materials, or equipment which are
produced or sold by only one manufacturer or vendor, or which cannot
practicably be procured by the Town from any other source, the Town
may specify such manufacturer's or vendor's supply, material or
equipment in the Invitation to Bid and may obtain competitive bids from
that manufacturer or vendor under the following conditions:
The Town must receive a letter from the manufacturer/vendor
enclosing copies of all applicable patents and a statement setting
forth the basis for the assertion that the manufacturer/vendor is the
sole provider of such supplies, materials or equipment;
(1)
The purchasing agent has, after a good faith review of available
sources, verified that there is only one responsible source for the
required supplies, materials, or equipment;
(2)
Upon a finding that no reasonable alternative source exists other
than the manufacturer/vendor asserted to be the sole source for the
required supplies, materials or equipment, the purchasing agent
shall negotiate in good faith in the best interests of the Town the
price, delivery and other terms of such sole source purchase; and
(3)
The purchasing agent shall complete, sign and submit to the Town
Clerk for recordkeeping in the regular course the Town's Sole
Source Justification Form, as amended from time to time and
available at Town Hall, attaching the letter from the manufacturer/
vendor required in Subsection A(1) above, and therein provide a
detailed justification for the sole source purchase to include the
Town's need for the supply, material or equipment and the unique
features of such supply, material or equipment which cause it to be
available for purchase from only one manufacturer or vendor.
(4)
A.
§ 26-6.1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 26-6.2
8:81
§ 26-6.3. Architectural and engineering services. [Added 3-5-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-2; amended 7-1-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-10]
Where the Town requires the same supplies, materials, or equipment
which are provided by a sole manufacturer/vendor, the Town may award
the bid so long as the conditions set forth in Subsection A above are
met and in accordance with the procedures, depending on the amount
of the purchase, set forth in § 26-3, 26-4 or 26-5.
B.
When the Town requires architectural and/or engineering services, the
Town may:
Follow the procedures for purchases set forth in the sections of this
chapter above; or
(1)
May choose to select such candidates on the basis of both
qualifications and a proposal, and continue to award services to the
successful candidate for a period up to five years, so long as:
The Town issues a combination Request for Qualifications
(RFQ) and a Request for Proposals (RFP), which shall include,
at minimum:
A request for the candidates' Statement of Qualifications
(SOQ):
[1]
[2] A fee schedule;
[3] A scope of services;
[4] Insurance requirements;
[5] The fee basis;
[6] A direction for submissions;
[7] A basis for a qualifications review; and
[8] A preliminary project schedule.
(a)
(2)
A.
When the purchase of architectural and/or engineering services follows
the RFQ/RFP method, the Town shall designate a Qualifications Review
Committee of two or three members of Town staff to review all
submissions of prospective candidates to determine the best successful
candidate to perform requested services.
B.
Purchases of architectural and engineering services under either
method set forth in this section shall, except as set forth in Subsection
A(2) above and, depending upon the amount of purchase, otherwise
follow the process for approval of awards set forth in § 26-3, 26-4 or
26-5 above.
C.
§ 26-6.2 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 26-7
8:82
§ 26-7. Other laws and regulations.
Whenever, by reason of revenue sharing or otherwise, state or federal
laws or regulations apply to any anticipated contract for supplies, services
or capital improvements, such laws or regulations shall prevail over any
inconsistent provisions of this chapter.
§ 26-8. Division of contracts.
No anticipated contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the
requirements of § 26-3 or 26-4.
§ 26-9. Lowest responsible bidder.
In determining the lowest responsible bidder under §§ 26-3 and 26-4, the
Council shall consider:
Chapter 31
RECREATION AND PARK BOARD
§ 31-1. Creation; composition; terms; compensation. [Amended
8-6-1984 by Ord. No. 137]
There is hereby created a Board of Recreation and Parks of the Town of
Mount Airy which shall consist of not fewer than five nor more than nine
members, all of whom shall have been legal residents of the Town for a
period of one year next preceding their appointment and one of whom shall
be a member of the Council of the Town of Mount Airy. All members of
the Board, except for the Council member, who shall serve for his elected
term of office, shall be appointed for terms of three years from the first
The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or
provide the service required.
A.
Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly or within the time specified without delay or interference.
B.
The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
C.
D. The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service.
E.
Whether the bidder is in arrears to the Town on debt or contract or is a
defaulter on surety to the Town or whether the bidder's Town taxes or
assessments are delinquent.
F.
Such other information as may have a bearing on the decision to award
the contract.
G.
§ 26-7 RECREATION AND PARK BOARD § 31-1
31:83
day of January of the year of their appointment or until their successors
are appointed; provided, however, that with respect to the members of
the Board first appointed, except for the Council member, two shall be
designated to serve for terms of three years and two shall be designated
to serve for terms of two years, or until their successors are appointed.
All appointments, including those required to fill vacancies, shall be made
by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. All members of the Board
shall serve without compensation except that they may be reimbursed for
actual expenses incurred to the extent authorized in the annual budget of
the Town.
§ 31-2. Officers and meetings.
The Board of Recreation and Parks shall annually select from among its
appointed members a Chairman and such additional officers as it may
deem advisable. The Board is empowered to adopt all necessary rules and
regulations for the conduct of its business and shall hold such meetings,
both regular and special, as may from time to time be deemed necessary.
The Board's regular place of business shall be the Town Hall of the Town
of Mount Airy, but both regular and special meetings of the Board may be
held elsewhere at the discretion of the Board. The Mayor shall be entitled to
participate in all meetings of the Board but shall have no vote on any matter
coming before the Board for decision except in the event of a tie.
§ 31-3. Powers and duties.
The Board is authorized and empowered to consider and determine all
questions of general policy relating to public recreation for the Town
and shall supervise and direct the expenditure of all appropriations and
funds made available to the Board from whatever source.
A.
The Board shall be responsible for the planning and recommendation
of recreation and park facilities of sufficient number, size and character
to serve the needs of the people of the Town. The Board is further
authorized to issue permits for the use of any of the facilities made
available to and accepted by the Board for such purposes by the Town
or by any person, corporation or agency having jurisdiction over the
same and to regulate the use thereof in the best interests of the
citizens and residents of the Town. The control of any lands, buildings
or other acceptable facilities made available to the Board shall be in
accordance with the agreements reached between the Board and the
person, corporation or agency having jurisdiction over such properties.
B.
The Board shall act as the coordinating agency for the Town in the use
of any state, federal or county funds available for recreation or park
facilities or the planning thereof.
C.
To the extent permitted by law, the Board of Recreation and Parks or
its authorized designee may deny an application for a permit for the
use of Town property if the applicant or the person on whose behalf the
application for a permit was made has on a prior occasion or occasions
D.
§ 31-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 31-3
31:84
made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an
event or activity previously permitted or has violated the terms of a
prior permit or permits issued to or on behalf of the applicant. The
Board of Recreation and Parks or its authorized designee may also deny
an application for a permit on any of the following grounds: [Added
6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
The application for a permit (including any required attachments
and submissions) is not fully completed and executed.
(1)
The applicant has not tendered any required application fee with
the application or has not tendered any required user fee,
indemnification agreement, insurance certificate or security
deposit as may be required within the times prescribed by the
Board.
(2)
The application for a permit contains a material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
(3)
There are reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not
legally competent to contract or be sued.
(4)
The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for
permit was made has on a prior occasion or occasions damaged
Town property and has not paid in full for such damage, or has
other outstanding and unpaid debts or taxes due to the Town.
(5)
A fully executed prior application for permit for the same time and
place has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted
to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not
reasonably permit multiple occupancy or use of the particular park
or part hereof.
(6)
The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with
previously planned programs organized and conducted by the Town
and previously scheduled for the same time and place.
(7)
The proposed use or activity is prohibited by or inconsistent with
the classifications and uses of the park or part thereof designated
pursuant to this chapter.
(8)
The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an
unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant or
other users of the park or Town employees or the public.
(9)
The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable
requirements, regulations or ordinances concerning the sale or
offering for sale of any goods or services.
(10)
(11)The use or activity proposed by the applicant is prohibited by law.
§ 31-3 RECREATION AND PARK BOARD § 31-4
31:85
§ 31-4. Annual report.
The Board shall submit to the Council of the Town of Mount Airy an annual
report of its activities, together with recommendations for further activities
and development of a recreation and parks program for the Town.
§ 31-5. Expenditures.
No expenditures may be made by said Board except to the extent authorized
by the annual budget of the Town or as may be otherwise lawfully approved
in advance by the Council of the Town of Mount Airy.
Chapter 32
RECYCLING AND SANITATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, trash and litter — See Ch. 64. Sewers — See Ch. 91.
§ 32-1. Creation; membership; terms; compensation.
There is hereby created the Recycling and Sanitation Commission of the
Town of Mount Airy, which shall consist of nine members, at least seven of
whom shall be residents of the Town, including one member of the Town
Council. All members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of
three years commencing from the first day of July of the year of appointment
or until their successors are appointed; provided, however, that with respect
to the members of the Commission first appointed, three shall be designated
to serve for initial terms of three years, three shall be designated to serve
for initial terms of two years, two shall be designated to serve for initial
terms of one year, and the Council member shall serve for the balance of his
term, or until their successors are appointed. All appointments, including
those required by any vacancies, shall be made by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, except that they may be reimbursed for actual expenses
incurred to the extent authorized in the budget.
§ 32-2. Chairman; adoption of rules; place of business.
The Commission, on or before the first day of July in each and every
year, shall select from among its members a Chairman to serve until the
succeeding June 30 and such additional officers as it may deem advisable.
The Commission is empowered to adopt all necessary rules and regulations
for the conduct of its business and shall hold such meetings as may, from
time to time, be deemed necessary. The Commission's regular place of
business shall be in the Town Hall of the Town of Mount Airy, but both
regular and special meetings of the Commission may be held elsewhere at
the discretion of the Commission.
§ 31-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 32-3
32:86
§ 32-3. Duties.
§ 32-4. Report.
The Commission shall submit to the Council of the Town of Mount Airy
an annual report on or before July 1 of each and every year summarizing
its activities, together with any recommendations relating generally to the
sanitation and recycling efforts of the Town for the ensuing year.
§ 32-5. Expenditures.
No expenditures may be made by the Commission except to the extent
authorized in the annual budget of the Town or as may otherwise be lawfully
approved in advance by the Council of the Town of Mount Airy.
Chapter 34
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
The Commission shall study, investigate and make recommendations
to the Council of the Town from time to time concerning appropriate
means and methods of efficient collection, removal and disposition of
trash and refuse, including particularly programs for recycling and the
education and encouragement of the use of recycling methods and
procedures to the fullest extent possible.
A.
The Commission shall undertake such other studies, programs and
recommendations as may be requested from time to time upon motion
of the Town Council.
B.
§ 32-3 RECYCLING AND SANITATION COMMISSION § 32-5
32:87

ARTICLE I
Council Members; Mayor
[Adopted 5-3-1982 by Ord. No. 120]
§ 34-1. Council members: compensation. [Amended 4-27-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5; 6-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-96]
Each Council member shall receive compensation of an annual salary of
$4,000 per year.
§ 34-2. Mayor: annual salary. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 148;
12-4-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-25; 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5]
The Mayor shall receive a salary of $8,500 per year.
§ 34-3. Applicability. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 148]
The rates of compensation as provided for in this article may not be changed
during the term of office of members of the Council or of the Mayor, but any
change shall apply only to those persons elected to the office of Councilman
or to the office of Mayor at and after the municipal election next following
passage of an ordinance making such change.
6. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this article, which was formerly
Councilmen; Mayor; and provided that this ordinance would retroactively apply to
7-24-2004.
§ 34-1 RECYCLING AND SANITATION COMMISSION § 34-3
32:89
Chapter 36
STREETS AND ROADS COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 25.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 96.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 98.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 36-1. Creation; members; terms; compensation.
There is hereby created the Streets and Roads Commission of the Town
of Mount Airy, which shall consist of up to seven members, including one
member of the Town Council. All members of the Commission must be
residents of the Town and shall be appointed for terms of three years
commencing from the first day of July of the year of appointment or until
their successors are appointed; provided, however, that with respect to the
members of the Commission first appointed, three shall be designated to
serve for initial terms of three years, three shall be designated to serve for
initial terms of two years, one shall be designated to serve for an initial
term of one year, and the Council member shall serve for the balance of his
term, or until their successors are appointed. The Mayor, with the approval
of the Council, shall make all appointments, including those required by any
vacancies. It is intended that membership of the Commission should, to the
extent possible, reflect all residential or commercial areas of the Town. All
members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except that
they may be reimbursed for actual expenses to the extent authorized in the
budget.
§ 36-2. Chairman; adoption of rules; place of business.
The Commission, on or before the first day of July in each and every
year, shall select from among its members a Chairman to serve until the
succeeding June 30 and such additional officers as it may deem advisable.
The Commission is empowered to adopt all necessary rules and regulations
for the conduct of its business and shall hold such meetings as may from
time to time be deemed necessary. The Commission's regular place of
business shall be in the Town Hall of the Town of Mount Airy, but both
regular and special meetings of the Commission may be held elsewhere at
the discretion of the Commission.
§ 36-3. Duties.
The Commission shall study, investigate and make recommendations to
the Council of the Town from time to time concerning traffic control,
including appropriate means and methods to promote traffic calming
and programs promoting active traffic-calming measures.
A.
§ 34-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 36-3
36:90
§ 36-4. Report.
The Commission shall submit to the Mayor and Council of the Town of
Mount Airy an annual report on or before July 1 of each and every year
summarizing its activities, together with any recommendations relating
generally to the streets and roads program for the ensuing year.
§ 36-5. Expenditures.
No expenditures may be made by the Commission except to the extent
authorized in the annual budget of the Town or as may otherwise be lawfully
approved in advance by the Council of the Town of Mount Airy.
Chapter 36A
SUSTAINABLE MOUNT AIRY COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 25. Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 36A-1. Creation: members: terms: compensation. [Amended
6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-8]
There is hereby created the Sustainable Mount Airy Commission of the
Town of Mount Airy, which shall consist of up to nine members, including
one member of the Town Council. All members of the Commission shall
be appointed for terms of three years commencing from the first day of
July of the year of appointment or until their successors are appointed:
The Commission shall review and provide advice on street and road
maintenance, including the annual street and road repaving plan for
the Town drafted by the Town of Mount Airy Engineer, and shall provide
recommendations to the Council. Any recommendations for repaving
shall be based on engineering and physical standards, and shall
consider only demonstrated need and/or the rotation under the
repaving program.
B.
The Commission shall review and provide advice on sidewalk and gutter
maintenance, including the annual sidewalk and gutter refurbishment
plan for the Town by the Town of Mount Airy Engineer, and shall
provide recommendations to the Council. Any recommendations for
sidewalk and gutter refurbishment shall be based on engineering and
physical standards, and shall consider only demonstrated need and/or
the rotation under the sidewalk and gutter refurbishment program.
C.
The Commission shall undertake such other studies, programs and
recommendations as may be appropriate or requested from time to time
by the Town Council.
D.
§ 36-3 STREETS AND ROADS COMMISSION § 36A-1
36:91
provided, however, that with respect to the members of the Commission
first appointed, three shall be designated to serve for initial terms of three
years, three shall be designated to serve for initial terms of two years, two
shall be designated to serve for an initial term of one year, and the Council
member shall serve for the balance of his term, or until their successors
are appointed. An alternate member may be appointed who may take part
in Commission discussions and who shall serve in the absence or recusal
of any of the seven regular members. The alternate shall likewise serve a
term of three years commencing from the first day of July of the year of
the appointment or until his/her successor is appointed: provided, however,
that the first alternate appointed shall serve an initial term of either three,
two or one years as the Mayor designates in the appointment of the first
alternate. The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, shall make all
appointments, including those required by any vacancies. All members of
the Commission shall serve without compensation, except that they may be
reimbursed for actual expenses to the extent authorized in the budget.
§ 36A-2. Chairman; adoption of rules; place of business.
The Commission, on or before the first day of July in each and every
year, shall select from among its members a Chairman to serve until the
succeeding June 30 and such additional officers as it may deem advisable.
The Commission is empowered to adopt all necessary rules and regulations
for the conduct of its business and shall hold such meetings as may from
time to time be deemed necessary. The Commission's regular place of
business shall be in the Town Hall of the Town of Mount Airy, but both
regular and special meetings of the Commission may be held elsewhere at
the discretion of the Commission.
§ 36A-3. Duties.
§ 36A-4. Report.
The Commission shall submit to the Mayor and Council of the Town of
Mount Airy an annual report on or before July 1 of each and every year
summarizing its activities, together with any recommendations relating
generally to the Sustainable Maryland program for the ensuing year.
The Commission shall study, investigate and make recommendations to
the Council of the Town from time to time concerning the adoption of
reasonable environmentally friendly policies and practices.
A.
The Commission shall review and provide advice to the Mayor, Town
staff and the Town Council as to zoning and planning measures that can
and should be undertaken to promote a healthy environment for the
Town and its residents.
B.
The Commission shall undertake such other studies, programs and
recommendations as may be appropriate or requested from time to time
by the Town Council.
C.
§ 36A-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 36A-5
36:92
§ 36A-5. Expenditures.
No expenditures may be made by the Commission except to the extent
authorized in the annual budget of the Town or as may otherwise be lawfully
approved in advance by the Council of the Town of Mount Airy.
Chapter 37
TOWN POLICE
§ 37-1. Department established.
The police department of the Town of Mt. Airy is hereby created and shall
be referred to herein as the "Town Police."
§ 37-2. Chief of Police.
The Town Police shall be headed by the Chief of Police, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Town Council
as provided in §§ C4-4B(1) and C7-3 of the Town Charter applicable to
managerial employees. The Chief of Police shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor and may be terminated, suspended, investigated and/or disciplined
by the Mayor in accordance with § C4-4B(2) of the Town Charter.
§ 37-3. Powers and duties of Chief of Police.
The general powers and duties of the Chief of Police shall be:
To organize, manage and supervise the Town Police and its officers and
civilian employees in all areas of law enforcement.
A.
To recommend to the Mayor the appointment, hiring or promotion
of the officers and civilian employees of the Town Police pursuant to
§§ C4-4B(1) and C7-3 of the Town Charter and subject to the limits of
any budget established for the Town Police by the Town Council.
B.
To recommend to the Mayor the termination of any officer or civilian
employee of the Town Police pursuant to Section C4-4B(2) of the Town
Charter and, as respects officers of the Town Police, subject to the Law
Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights (LEOBR) as codified at § 3-101, et
seq., of the Public Safety Article of the Maryland Code.
C.
To investigate, suspend, discipline and demote officers of the Town
Police subject to the LEOBR.
D.
To investigate, suspend, and discipline civilian employees of the Town
Police.
E.
To recommend to the Mayor and Town Council the number of police
officers and civilian employees of the Town Police force and their
compensation subject to the limits of any budget established for the
Town Police by the Town Council.
F.
§ 36A-5 STREETS AND ROADS COMMISSION § 37-3
36:93
§ 37-4. Powers and duties of police officers.
Police officers of the Town Police, including the Chief of Police, shall have
the powers and authority of constables in this state and specifically shall
have the authority to enforce the criminal, traffic and parking laws of
this state, the provisions of the Town Code or other applicable law that
To establish qualifications, rules and regulations and operational
policies for the Town Police and set standards for hiring, training and
performance.
G.
To appoint a physician and a psychologist as medical examiners, who
shall examine all applicants for police officer, or periodically examine
police officers, as to their physical and psychological fitness to become
members of the Town Police.
H.
To require polygraph examinations of applicants for the position of
police officer or of police officers periodically or in connection with an
internal investigation if authorized by law, including the LEOBR.
I.
To formulate goals and objectives for the Town Police and to insure
productivity from its personnel.
J.
To set operational strategies that will work best in the Town and to
ensure that the citizens have a well-trained and professional police
department.
K.
To issue operational orders and special orders, including, but not
limited to, the disposition of unclaimed, found or lawfully seized
personal property, not inconsistent with law, including the Town Code.
L.
To propose a departmental budget and work within the limits of any
budget established for the Town Police by the Town Council.
M.
To recommend that the Town Council approve entry into mutual aid
agreements with other law enforcement agencies, pursuant to the
Criminal Procedure Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, § 2-105.
N.
To cooperate and exchange information with other federal, state or
local police departments or law enforcement agencies within and
without the state for the purposes of achieving greater success in
preventing and detecting crimes and apprehending criminals.
O.
To attend regular meetings of the Town Council, or to designate another
employee of the Town Police in the event that the Chief of Police cannot
attend, to provide a monthly police report in public session, or at such
other meetings or times as the Mayor and/or the Town Council may
require.
P.
Such other things in relation to the fiscal, financial or administrative
affairs of the Town Police as may be lawfully authorized by the Mayor
or the Town Council or as may be authorized by law applicable to law
enforcement agencies.
Q.
§ 37-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 37-4
36:94
constables in this state are authorized to enforce, within the Town limits or
otherwise where they are authorized to police pursuant to any applicable
mutual aid agreement or other applicable law. Police officers of the Town
Police, including the Chief of Police, shall have the power of arrest and
to issue traffic, criminal, parking or municipal infraction citations where
applicable law, including the Town Code, permits.
§ 37-5. Compensation.
The compensation of the Chief of Police shall be set each year by the Town
Council in its annual budget.
Chapter 38
WATER AND SEWER COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 91.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 98.
Water — See Ch. 109.
§ 38-1. Creation; membership; terms.
There is hereby created the Water and Sewer Commission of the Town of
Mount Airy, which shall consist of seven members all of whom shall be
residents of the Town and include one member of the Town Council. Each
member is to serve for four years or until his or her successor takes office,
except that the terms of members first appointed are staggered such that
the first person appointed serves for one year, the second appointed for
two years, the third appointed for three years, the fourth appointed for four
years, the fifth appointed for one year and the sixth appointed for two years
or until their successors are appointed. All appointments, including those
required by any vacancies, shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of
the Council.
§ 38-2. Officers; quorum; compensation.
The members will elect a Chairman of the Commission in their first meeting
and agree upon other officers as they deem necessary. Officer elections will
be held every year in the July meeting. Four members of the Commission
shall constitute a quorum. The members of the Commission shall not be
entitled to compensation for their services but may be reimbursed for actual
expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties, provided
that funds for such reimbursement shall have been authorized in the budget
of the Town.
§ 38-3. Duties.
§ 37-4 WATER AND SEWER COMMISSION § 38-3
38:95
§ 38-4. Reports.
The Water and Sewer Commission will present a timely annual report on
actual usage during the previous year ending December 31 and projected
usage and capacities for each of the ensuing five years and for 10 years
in the future. The projections will include, at a minimum, average-year and
worst-case-year scenarios. Specific subjects of the report should include the
following:
The Water and Sewer Commission, in consultation with appropriate
staff, will monitor and report on water and sewer systems' demand
and capacity and make recommendations for actions by Town staff, the
Mayor and Town Council to ensure that citizens have access to essential
services without restriction to the greatest degree possible even under
adverse weather conditions. Specifically, the Commission shall study,
investigate and make recommendations to the Council on the following:
Review means of enhancing the Town's water supply, specifically
including strategies to enhance the groundwater supply but
optionally including surface water in combination with
groundwater.
(1)
Consider incentives and strategies for commercial and residential
conservation.
(2)
Draft plans for addressing future drought emergencies which will
focus on shared sacrifice, predictability and flexibility.
(3)
In consultation with staff, recommend water allocations (MDE
permits) required before future development can be approved.
(4)
A.
The Commission shall regularly review and make recommendations
upon water and sewer usage rates and overall development fees,
including but not limited to water and sewer connection fees, annual
assessment fees, water and sewer service fees, impact fees, and
temporary surcharges to pay for principal and interest on loans for
new water sources or to upgrade or expand water and wastewater
treatment facilities.
B.
The Commission shall undertake such other studies, programs and
recommendations as may be requested from time to time by the Town
Council.
C.
Annually updated plan to meet the specific water needs of all existing
residents and businesses, both normal and peak time use, as well as
reserves as recommended by the state for normal and drought years
considering specific water needs of infill development and approved
development that is yet to be built.
A.
Annual updates to the recommendations enumerated in § 38-3. Duties,
Subsections A and B.
B.
§ 38-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 38-5
38:96
§ 38-5. Expenditures.
No expenditures may be made by the Water and Sewer Commission except
to the extent authorized in the annual budget of the Town or as may
otherwise be lawfully approved in advance by the Council of the Town of
Mount Airy.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 41
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 51. Peace and good order — See Ch. 82.
§ 41-1. Prohibited acts; exemptions. [Amended 10-3-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-13]
§ 41-2. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment for six months, or both.
§ 41-3. Public intoxication; possession and consumption. [Added
12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-12; amended 10-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-13]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or manager of any property
located in the Town of Mount Airy which is operated for nonresidential
purposes to knowingly permit, encourage or allow anyone to enter
upon said premises with alcoholic beverages in either open or closed
containers intended for the consumption of such person or others upon
said premises or to consume any alcoholic beverage upon such
premises.
A.
This section shall not apply to any private residence, any premises
being operated solely for the benefit of a not-for-profit organization
as defined in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, any
premises for which an alcoholic beverage license has been issued
pursuant to Article 2B of the Maryland Code or to those persons
presently owning, leasing or managing any restaurant or similar food
establishment with a valid license issued by the respective county- or
state-authorized authority.
B.
Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following phrases shall
have the meanings indicated:
A.
§ 38-5 WATER AND SEWER COMMISSION § 41-3
38:97
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin,
cordials, beer, ale, stout, wines, cider and any other spirituous, vinous,
malt or fermented liquor or compound by whatever name called
containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes.
BEER — Any brewed alcoholic beverage and includes beer, ale, porter
and stout.
QUASI-PUBLIC PLACE — Property under private ownership or control
to which the general public is invited for an event.
UNSEALED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINER — A container when
its top, tab or cork has been removed or any of the contents have been
removed or any seal or stamp thereon has been removed or broken or
where the container has been opened in any other manner.
Public intoxication. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an
intoxicated condition upon any of the streets, alleys, public lands or
any place or establishment habitually frequented by members of the
general public within the limits of the Town of Mount Airy.
B.
Consumption of, or unsealed container of, alcoholic beverages. It shall
be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage or to
have in his or her possession any unsealed alcoholic beverage container
with alcoholic beverages therein or to discard any alcoholic beverage
container under the following circumstances:
While in or on a public street, lane, road, avenue, sidewalk, public
parking place, park, playground, recreation area or any other
public place or upon any land owned or occupied by the Town of
Mount Airy or by the County Commissioners of Frederick County
or the County Commissioners of Carroll County.
(1)
While in private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or
parked upon any public street, alley, public parking lot or other
public or quasi-public place within the Town limits.
(2)
While upon any private property in which he or she does not have
an ownership interest without the permission of the owner or such
other person who has authority to grant such permission.
(3)
While in or about any other public or quasi-public place or a
place to which the public is invited, including without limitation
any business, church, institutional, commercial or professional
premises, except when such consumption or possession of an
unsealed container or containers is with the express permission
of the owner or other person having authority to grant such
permission.
(4)
C.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C, the same shall not
apply to any public area where the consumption of alcoholic beverages
D.
§ 41-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 41-3
38:98
Chapter 42
AMUSEMENT AND VIDEO GAMES
§ 42-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FOR PROFIT — The charging of anything of value by the owner or possessor
of a video game to permit another to use the video game machine.
VIDEO GAME — Any game that has an electronic display screen such as a
cathode ray tube.
§ 42-2. License required.
On and after September 1, 1982, no person shall operate for profit within
the Town limits any machine or device which displays a video games unless
a license has first been obtained therefor.
§ 42-3. Applications.
Applications for licenses, known as "video game machine licenses," shall be
made at the Town Hall upon forms to be prepared by the Town Clerk with
the approval of the Mayor. Applicants shall be required to state their name,
permanent address, a description of the machine or device, disclosing the
manufacturer, with the popular name of the video game or games to be
displayed by the machine or device and any serial or identification number
of the machine and the address of the location where it will be operated.
The applicant must be at least 18 years of age and must be the actual owner
or lessee of the machine applied for licensing. Upon being satisfied as to the
correctness and completeness of the application, the license may be issued
by the Town Clerk or the Mayor upon payment of the proper fee.
§ 42-4. Fees.
has been specifically authorized by a resolution of the Mayor and
Council of the Town of Mount Airy.
Violations and penalties. Violation of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor subject to the penalties as set forth in § 41-2 of the Code
of the Town of Mount Airy.
E.
Any license applied for between September 1 and February 28 shall be
valid until August 1 of the next year and the fee shall be $50.
A.
Any license applied for on and after March 1 shall be valid until August
1 of that year and the fee shall be $25.
B.
§ 41-3 AMUSEMENT AND VIDEO GAMES § 42-5
42:99
§ 42-5. Renewals.
Licenses terminate automatically at the end of the period for which they
were issued. Licensees may renew licenses only by filing new applications
with current information. Such applications may be filed prior to a
termination date to avoid any unlicensed period of time.
§ 42-6. Surrender or abandonment of license.
Surrender or abandonment of any license or of any licensed machine shall
not entitle the licensee to any refund of license fees.
§ 42-7. Display of license.
Licenses shall be securely affixed to the machine for which issued or to
the premises for which issued in close proximity to the machine so as to
be readily visible. Failure to have such a license displayed shall create a
presumption that the license was never issued.
§ 42-8. Restrictions.
§ 42-9. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction, subject to a
fine not to exceed $100 upon conviction and a fine not to exceed $200 for
each repeated offense.
Chapter 43
ANIMALS
§ 43-1. Laws applicable.
Licenses may not be transferred from one person to another and are
valid only for the machine and for the premises described in each
application.
A.
There shall be no more than three such machines on any one premises,
except that this restriction shall not apply to premises the principal use
of which is as a bowling alley, arcade or recreation center.
B.
The animal control laws applicable within Frederick County, as
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference as
governing the conduct of pets and animals within the corporate limits
of the Town of Mount Airy which are located within Frederick County,
and all citizens of the municipality within Frederick County will abide
by said animal control laws and any amendments thereto.
A.
The animal control laws applicable within Carroll County, as amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference as governing the
conduct of pets and animals within the corporate limits of the Town of
B.
§ 42-5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 43-1
43:100
§ 43-2. Enforcement.
Chapter 44
ANNEXATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 25.
§ 44-1. Form of petitions.
In addition to all requirements of state law, each petition for annexation
shall be either typewritten or legibly printed and shall contain the address
of each person signing the same. In the event that there is more than one
petitioner, the petition shall also contain the name, address and telephone
number of a designated representative of the petitioners who shall serve as
a contact person for the purpose of receiving notices from the Town and
requests for further information concerning the petition.
§ 44-2. Attachments.
Each petition shall be accompanied by seven copies of a metes and bounds
description and of a plat of the property to be annexed, prepared by a
professional land surveyor or property line surveyor licensed in the State of
Maryland. The plat shall show adjacent Town boundaries, names of owners
of adjoining properties with title references, the zoning of the property
proposed to be annexed and of all adjoining properties, shall have a site map
or detail showing the location of the subject property on the County Master
Plan and shall be of a scale as requested by the Town Planner.
Mount Airy which are located within Carroll County, and all citizens of
the municipality within Carroll County will abide by said animal control
laws and any amendments thereto.
The Commissioners of Frederick County, or their successors, are
through their designated agent or government department hereby
empowered and designated by the Town of Mount Airy to enforce its
laws within the corporate limits of the Town of Mount Airy which are
located within Frederick County.
A.
The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, or their successors,
are through their designated agent or government department hereby
empowered and designated by the Town of Mount Airy to enforce its
laws within the corporate limits of the Town of Mount Airy which are
located within Carroll County.
B.
§ 43-1 ANIMALS § 44-3
43:101
§ 44-3. Processing. [Amended 12-5-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-4]
Upon the filing of any petition for annexation with the Town, the same or
a copy of the same shall be forwarded to the Town Attorney(s) who shall
cause to be made a verification of the signatures thereon for the purpose of
seeing if the same comply with state law. In the event that said verification
fails to indicate compliance with state law, the Town Attorney(s) shall advise
the Council and the petitioner or petitioners thereof, and no further action
shall be taken until compliance is obtained by the petitioner or petitioners.
In the event that said verification indicates compliance with state law and
that the Town Attorney(s) find said petition to otherwise be in proper
form, then the Town Attorney(s) shall prepare an appropriate resolution for
introduction at the next legislative session of the Town Council and shall
advise the representative of the petitioner of such preparation and furnish
such representative with a copy of the proposed resolution. Prior to the
introduction of said resolution, the petitioner or petitioners shall pay to the
Town the sum of $5,000 as a deposit toward costs to be incurred by the
Town for review of the request by the Town Planner, advice and services by
the Town Attorney(s) and review by any consultants engaged by the Town.
§ 44-4. Advertising and hearing; referral to Planning Commission.
Upon payment of the above sum, the resolution shall be formally introduced
at a legislative session of the Council, which shall cause public notice of a
hearing thereon to be given as required by state law and which shall also
refer the same to the Planning Commission for study and recommendations.
§ 44-5. Further information.
The Planning Commission, in its discretion, may request additional
information from the petitioner or petitioners, such as topographic
information, traffic studies, etc.
§ 44-6. Action on petition.
The Town shall cause any written report and/or recommendations made
by the Planning Commission to be furnished promptly to the
representative of the petitioner or petitioners. At the conclusion of the
public hearing or public hearings thereon, the Council shall announce
the date of the legislative session at which it intends to act upon said
petition and shall give notice of that fact to the representative of the
petitioner or petitioners.
A.
At the legislative session designated for action upon said petition, the
Council may propose that the same be granted subject to conditions. In
the event that the petitioners fail to attend said meeting or attended the
same but failed to object to any of said proposed conditions, they shall
be deemed to have consented to the same in the event that said petition
is granted, and said conditions shall be binding upon the petitioners,
each of them and all persons thereafter acquiring an interest in the
property so annexed.
B.
§ 44-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 44-7
43:102
§ 44-7. Withdrawal of petition.
Upon the written request of any petitioner, signed by him or her in person,
or upon verbal request made by any petitioner at any public hearing on the
petition or at any legislative session at which the resolution in connection
therewith is being considered, the petition may be withdrawn.
§ 44-8. Adjustment and payment of fees. [Amended 12-5-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-4]
The Town shall provide quarterly statements of costs incurred to date
for review of the annexation by the Town Planner, services of the Town
Attorney(s) and any consultants and costs of publication of required notices
plus 15% toward the Town’s administrative costs and overhead. Before
taking final action upon any such petition or in the event that any such
petition is withdrawn, the Council shall advise the petitioners’
representative of the total charges incurred for review of the same by the
Town Planner, services of the Town Attorney(s) and any consultants and
costs of publication of required notices of hearing, to which 15% will be
added toward the Town’s administrative costs and overhead. In the event
that the resulting figure is less than the fee imposed in § 44-3, then the
difference will be refunded to the representative of the petitioners; but,
if greater, the petitioners will pay the difference. Each of the petitioners
shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of any such sum and,
in addition to all other rights and means of collection, the Town shall be
authorized to withhold final action on such petition until payment is made
and to refuse to accept any subsequent petition from any of the petitioners
for annexation or application for the issuance of any other permit, license
or approval which any of them may thereafter seek from the Town. All sums
due from the petitioners shall bear interest at 10% commencing 30 days
after final demand for payment.
Chapter 47
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and Sewer Commission — See Ch. 38.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 49.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
Plumbing — See Ch. 83.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 85.
Sewers — See Ch. 91.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 98.
Water — See Ch. 109.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 44-7 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 47-1
47:103
§ 47-1. Automatic adoption of county standards. [Amended
12-3-1984 by Ord. No. 138]
The BOCA Basic Building Code, together with the Mechanical Code, Family
Dwelling Code, Energy Conservation Code, Carroll County Plumbing Code,
National Electric Code and Life Safety Code as adopted and ordained by
the County Commissioners of Carroll County from time to time, including all
amendments thereto, shall automatically be and become the Town of Mount
Airy Building Code without further action on the part of the Town of Mount
Airy except to the extent that the Town of Mount Airy shall hereafter pass
any ordinance inconsistent with the same.
§ 47-1.1. Construal of terms. [Added 12-1-1986 by Ord. No. 154]
Whenever the County Commissioners of Carroll County shall have adopted
and ordained from time to time any of the codes referred to in § 47-1, the
words "name of municipality" or "name of jurisdiction" shall be construed
to refer to the Town of Mount Airy whenever such construction would be
reasonable.
§ 47-2. Enforcement official. [Added 12-3-1984 by Ord. No. 138]
The Building Official of Carroll County, Maryland, shall be the Building
Inspector for the Town of Mount Airy and for that purpose shall enforce the
provisions of the Town of Mount Airy Building Code.
§ 47-2.1. Limits on number of permits issued. [Added 8-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 1988-4]
No more than 24 building permits shall be issued in any residential
development in any construction year at a rate of no more than four
permits per calendar month, except that the Zoning Administrator,
in his or her discretion, may allow up to six permits per month in
cases of practical necessity, as in building sections of townhouses.
Carryover shall be permitted for unused monthly permit limitations
within a single residential development. [Amended 7-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-12; 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
A.
The phrase "construction year" means a period of 12 calendar months
measured from the date of the issuance of the first building permit and
each succeeding twelve-month period thereafter.
B.
Additional permits. [Added 1-9-1989 by Ord. No. 1988-5]
After review and report by the Planning Commission, the Council
may, by resolution, provide for the issuance of more than 24
building permits for any one residential development in any
construction year following a public hearing upon not less than 10
days' notice given in one or more newspapers of general circulation
in the Town and upon making the following findings of fact:
[Amended 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
(1)
C.
§ 47-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 47-2.1
47:104
That the proposed development provides for land to be set
aside and conveyed to the Town or, where appropriate, to
a county or other governmental entity, for a needed public
facility, such as a school, library, police station or fire station,
in excess of the amount of land which would be required in any
event for site plan approval or water sources with an estimated
yield twice that required for the development, based upon
250 gallons per day per household, and that adequate access
thereto is to be provided by streets to be constructed at the
developer's sole cost, such streets to be built at an accelerated
rate beyond the access needs for 24 units per year in the
development in order to accommodate general community and
public needs as determined by the Council to be in the best
interest of the general welfare of the Town.
(a)
That said development:
Includes major connector streets shown on the Town's
Comprehensive Development Plan and which will
implement the Town's transportation plan; or
[1]
Provides for the construction or extension of pumping
stations for wastewater that shall serve areas in addition
to the development and water or sewer trunk lines or
water sources providing service to areas in addition to the
development to be constructed at an accelerated rate as
determined by the Council at the developer's sole cost.
[2]
(b)
That the land and facilities to be provided will serve a definite
public need, will provide services to areas beyond the
development or supplement major facilities that would
otherwise be required for site plan approval or will provide
funds for development of water sources greater than needed
for the particular development by twice the amount needed
for the development, based upon 250 gallons per day per
household.
(c)
Any such resolution shall not take effect unless and until the
developer enters into a suitable public works agreement approved
by the Council and which, in addition to all other requirements,
sets forth the obligations of the developer to provide for the
matters contained herein and which public works agreement is
further approved by the Town Attorney for form and legal
sufficiency.
(2)
In any such resolution and public works agreement, the Council
may require a schedule, in its discretion, for facilities enumerated
above to be constructed earlier than the needs of the development
would require in order to meet immediate or reasonably
foreseeable needs of the general public.7
(3)
§ 47-2.1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 47-3
47:105
§ 47-3. Appeals.
Any appeals permitted by the Town of Mount Airy Building Code as now
or hereafter in force shall be taken to the Mount Airy Board of Appeals as
created by this chapter.
§ 47-4. Board of Appeals; composition; terms; powers.
There is hereby created a Mount Airy Board of Appeals. Said Board shall
consist of three members and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council. The terms of members shall be for three
years and until their successors are selected; provided, nevertheless, that
of the members first appointed, one shall be designated to serve for a term
of one year, one for a term of two years and one for a term of three years.
One or more of said members may, but need not be, members of the Council.
The members of said Board shall serve without compensation except that
they may be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred
in the performance of their duties to the extent authorized by the Council.
Said Board shall have the power and duties provided for in the Town of
Mount Airy Building Code, and the procedure before said Board shall be
as therein set forth, except that two members thereof shall constitute a
quorum and the Board shall affirm, modify or reverse a decision of the
Building Official by a concurring vote of two members, and the failure to
secure two concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the decision
of the Building Official.
§ 47-5. Continuance of former provisions.
To the extent not inconsistent herewith, Ordinance No. 96 is continued in
full force and effect.8
§ 47-6. Building permit fees. [Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-8;
amended 6-5-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-9; 12-4-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-18]
The Carroll County building permit fees, as adopted by the County
Commissioners of Carroll County, including all amendments thereto,
shall be automatically the Town of Mount Airy building permit fees
without the necessity of further action on the part of the Town of Mount
Airy.
A.
The Mayor of the Town of Mount Airy is hereby authorized to enter into
agreement with the County Commissioners of Carroll County, a body
B.
7. Editor’s Note: Former § 47-2.2, Limitations on residential building permits, added
2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2; amended 8-5-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-14; 2-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-3, which section immediately followed this section, was repealed 7-10-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-7.
8. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 96, adopted 6-3-1973, adopted by reference the provisions of
the Carroll County Building Code, being the BOCA Building Code, as adopted by the
County Commissioners of Carroll County, effective 4-1-1968, as modified and amended by
Resolution No. 3-73 of the County Commissioners of Carroll County, effective 3-2-1973.
Provisions of this ordinance are on file in the office of Town Clerk.
§ 47-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 47-6
47:106
§ 47-7. Plumbing/gas permit fees. [Added 6-5-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-10; amended 7-1-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-8; 12-4-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-19]
§ 47-8. Capital improvement assessments. [Added 6-5-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-11; amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-17]
A capital improvement assessment shall be payable prior to the issuance of
any building permit.
§ 47-9. Inspection, testing and review fees. [Added 6-5-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-12; amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
Fees for the inspection of final site plans, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and
driveways and water and sewer main installation, the testing of water and
sewer mains and the review of plans by the Town Engineer shall be paid
prior to the issuance of any building permit.
§ 47-10. Grading and sediment control. [Added 7-10-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-15]
The Town of Mount Airy hereby adopts Ordinance No. 5, as adopted by the
County Commissioners of Carroll County, entitled "Grading and Sediment
Control," including all amendments thereto, said Ordinance No. 5 and all
amendments thereto to be effective within the limits of the Town of Mount
Airy and enforceable in accordance with the provisions thereof.9
corporate and politic, with respect to review and issuance of building
permits for properties located in the Town of Mount Airy.
The Carroll County plumbing/gas permit fees, as adopted by the County
Commissioners of Carroll County, including all amendments thereto,
shall be automatically the Town of Mount Airy building permit fees
without the necessity of further action on the part of the Town of Mount
Airy.
A.
The Mayor of the Town of Mount Airy is hereby authorized to enter into
agreement with the County Commissioners of Carroll County, a body
corporate and politic, with respect to review and issuance of plumbing/
gas permits for properties located in the Town of Mount Airy.
B.
9. Editor's Note: Former § 47-11, Grading certification, added 8-3-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-7,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4.
§ 47-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 47-10
47:107
Chapter 49
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal infractions — See Ch. 19.
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 85.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 49-1. Number required.
Prior to the issuance of any use and occupancy permit therefor, each
building shall be identified by the use of Arabic numerals or such numerals
and a letter suffix with a number as approved by the postal authorities and,
in the absence of such approval, as designated by the Town Clerk, which
number shall be affixed to the building in characters at least three inches
high and at least 1/2 inch in width and of a color and/or finish sufficiently
contrasting with the building as to be clearly visible and legible in the
daytime from the street. Such number shall thereafter be maintained, and,
if necessary, replaced from time to time so as to comply at all times with the
requirements of this section.
§ 49-2. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with the provisions hereof shall constitute a municipal
infraction punishable in accordance with Chapter 19 of the Mount Airy
Code.
Chapter 51
CURFEW
§ 51-1. Word usage; definitions.
Word usage. In this chapter the singular shall include the plural, the
plural shall include the singular and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
A.
Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings hereby ascribed to them, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHILD — A person under the age of 18 years, whether a resident
or a nonresident of the Town of Mount Airy, and whether married or
unmarried.
CURFEW PERIOD — The entire period between 10:00 p.m. in the
evening and 5:30 a.m. the following morning.
B.
§ 47-10 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 51-1
49:108
§ 51-2. Hours and terms of curfew.
It shall be unlawful for any child to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parks or other public places in the Town of Mount Airy or in any
place of public resort or entertainment or in any place of business outside
the premises of his home at any time during the curfew period, provided,
the prohibition set forth hereinabove shall not apply in any of the following
situations:
§ 51-3. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 53
DEBT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter — See §§ C6-18, C6-19 and C6-20.
PARENT — The father, the mother or the guardian or other legal
custodian of the child.
In the case of a child accompanied by his parent or another responsible
person of good repute who is at least 21 years of age;
A.
In the case of a child who is in the performance of an errand for his
parent, and who bears a written note, from such parent, giving the date,
time and nature of the errand;
B.
In the case of a child who is returning from a community or schoolsponsored
function or activity, in which case such child shall be allowed
1/2 hour after the conclusion of such function or activity to reach
his home, but in no case later than 12:00 midnight. This exception,
however, shall apply only in instances where the Mayor shall be notified
by the school principal or other person in charge of the function or
activity in advance of such scheduled or contemplated function or
activity, and when, at the conclusion of such function or activity, the
Mayor shall be notified by the principal or other person in charge.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any parent to allow or permit his child to violate
any of the provisions of § 51-2, and any parent violating any of the
provisions of that section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $25 and costs of prosecution.
A.
If any child shall be found violating any of the provisions of § 51-2 of
this chapter more than three times, the Mayor shall report such fact to
the Department of Juvenile Services for Carroll County and proceedings
shall then be taken in the Juvenile Court for the permanent welfare of
such child, and a like procedure shall be followed in cases where the
arrest and prosecution of the parent shall not be effective.
B.
§ 51-1 CURFEW § 51-3
51:109
§ 53-1. Policy established.
The Town Charter §§ C6-18, C6-19 and C6-20 are hereby adopted as the
debt policy of the Town.
Chapter 54
(RESERVED)
Chapter 58
FIREARMS AND SIMILAR DEVICES
§ 58-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FIREARM — Includes any pistol, revolver, handgun, rifle, shotgun, air pistol,
air rifle and any weapon capable of firing or discharging a bullet, shot, pellet
or projectile, except an air rifle firing lead pellets known as "BB's."
§ 58-2. Discharge unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or compound bow within
the limits of the Town of Mount Airy; provided that this chapter shall not
be construed to prohibit any law enforcement officer from discharging a
firearm in the performance of his duties nor to prohibit any citizen from
discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property.
§ 58-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-2-1985 by Ord. No.
144]
Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be municipal infraction.
Chapter 60
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Open burning — See Ch. 79.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 85.
§ 51-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 60-1
54:110
§ 60-1. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted by the Town of Mount Airy, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, the Fire Protection Code, known as the NFPA 1,
Uniform Fire Code™, as amended from time to time, except any such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by the Town Code.
These standards are as amended and as it may be amended in the future.
§ 60-2. Office of Fire Official.
§ 60-3. Prevention of fires.10
No waste fuel, shavings, wastepaper, trash, leaves, yard waste, debris or
other combustible waste matter shall be burned in the open within the Town
limits.
§ 60-4. Fire/Emergency equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give a false alarm or remove
any fire or life safety apparatus or equipment belonging to the Town or the
Mt. Airy Volunteer Fire Company from its proper place except in the case
of fire or other public necessity. In addition, it is unlawful to tamper with or
remove life safety apparatus or equipment, including fire sprinkler systems,
smoke alarms, smoke detectors, fire extinguishers and fire alarm systems
with the intention of eliminating or interfering with its life safety function,
except in the case of fire or other public necessity.
§ 60-5. Smoke alarms.
The office of Fire Official is hereby created, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
A.
B. The Fire Official or his or her designee shall enforce these ordinances.
C. The State Fire Marshal may also enforce these ordinances.
The fire officials indicated in Subsections A through C above shall be
permitted to inspect all structures and premises, except single-family
dwellings and dwelling units in two-family and multifamily dwellings for
the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions
liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with firefighting
operations, endanger life or any violations of the provisions
or intent of these regulations, of the fire prevention code or any other
ordinance affecting fire and life safety.
D.
All residential properties, as set out in Subsection B, shall be equipped
with working smoke alarms inside each room used for sleeping
purposes, on each level adjacent to sleeping areas, and on each story.
A.
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 79, Open Burning.
§ 60-1 FIREARMS AND SIMILAR DEVICES § 60-5
58:111
§ 60-6. Maintenance of smoke alarms and emergency equipment.
Every new residential property, including single- and two-family homes,
townhouses, apartments and multifamily dwellings, shall be equipped
with listed single- or multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL
217 (as it may be amended in the future) and installed in accordance
with the household fire-warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72,
National Fire Alarm Code, as amended from time to time. Single- or
multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in all of
the following locations:
On the ceiling or wall adjacent to sleeping areas and in the
immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
(1)
(2) In each room used for sleeping purposes.
In each story within the dwelling unit, including basements, but not
including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics.
(3)
B.
Existing residential properties, as set out in Subsection B, may have
smoke alarms which are not interconnected, and which may be
powered by battery power.
C.
D. All existing residents shall comply by January 1, 2010.
Smoke alarms, fire alarm and fire detection systems, sprinkler systems
and other fire or life safety equipment shall be maintained in good
working order at all times. Residential sprinkler systems and other
water-based fire protection equipment shall be maintained in
accordance with NFPA 25, Standard for Inspection, Testing and
Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection Systems, as amended from
time to time. Residential smoke alarms, fire alarms and fire detection
systems shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 72, National Fire
Alarm Code, as it may be amended in the future. Life safety systems
and equipment shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 101, Life
Safety Code, 2008, as amended from time to time.
A.
For reasonable cause and upon reasonable notice, the Town, including
the Fire Official, State Fire Marshal or other designee, shall have
the right to inspect all premises, including single-family dwellings and
dwelling units in two-family and multifamily dwellings, for compliance
with this section.
B.
Upon the transfer of ownership or lease of property and a transfer of
any water and sewer account, a certification acceptable to the Fire
Official must be filed with the Town specifying compliance with this
chapter. No water and sewer account may be established in the absence
of this certification, which shall be on a form as prescribed by the
Town. The Town shall also have the right to inspect the property for
compliance with this section as provided in Subsection B above.
C.
§ 60-5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 60-7
58:112
§ 60-7. Fire sprinkler systems.
Note: See also Chapter 47, Building Construction and Chapter 85, Property
Maintenance, specifically § 85-21.
Fire sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in all new oneand
two-family dwellings and manufactured homes in accordance with
NFPA Standard 13D, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems
in One and Two Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes, and in
all other new residential occupancies up to and including four stories
in height in accordance with NFPA 13R, Standard for the Installation
of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and Including
Four Stories in Height, as promulgated by the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA), as modified and adopted by the Maryland State
Fire Prevention Code (COMAR 29.06.01), as amended from time to
time.
The requirement for sprinkler systems of this § 60-7A shall apply
to all new construction but shall not apply to the rebuilding,
refurbishment, renovation or alteration of a residence in existence
as of January 6, 2003, unless such existing structure is razed and
replaced by a new principal structure, or unless the accumulated
refurbishment, renovation or alteration affects more than 50% of
the structure's total area, in which case the refurbished, renovated,
or altered portion of the structure will be required to have
sprinklers in accordance with this chapter.
(1)
The requirement for sprinkler systems shall not apply to detached,
accessory or uninhabitable structures on residential lots (such as
carports, garages, greenhouses, and sheds), unless the distance
from the principal residence is less than 15 feet and the structure
is of such size and height that the Town Fire Official or State Fire
Marshal recommends installation of sprinkler systems.
(2)
Fire sprinkler systems required under this § 60-7A may be
connected to the domestic water supply serving the residence,
provided the domestic water supply is of adequate pressure,
capacity and sizing for the combined domestic and sprinkler system
requirements, and proper backflow valves are installed.
(3)
A.
Commercial and industrial structures.
Fire sprinkler systems meeting the requirements of NFPA 13,
Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, as amended
from time to time, shall be installed and maintained in all new
buildings where required by the International Building Code. For
nonsprinklered buildings, the maximum area set by the applicable
International Building Code after all modifications have been
applied shall be reduced by 50%.
(1)
The requirement for fire sprinkler systems shall not apply to the
rebuilding, refurbishment, renovation or alteration of an existing
(2)
B.
§ 60-7 FIREARMS AND SIMILAR DEVICES § 60-7
58:113
Chapter 61
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 85.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 94.
Storm sewer systems — See Ch. 94A.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 98.
Water resource management — See Ch. 110.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 61-1. Designation of public documents.
Those public records entitled "Flood Insurance Study for Carroll County,
Maryland, and Incorporated Areas," dated October 2, 2015, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated October 2, 2015, and all
subsequent amendments and/or revisions, copies of which shall be kept
on file in the Town Office of the Town of Mt. Airy, are hereby adopted by
reference as the basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas for
floodplain management in the Town of Mt. Airy. The special flood hazard
areas documented in the Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate
Maps are the minimum area of applicability of the floodplain management
regulations and may be supplemented by studies for other areas as allowed
in the regulations.
§ 61-2. Adoption of Carroll County provisions.
That public record designated as the Floodplain Management Regulations
for Carroll County, known as Chapter 153, Floodplain Management, of
the Carroll County Code, dated September 3, 2015, and all subsequent
amendments and/or revisions, copies of which shall be kept on file in the
Town Office of the Town of Mt. Airy, is hereby adopted as the legal basis for
implementing floodplain management in the Town of Mt. Airy.
§ 61-3. Delegation.
The Town of Mt. Airy delegates the responsibility of floodplain management
to Carroll County as provided in an executed resolution dated September
14, 2015. Per 44 CFR Part 59.22(b), the Mayor, or his designee, is
designated as the official or agency responsible for the implementation
of floodplain management for the Town of Mt. Airy and will serve as the
building unless such existing structure is razed and replaced by a
new principal structure, or unless the accumulated refurbishment,
renovation or alteration affects more than 50% of the structure's
total area, in which case the entire structure will be required to
have fire sprinklers in accordance with this chapter.
§ 60-7 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 61-3
58:114
community point of contact on National Flood Insurance Program issues for
county, state and federal officials.
§ 61-4. Enforcement.
Carroll County shall have the right and authority to fully enforce the
provisions of the ordinance within the corporate limits of the Town of Mt.
Airy.
§ 61-5. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are
hereby repealed.
§ 61-6. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, all remaining portions of this chapter shall remain
in full force and effect.
§ 61-7. Penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of the Floodplain Management Ordinance shall be subject to the
penalties as outlined within Chapter 153 of the Carroll County Code.
Chapter 62
FOREST CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beautification Commission — See Ch. 4.
§ 62-1. Adoption by reference.
Except as set forth in § 62-2 hereof, the Forest Conservation Ordinance of
Carroll County, Maryland, known as "Ordinance No. 106" of said county,
as now in force, together with all reenactments thereof and amendments
thereto, shall automatically be and become the Forest Conservation
Ordinance of the Town of Mount Airy without the necessity of any further
action on the part of the Town of Mount Airy.11
11.Editor's Note: Said Ord. No. 106 is on file in the Town offices.
§ 61-3 FOREST CONSERVATION § 62-2
62:115
§ 62-2. Amendments.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 62-1, the following modifications to
the Carroll County, Maryland, Forest Conservation Ordinance No. 106 are
hereby declared to be effective within the limits of the Town of Mount Airy:
At such time as a forest stand delineation is submitted in accordance
with Section 5 of Ordinance No. 106 of Carroll County, Maryland, the
person submitting the same shall also make submittal thereof to the
Town of Mount Airy.
A.
Section 6G of said ordinance shall provide as follows with respect to
noncompliance within the Town of Mount Airy:
"The Town of Mount Airy may refuse to issue or may revoke a use and
occupancy permit for any property found to be in noncompliance with
the ordinance."
B.
Section 10A shall read as follows:
Section 10A. Priorities and time requirements for reforestation and
afforestation.
The required sequence for afforestation or reforestation after
techniques for retaining existing forest on the site have been
exhausted is as follows:
(1) (a) On-site afforestation or reforestation, if technically
feasible, using transplanted or nursery stock which meets
the requirements of the Technical Manual;
(b) In areas zoned for commercial or industrial use, off-site
afforestation or reforestation within the Town of Mount
Airy, using transplanted or nursery stock which meets the
requirements of the Technical Manual;
(2) Off-site afforestation or reforestation within the Town of Mount
Airy, using transplanted or nursery stock which meets the
requirements of the Technical Manual;
(3) Off-site afforestation or reforestation within the county using
transplanted or nursery stock which meets the requirements of
the Technical Manual;
C.
The following subparagraph shall be added to Section 10B thereof:
(7) To establish forested areas within municipal well recharge
areas in the Town of Mount Airy.
D.
Within the Town of Mount Airy, Section 12 of Ordinance 106 shall be
interpreted and administered in such a manner that the agreement
referred to therein shall be a portion of the public works agreement
between any person covered by said ordinance and the Town of Mount
Airy; that references to the "county" shall mean the "Town of Mount
E.
§ 62-2 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 62-2
62:116
Chapter 64
GARBAGE, TRASH AND LITTER
Airy;" and that references to the "County Attorney's Office" shall mean
the "Office of the Town Attorney."
Section 16B shall be interpreted and enforced so as to require that
all moneys deposited to the Forest Conservation Fund with respect to
property located within the Town of Mount Airy shall be used for the
implementation of Ordinance No. 106 within the limits of the Town of
Mount Airy.
F.
§ 62-2 FOREST CONSERVATION § 62-2
62:117

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 6-13-2005by Ord. No. 2005-612]
§ 64-1. Purpose and authority.
§ 64-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULKY WASTES — Large items of refuse, including but not limited to
appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches and stumps and
construction and remodeling waste which cannot be handled by normal
municipal waste processing, collection or disposal methods.
CLERK — The Clerk for the Town of Mount Airy, Maryland.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONTAINER — A portable device in which solid waste is held for storage or
transportation.
CONTRACTOR — The individual or entity with whom the Town has
contracted to provide municipal waste collection and/or recycling services
within the Town limits.
DIRECTOR — The Town Council member appointed as liaison to the
Recycling and Sanitation Commission.
DISPOSAL — The deposit, placement, drainage, dumping, spilling or
leaking of solid waste into or on the land or water within the Town in
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the
public health, safety and general welfare by establishing requirements
and procedures relating to the collection and disposal of solid waste in
the Town of Mount Airy.
A.
Prior to the enactment of this article, the Sanitation and Recycling
Commission undertook a detailed review and analysis of information
relating to the collection and disposal of solid waste and, based on such
review, issued a report and recommendation to the Mayor and Council
on April 4, 2005.
B.
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Article 23A of the Annotated
Code of Maryland and the City's Charter authorize the City to enact
ordinances for the protection and promotion of public safety, health,
morals and welfare.
C.
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Storage and Collection, derived
from Sec. 2-5, Art. 2 of the former codification adopted 1-13-1963.
§ 64-1 FOREST CONSERVATION § 64-2
62:119
a manner that solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters.
INCINERATOR — An enclosed device using controlled combustion for the
primary purpose of thermally destructing solid waste.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
institutional service, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
life-care communities, care homes, orphanages, schools and universities.
LITTER — All rubbish, solid waste, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead
animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description.
MULTIFAMILY UNITS — A building containing four or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — All garbage, refuse and other discarded materials,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting
from residential, commercial, industrial and municipal activities.
POLICE — The Maryland State Police or such other law enforcement agency
which, by cooperative agreement, provides general police protection to the
Town.
POLLUTION — Contamination of air, water, land or other natural resources
which will create or is likely to create a public nuisance or to render such
air, water, land or other natural resources harmful, detrimental or injurious
to public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, municipal, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses or to
livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other life.
PROCESSING — Technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume
or bulk of refuse and/or municipal waste or technology used to convert part
or all of such materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include but
are not limited to transfer facilities, composting facilities, incinerators and
resource recovery facilities.
PUBLIC or PRIVATE PROPERTY — The right-of-way of any road or highway;
any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any
park, parking facility, playground, building, refuge or conservation or
recreation area; any residential or farm properties, timberlands or forest.
RECYCLABLES — Source-separated materials that are authorized or
required by the contractor to be separated from the municipal waste for
the purpose of recycling. Recyclables include, but are not limited to, metal,
glass and plastic consumer product containers or packaging, newsprint and
cardboard.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be
disposed of or processed as municipal waste.
RESIDENTIAL UNITS — Single-family detached, single-family
semidetached and single-family attached residential housing units and
apartments with three or fewer units.
§ 64-2 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 64-2
62:120
RESIDUE — Solid and semisolid refuse, such as but not limited to ash,
ceramics, glass, metal and organic substances, remaining after incineration
or combustion processing.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including
but not limited to solid, semisolid, liquid and contained gaseous materials
resulting from municipal, industrial, commercial, agriculture and
residential activities.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The entire process or a part thereof of
storage, collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of
solid wastes by a person engaging in the process.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STORAGE — The containment of waste on a temporary basis which does not
constitute disposal of the waste.
TOWN — The Town of Mount Airy, Maryland.
TOWN BUILDINGS — Buildings and facilities owned or leased by the Town
of Mount Airy.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
§ 64-3. Administration of article; violation of regulations.
This article shall be administered by the Town Council member appointed
as liaison to the Recycling and Sanitation Commission who shall be referred
to herein as the "Director." The Director, subject to approval of the Council,
may establish regulations regarding the collection or disposal of solid
waste, including recyclables. Upon approval by resolution of the Council,
any such regulation shall have the force and effect of law, and any violation
thereof is declared to be a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation
shall be a fine of $25 for each offense. These regulations may include,
among other subjects, the days and hours and routes for collection of solid
waste, including recyclables; the specifications for solid waste containers
and recyclables bins, and the times and manner in which they shall be
set out for pickup of the contents thereof by the collectors and removal of
such containers after they have been emptied; preventing the mixture of
certain types of solid waste in any one container; limiting the amount of
solid waste or the number of containers that may be set out for any one
premises at any one time; the imposition of reasonable fees to cover the
costs of the administration of the article, including the cost of licensing and
inspection; and such other matters as may be deemed appropriate. Copies
of any such regulations shall be maintained by the Director at Town Hall
and are available for inspection during regular hours of business.
§ 64-2 FOREST CONSERVATION § 64-4
62:121
§ 64-4. Permit required to collect or dispose of solid waste; fee;
penalty for violations.
§ 64-5. Residential collection; penalty for violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting or disposing of solid waste within the confines of the Town
unless such person shall have obtained a permit from the Clerk for
collection and any other permits required by federal, state and county
law.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a collector or hauler
of solid waste within the Town except as provided in this article. This
subsection shall not be construed to prevent a person from disposing of
his own solid waste at a municipal waste disposal or processing facility,
provided that it is transported in a manner to prevent spillage.
B.
The Clerk is authorized to issue permits under this section upon the
filing of an application for a permit. Such application shall be filed on
forms furnished by the Clerk and contain such information as he shall
prescribe. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the
amount of $100 and, if approved, shall remain valid for a period of one
year.
C.
Any violation of any subsection of this section is declared to be a
municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for
each offense.
D.
The Town shall provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste,
including recyclables, for residential units within the Town. The Council
may enter into a contract or contracts with permitted collectors to
perform all or part of such collection and disposal.
A.
Regular collection service shall not include removal of items such as
tires, crates, refrigerators, stoves, air conditioners, furniture, pipe, auto
parts, mufflers, trees and other similar bulky items. Further, regular
collection service shall not include recyclables, lawn clippings, leaves
or shrubbery. Owners or occupants of any premises shall have these
items removed as provided in § 64-7.
B.
Owners and occupants of any residential premises provided solid waste
disposal services by the Town shall separate recyclables from their
other solid waste and shall place such recyclables as identified by
the Town in a recyclables container or as otherwise provided by the
Director pursuant to regulations promulgated under § 64-3 of this
article. Willful failure to comply with this subsection is declared to
be a municipal infraction subject to a fine of $100 for each violation.
[Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
C.
Each residential premises (or each apartment unit within a building
with three or fewer units) shall be entitled to:
D.
§ 64-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 64-5
62:122
§ 64-6. Nonresidential collection; penalty for violations.
One weekly pickup of not more than 120 gallons of solid waste on
a date and time to be determined by the Director.
(1)
One weekly pickup of recyclables on a date to be determined by the
Director. There shall be no limitation on the amount of recyclables
to be picked up on a weekly basis; provided, however, that all
recyclables left out for collection shall be stored as required in
§ 64-11.
(2)
In addition to the services set forth in § 64-5D above, the Director may
additionally provide for pickup of the following items as provided for in
§ 64-7 below:
(1) Lawn clippings, leaves and shrubbery clippings.
(2) Christmas trees.
(3) Large and bulky items.
E.
The Town shall provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste,
including recyclables, for nonresidential premises within the Town.
The Council may to enter into a contract or contracts with permitted
collectors to perform all or part of such collection and disposal.
A.
Regular collection service shall not include removal of items such as
tires, crates, refrigerators, stoves, air conditioners, furniture, pipe, auto
parts, mufflers, trees and other like items. Further, regular collection
service shall not include recyclables, lawn clippings, leaves or
shrubbery. Owners or occupants of any premises shall have these items
removed as provided in § 64-7.
B.
Owners and occupants of any nonresidential premises provided solid
waste disposal services by the Town shall separate recyclables from
their other solid waste and shall place such recyclables as identified
by the Town in a recyclables container or as otherwise provided by
the Director pursuant to regulations promulgated under § 64-3 of this
article. Willful failure to comply with this subsection is declared to
be a municipal infraction subject to a fine of $100 for each violation.
[Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
C.
Each nonresidential premises shall be entitled to:
One weekly pickup of not more than 120 gallons of solid waste on
a date and time to be determined by the Director.
(1)
One weekly pickup of recyclables on a date to be determined by the
Director. There shall be no limitation on the amount of recyclables
to be picked up on a weekly basis; provided, however, that all
recyclables left out for collection shall be stored as required in
§ 64-11.
(2)
D.
§ 64-5 FOREST CONSERVATION § 64-6
62:123
§ 64-7. Bulk pickup.
§ 64-8. Maintenance of premises; penalty for violations.
§ 64-9. Performance of work by Town.
In addition to the services set forth in § 64-6D above, the Director may
additionally provide for pickup of the following items as provided for in
§ 64-7 below:
(1) Lawn clippings, leaves and shrubbery clippings.
(2) Christmas trees.
(3) Large and bulky items.
E.
As used herein, the term "nonresidential premises" shall refer to
premises which are not being used for single-family detached, singlefamily
semidetached or single-family attached residential housing.
F.
In recognition of the disproportionate impact of multifamily units upon
the provision of refuse collection and recycling services by the town,
notwithstanding any contrary provision contained herein, multifamily
units shall be responsible for obtaining their own contractor for such
collection services and shall not be entitled to provision of such services
by the Town.
G.
The Council is authorized by resolution to institute a service charge
by the Town for bulk pickup of those items specified in § 64-5B and D
above, to be implemented by a sticker purchase system or by such other
means as designated by said resolution.
A.
Upon request by the owner or occupant of any premises served by
the Town's garbage and trash collection service and subject to the
availability of vehicles and personnel, the Director may authorize
removal of solid waste from such premises when the amount to be
removed is greater than that which is normally collected or at a time
other than the regular collection day for such premises, upon such
terms and conditions and upon the payment of such fee as may be
provided by resolution of the Council.
B.
Owners and occupants of occupied premises and owners and persons in
charge of unoccupied premises, including vacant lots, within the Town
are hereby charged with the duty of maintaining such premises at all
times in a sanitary, clean and tidy condition and so as to prevent the
accumulation thereof of solid waste which constitutes a nuisance or a
fire hazard.
A.
A violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
B.
§ 64-6 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 64-9
62:124
§ 64-10. Responsibility of owners and occupants; penalty for
violations.
If, at any time, the maintenance of any premises within the Town is
found by the Director or other official designated by the Mayor and
Common Council to be in violation of § 64-8 or 64-10, he shall give
notice, in writing, to the owner, occupant or person in charge of such
premises, stating therein the condition which constitutes such violation
and directing the addressee to remedy such condition within seven days
for a first offense and within three days for any subsequent offense, and
it shall be unlawful for any such owner, occupant or person in charge to
fail to comply with the terms of such written notice.
A.
Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given pursuant
to Subsection A of this section to comply with the terms of such notice,
the Director or other designated official shall forthwith direct the
appropriate Town officer to remedy the condition which is the subject of
such notice, and the expenses incurred by the Town in so doing shall be
charged to the addressee of such notice, to be collectible as Town taxes;
and such expenses shall constitute a lien upon the premises upon which
such condition occurred, to be collected as Town taxes are collected, if
not otherwise first paid to the Town.
B.
Abatement by the Town of conditions in violation of this article and
reimbursement to the Town of expenses incurred thereby shall not bar
the issuance of a municipal infraction and the prosecution for such
violation.
C.
Residential units. It shall be the joint and severable responsibility of
the owner and occupant to provide a sufficient number of approved
containers for storage of solid waste to prevent overflow between times
of collection in residential units and to maintain the premises in
accordance with the standards of this article. It shall be unlawful for
the owner or occupant of such private property to fail to provide such
containers.
A.
Residential apartments with no more than three units. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner and not the occupants of such units to
provide a sufficient number of approved containers for the storage of
solid waste to prevent overflow between times of collection and to
maintain the premises in accordance with the standards of this article.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of such units or property to fail to
provide such containers.
B.
Institutional establishments. It shall be the joint and several
responsibility of the owner and the occupant of institutional
establishments to provide a sufficient number of approved containers
for the storage of solid waste to prevent overflow between times of
collection and to maintain the premises in accordance with the
standards of this article. It shall be unlawful for the owner of such
institutional establishment to fail to provide such containers.
C.
§ 64-9 FOREST CONSERVATION § 64-10
62:125
§ 64-11. Containers.
Commercial and industrial land or buildings. It shall be the joint and
severable responsibility of the owner and occupant of commercial and
industrial land or buildings to provide a sufficient number of approved
containers for the storage of solid waste to prevent overflow between
times of collection and to maintain the premises in accordance with the
standards of this article. It shall be unlawful for the owner and occupant
of such commercial and industrial land or buildings to fail to provide
such containers.
D.
Shopping centers. In addition to the responsibilities provided in
Subsection D hereof, the owner and occupants of all shopping centers
within the limits of the Town are hereby required to install and maintain
trash receptacles on the edge of the pedestrian walkway areas within
such shopping centers. They shall be of a type and size and placed at
such location as may be required and approved by the Director and
clearly designated as receptacles for solid waste.
E.
Vacant land. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of all vacant land
to keep his property free of solid waste.
F.
Any owner who leases a residential unit located within the Town shall
provide notificaction to the tenants occupying such residential unit of
the Town's refuse collection practices.
G.
Deficiencies observed in violation of the standards of this article shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the required maintenance is not
adequate. The Director may proceed to rectify such deficiencies as
provided in § 64-9.
H.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense, except that
the penalties for violation of Subsection G shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
I.
All containers for the storage of solid waste, except bins for the storage
of bulky rubbish, shall be verminproof and waterproof, of noncorrodible
material or similar material, and shall be equipped with tight-fitting lids
at all times.
A.
All solid waste shall be placed in containers as provided herein and
shall be placed at convenient outdoor pickup locations on the premises
as may be designated by the Director. Recyclables shall be placed in the
containers described in Subsection C(1) and (2) herein. Alternatively,
recyclables may be placed in bundles or any other container which in
the Director's opinion is suitable for holding such items.
B.
Receptacles used for storage of solid waste with respect to residential
units shall meet one of the following specifications:
C.
§ 64-10 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 64-11
62:126
§ 64-12. Maintenance of containers; transfer of recycling
containers; penalty for violations. [Amended 11-1-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-11]
§ 64-13. Interference with containers; penalty for violations.
Trash cans of a durable grade of plastic, galvanized metal or other
suitable material approved by the Director, with a minimum
capacity of 20 gallons and a maximum capacity of 90 gallons. All
such containers shall have tightly fitting lids and shall include
adequate lifting handles. For containers larger than 35 gallons,
they shall have wheels such that the container may be rolled to
the curb for pickup. All containers should be without interior
protrusions, and the solid waste should be loosely packed so that
the contents shall discharge freely when the receptacle is inverted.
(1)
Recyclables bins made of durable plastic approximately 18 gallons
in size and provided by the Town or its designee.
(2)
It shall be the responsibility of the persons provided containers
pursuant to § 64-10 to ensure that containers are properly maintained.
A.
The presence of solid waste in places other than inside proper
containers, the presence of sour odors or the presence of insects,
rodents or other vermin or evidence of their presence shall constitute
improper maintenance or lack of maintenance. The lack of maintenance
of containers constitutes a violation of this section and is declared to be
a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100
for each offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful and constitute a municipal infraction for any person
to intentionally destroy or damage, fail within a reasonable time to
return to the Town upon demand and/or to take, abscond with or
convert with the intent to permanently possess and/or to deprive the
Town of recycling containers provided by the Town pursuant to
§ 64-11C(2) for the purpose of storage and collection of recyclables. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
C.
Upon the transfer of ownership or lease of property and a transfer of
any water and sewer account, a certification by the seller, lessor or
transferor, on a form prescribed by the Town and made available at
Town Hall, shall be filed with the Town specifying that all recyclables
containers provided by the Town pursuant to § 64-11C(2) for use on the
property have been transferred to the new owner, lessee or transferee.
No water and sewer account may be established of this certification.
The Town shall also have the right to inspect the property for
compliance with this section.
D.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove the cover
from any container which has been set out for collection of the contents
A.
§ 64-11 FOREST CONSERVATION § 64-13
62:127
§ 64-14. Matter not to be placed in containers; penalty for
violations.
§ 64-15. Separation of solid waste.
The Director is authorized to provide by regulation for the implementation
of § 64-5C, including each class of solid waste to be collected by the Town to
be separated, and the Director may require the use of separate containers
for items to be recycled, including but not limited to metal, glass, paper,
cardboard and plastics.
§ 64-16. Storage and removal; penalty for violations.
thereof or to upset, remove or in any way tamper with any such
container.
Any violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for each offense.
B.
The following matter shall not be placed in receptacles used for regular
solid waste collection service:
(1) Dead animals.
(2) Poisons.
(3) Explosives.
(4) Dangerous or corrosive chemicals.
(5) Clothing taken from persons with infectious diseases.
(6) Heavy metals or metal parts.
(7) Lumber.
(8) Dirt.
(9) Rocks.
(10)Bricks.
(11)Concrete blocks.
(12)Tires.
(13)Automobile or machine oil.
(14)Crates.
(15)Other refuse from construction or remodeling.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
B.
§ 64-13 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 64-16
62:128
§ 64-17. Littering prohibited; penalty for violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or accumulate any solid
waste within the Town except as provided in this article and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto. "Store or accumulate" shall mean to
exist outside of an approved container for a period of time in excess
of seven days. The provisions of this section shall apply to any land or
premises where solid waste accumulates or is stored, be it residential,
commercial or industrial, including vacant property.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
B.
Unlawful activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit,
throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing,
placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private
property in this Town or any waters in this Town unless:
Such property is designated by the Town or by any of its
agencies for the disposal of such litter and such person is
authorized by the proper public authority to use such property.
(a)
Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container
installed on such property.
(b)
Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such
property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant
in lawful possession or the act is done under the personal
direction of said owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent
with the public welfare.
(c)
(1)
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump or
deposit any trash, junk or other refuse upon any highway or to
perform any act which constitutes a violation of the vehicle laws of
the Town or the State of Maryland relative to putting trash, glass
and other prohibited substances on highways.
(2)
A.
Presumption of responsibility for violation; suspension of licenses.
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any
motor vehicle in violation of Subsection A of this section and if the
vehicle has two or more occupants and it cannot be determined which
occupant is the violator, the owner of the vehicle shall be presumed to
be responsible for the violation.
B.
Receptacles to be provided; notice of provisions or section. The
Director is authorized and empowered to establish and maintain
receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where such
property is frequented by the public and to post signs directing persons
to such receptacles and serving notice of the provisions of this section
C.
§ 64-16 FOREST CONSERVATION § 64-17
62:129
§ 64-18. Dumping solid waste on land of another or into another
container or upon any public highway; penalty for violations.
§ 64-19. On-site disposal by burial or by burning; penalty for
violations.
§ 64-20. Protection of wells, springs and watercourses; penalty for
violations.
§ 64-21. Violations and penalties.
In addition to all other remedies provided herein or by law, any violation
of this article, unless otherwise provided for in the applicable section, shall
be punished as a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall be
a fine of $100 for each offense. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, the Town may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any violation of this article.
and to otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and
requirements of this section.
Any violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $250.
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit any solid
waste upon the land or property of another without written consent first
having been obtained from the owner of the property.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for each offense.
B.
On-site disposal of solid waste by burial in a pit or trench or by burning
is prohibited.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any solid waste in or
to knowingly pollute or contaminate any watercourse, body of water,
spring, well or other source of water in the Town.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for each offense.
B.
§ 64-17 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 64-21
62:130
ARTICLE II
Transportation; Littering13
[Adopted 3-7-1983 by Ord. No. 131]
§ 64-22. Unlawful acts. [Amended 11-2-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-8]
§ 64-23. Throwing of materials from vehicles. [Added 8-7-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-4]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall bring, carry or
cause to be transported into the Town any manner of trash, debris,
garbage, junk, refuse or similar matter and who shall leave or cause the
same to be left within the limits of the Town shall be deemed to have
committed a municipal infraction.
A.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall bring, carry or
cause to be transported into the Town any manner of trash, debris,
garbage, junk, refuse or similar matter for collection by the Town's
contractors shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to anyone
transporting grass clippings, leaves or similar yard waste to any
compost center operated by the Town.
B.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall dump, deposit or in
any other manner leave any material within any compost center of the
Town other than during hours when the same is staffed shall be deemed
to have committed a municipal infraction.
C.
Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context requires
otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following
meanings:
MATERIAL — Includes all paper, paper products, cardboard,
pamphlets, circulars, magazines, newspapers, handbills, cartons,
plastic and plastic products, bottles, glass and glass products, metal
objects, lumber, wood scraps and other discarded items of every kind
and description.
STREET — The right-of-way of any road, highway, alley or paved
thoroughfare of any nature located within the boundaries of the Town
of Mount Airy.
VEHICLE — Any device in, on or by which any individual or property is
or might be transported or towed on a street.
A.
13.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2005-6, adopted 6-13-2005, repealed former Art. I of this
article and replaced it with a new Art. I. The new Art. I consists of §§ 64-1 through 64-21.
As a result of that numbering, the section numbers in this article conflicted with the
numbering in Art. I. Therefore, former §§ 64-8, 64-8.1 and 64.9 of this article have been
renumbered as §§ 64-22, 64-23 and 64-24, respectively.
§ 64-22 FOREST CONSERVATION § 64-23
62:131
§ 64-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-1-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-12]
The amount of the infraction fine assessed shall be $250.
Unlawful activity. It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to throw
or to cause or permit the throwing of any material from any vehicle
being operated upon any street within the Town of Mount Airy.
B.
Penalties. Any violation of Subsection B of this section is declared to be
a municipal infraction. [Amended 10-1-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12]
C.
Presumptions. Whenever material is thrown from any vehicle in
violation of Subsection B of this section and if the vehicle has two or
more occupants and it cannot be determined which occupant is the
violator, the owner of the vehicle, if present, shall be presumed to be
responsible for the violation; in the absence of the owner of the vehicle,
the operator shall be presumed to be responsible for the violation.
D.
§ 64-23 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 64-24
62:132
Chapter 70
LICENSES
§ 70-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PEDDLER or SOLICITOR — Includes any person who hawks, peddles or
vends or takes orders for any wares or merchandise or anything of value
upon the streets of the Town or any person who goes from house to house to
vend, sell or take orders for any wares or merchandise or anything of value,
either by sample or otherwise.
§ 70-2. License required.
§ 70-3. Vehicle used for vending.
Every vehicle and everything pertaining thereto used by a licensed vendor
shall at all times be maintained in a clean and orderly condition, and no
portion of the contents thereof shall be thrown, spilled or deposited upon
the street or other public place.
No person, corporation, company, firm, partnership or association shall
engage in any kind of business for gain within the Town limits without
first having obtained a license and paid the required license fee. Any
such person, corporation, company, etc., desiring to obtain a license to
engage in and conduct any business within the Town, shall first make
application therefor in writing accompanied by the prescribed fee, to
the Mayor of Mount Airy upon which shall be stated the lot and square
number if the business is to be conducted in a building and the nature
of the business so to be conducted.
A.
No person or persons shall, within the corporate limits of Mount Airy,
act, exhibit, play or perform any farce, play, show, circus, theatrical or
dramatic performance or any other description of public entertainment
or exhibition for gain (excepting only vocal or instrumental concerts,
exhibitions of paintings or sculpture and lectures for disseminating
useful knowledge) without first obtaining a license.
B.
No person shall hawk or peddle for sale any merchandise of any kind
whatever upon the public streets, roads or alleys of Mount Airy, without
a license for that purpose first had and obtained from the Mayor or,
in his absence, from the Clerk, under Seal of the Corporation; and
such license, when issued, shall always express the specific purpose or
object for which it is granted and the space of time during which it is to
continue.
C.
§ 64-24 FOREST CONSERVATION § 70-4
62:133
§ 70-4. Inspections.
Any and all premises or vehicles used by street vendors licensed hereunder
for the conduct of business shall from time to time be inspected. If any
unsanitary condition is found to exist, or other condition injurious to the
public health and morals is disclosed, the same shall be ordered to be
immediately corrected, and if the order is not complied with, the license
may be revoked by vote of the Mayor and Council and all payments made
on the same forfeited to the Town of Mount Airy.
§ 70-5. Annual fees.
§ 70-6. Establishment of fees by resolution.
The Mayor and Council shall from time to time pass a resolution
establishing the license fees to be paid by various business categories in
Town.
§ 70-7. License a personal privilege.
Every license shall be held to confer a personal privilege to transact the
business specified therein and shall not be exercised, except by the person,
firm, company or corporation licensed, or his, her or its duly authorized
agents, executors or administrators.
§ 70-8. Peddling and soliciting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage within the corporate limits of
the Town of Mount Airy in the business of a peddler or a solicitor without
first obtaining a license as provided herein.
§ 70-9. Exemptions.
The provisions of § 70-8 shall not apply to:
Annual license fees for the year beginning January 1 of each and every
year in the amount as hereinafter set forth shall be due and payable on
or before January 1 of the current year. Any new business commencing
after January 1 must obtain the required license prior to the starting of
the said business. All licenses acquired must be posted on the premises
in a conspicuous place at all times.
A.
No license for the operation of any type of business shall be issued
unless all real estate taxes, personal property taxes or any other public
dues, fees or assessments levied against the said premises by the Town
and county wherein the business is to be conducted are paid to and
including the calendar year immediately preceding the year for which
the license is applied.
B.
Persons selling merchandise to manufacturers, wholesalers or retailers
for use in their business or for resale;
A.
§ 70-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 70-9
62:134
§ 70-10. Separate peddler's license for each individual. [Amended
6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
A separate peddler's license must be applied for and obtained by each
individual who will participate in the hawking, peddling or vending or the
taking of orders for any wares or merchandise or thing of value. Each
individual applying for a peddler's license shall hereinafter be referred to
as "applicant" and each individual who is issued a peddler's license shall
hereinafter be referred to as "licensee."
§ 70-11. Contents of applications for peddler's licenses. [Amended
6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
Applicants for a peddler's license shall file with the Town Clerk a signed
application giving the following information:
Persons who take orders for or make delivery of newspapers, milk, ice,
fuel, bakery goods or other dairy or bakery perishable food products;
B.
Persons selling such articles as may be produced, caught or raised by
them;
C.
D. Persons selling Christmas trees, cards, greens, holly and wreaths;
Fraternal, religious, charitable, patriotic, educational, benevolent or
civic organizations;
E.
F. Volunteer fire companies.
Name, local and permanent addresses, age, weight, height, color of
hair and eyes and other distinguishing physical characteristics of the
applicant;
A.
All names by which the applicant is or has been known, all addresses at
which the applicant has regularly conducted business, and the address
where the applicant receives electronic mail, and the same information
for any company with which the applicant is employed or with which
the applicant is associated, or with which the applicant's employer is
affiliated (to include all parent, sister or subsidiary companies) or has
succeeded;
B.
Length of the applicant's employment or association with any company
to disclosure of which is required by Subsection B above;
C.
Brief description of the business and nature of the merchandise to be
sold;
D.
E. Fingerprints of the applicant;
Letters from two persons who have known the applicant for at least
two years attesting to his moral character and at least two references
from persons, other than those providing the letters attesting to the
F.
§ 70-9 FOREST CONSERVATION § 70-11
62:135
applicant's moral character, whom the applicant is willing that inquiry
be made to verify the facts stated by the applicant;
Two photographs, two inches by two inches in size, showing the head
and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
G.
A list of all vehicles that will be used in the solicitation, which the
applicant shall update from time to time after initial application and/or
issuance of license as vehicles are added, deleted or substituted on the
list, providing as to each vehicle a description of the same, including
the make, model and year, together with license tag number;
H.
A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed;
I.
A complete background investigation report for the applicant, from
a reputable vendor selected by applicant from among those on an
approved list kept by the Town Clerk, which shall at a minimum include
the individual's complete criminal background if any, including any
such background as may be disclosed by searching of the fingerprinting
required by this section, a report of any bankruptcy or insolvency
proceedings filed by the individual, suits against the individual and/or
applicant and a credit report for the applicant;
J.
A copy of any home improvement license(s) held in Maryland and the
states or jurisdictions in which the applicant has its principal place of
business or in which the applicant regularly conducts business, and an
identification by the applicant of each and every such license that the
applicant has held that has been suspended or revoked;
K.
A report, letter or statement from each home improvement commission
that has issued a home improvement license to the applicant within the
last 10 years, and from any such commission that has ever suspended
or revoked such a license held by the applicant, providing a list of
any complaints filed against the applicant in the last 10 years setting
forth the resolution and current status of each such complaint, and the
reasons for the suspension or revocation of any such license held by the
applicant;
L.
A report, letter or statement from the Better Business Bureau as to the
applicant's rating and setting forth whether in the last 10 years the
applicant has been the subject of any complaint, a brief description of
any such complaint, and the resolution and current status of any such
complaint; and
M.
The information required in Subsections K through M above for any
employer of the applicant or with which applicant is associated;
N.
Any updated information in the event that information required by this
section changes during the pendency of the application.
O.
§ 70-11 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 70-12
62:136
§ 70-12. Investigation of applicants for peddler's licenses.
[Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
Upon receipt, the Town Clerk shall review the application and information
required by § 70-11 above. The Town Clerk may, but is not obliged, to
conduct any further information that the Town Clerk determines is
necessary and appropriate and may request further information from the
applicant, including information concerning the applicant's employer or
any company affiliated with the applicant's employer or which applicant's
employer has succeeded.
§ 70-13. Issuance of peddler's licenses. [Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-5]
§ 70-14. Appeals from denial of peddler's license by Town Clerk.
[Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
An appeal from the Town Clerk's denial of the issuance of a peddler's license
may be taken upon written request provided to the Town Clerk within 15
days after notification of denial to the applicant pursuant to § 70-13B above
and shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the Town Council at which
there is a quorum which takes place after receipt of the written request for
Upon determining that all the information required in § 70-11 above
has been provided and upon receipt or completion of any additional
investigation or information requested pursuant to § 70-12 above, the
Town Clerk may issue a peddler's license if, in the sound judgment of
the Town Clerk, based upon the information submitted by the applicant
or obtained by means of independent investigation, the applicant does
not present an apparent substantial risk to those that the applicant
intends to solicit of bodily injury or financial harm by means of fraud.
A.
The Town Clerk may deny issuance of a peddler's license if, in the sound
judgment of the Town Clerk, based upon the information submitted
by the applicant or obtained by means of independent investigation,
the applicant presents an apparent substantial risk to those that the
applicant intends to solicit of bodily injury or financial harm by means
of fraud and/or upon a finding that the applicant has willfully withheld
or falsified any information required for a license. The Town Clerk
shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the denial by mailing
notification to the address, or by means of electronic mail sent to the
electronic mail address, provided by the applicant pursuant to § 70-11B
above. Notification of denial shall be made upon being sent by the Town
Clerk.
B.
Upon determination by the Town Clerk to issue a license, or upon being
directed to issue a license on appeal pursuant to § 70-14, upon signing
a form acknowledging receipt of the "No Solicitation" list described in
§ 70-15C below and any other acknowledgment forms that the Town
may, from time to time, reasonably require, and upon receipt of a
license fee of $150, the Town Clerk is authorized to issue such license.
C.
§ 70-12 FOREST CONSERVATION § 70-14
62:137
appeal by the Town Clerk, or if such written request for appeal is timely
received by the Town Clerk within 10 days of the next regularly scheduled
Town Council meeting, at the regular Town Council meeting at which there
is a quorum that occurs after the next such meeting. The Town Council shall
thereafter affirm the action of the Town Clerk or overrule it and direct the
Town Clerk to issue the license.
§ 70-15. Terms of peddler's license; display. [Amended 6-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-5]
A peddler's license shall be good for one year from the date of issuance,
unless earlier suspended or revoked as provided in § 70-17 below. Every
peddler or solicitor shall carry with him his license at all times while
engaged in peddling or soliciting and shall display the same to any
person who shall demand to see the same while he is so engaged. The
licenses shall remain the property of the Town and shall be surrendered
to the Town Clerk upon expiration, nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation.
A.
No person who has been issued a peddler's license shall enter upon any
private property for the purposes of peddling or solicitation on which
is conspicuously posted a "No Solicitation" sign or sign containing
substantially the same message.
B.
No person who has been issued a peddler's license shall for the
purposes of peddling or solicitation enter upon the private property of
any person who has requested to be included in a "No Solicitation" list
to be kept by the Town, notwithstanding whether a "No Solicitation"
sign has been posted on the property. Said "No Solicitation" list shall
be kept and maintained by the Town Clerk, shall be provided to the
licensee upon issuance of the license and shall be posted on the Town's
website. The list shall be updated every 90 days by the Town Clerk and
posted on the Town's website. It shall be the obligation of the licensee
to obtain an updated list every 90 days and/or to consult the updated
lists posted on the Town's website before a solicitation.
C.
Any person issued a peddler's license shall immediately leave private
property entered by the licensee upon the verbal request of the owner,
resident or other person solicited and immediately cease and desist
all peddling or solicitation attempts on the property or directed to the
person who has requested that the licensee leave the premises.
D.
A licensee may only peddle or solicit between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m.
E.
F. A peddler's license is not transferable.
§ 70-14 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 70-16
62:138
§ 70-16. Renewals of peddler's licenses. [Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-5]
The holder of any expiring license desiring a new license to be effective
on the expiration of the existing license, shall, not less than 30 nor more
than 60 days before the expiration of the existing license, file a written
application for renewal with the Town Clerk, giving the information set forth
in § 70-11, except, at the discretion of the Town Clerk, new photographs
shall not be required if the existing photograph is a good likeness, and
except that the background check required in § 70-11J shall be updated
every five years. There must be filed with the application a renewal fee of
$75.
§ 70-17. Revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of peddler's
licenses. [Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
§ 70-18. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-2-1985 by Ord. No.
144]
Violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
municipal infraction.
Chapter 74
MOTORCYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND SIMILAR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 96.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 105.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 107.
Subject to the right of appeal set forth in § 70-14 above, the Town Clerk
may refuse to renew a license or may revoke or suspend any peddler's
license on any ground that would justify denial of original issuance of
the license.
A.
The Town Clerk may suspend for a period up to 90 days; or immediately
revoke, or refuse to renew any license upon a finding that the licensee,
while peddling or soliciting and in connection therewith, has engaged
in fraud or willful misrepresentation, has violated any provision of
this chapter, has committed any unlawful act, or has refused to leave
the premises immediately when requested by the owner or occupant
thereof to do so. Any revocation, suspension or failure to renew shall
be by written notice to the licensee delivered personally or sent by
certified mail to the licensee's local address listed in his application.
The notice shall contain a statement of the reason for the action taken.
The licensee shall promptly return the peddler's license upon
suspension, nonrenewal or revocation of the license.
B.
§ 70-16 MOTORCYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND § 70-18
74:139
§ 74-1. Use and operation restrictions. [Amended 10-7-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-20; 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-11]
§ 74-2. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, the amount of the
fine shall be $250 for a first offense and $500 for each repeat offense. And
upon conviction, the Town shall be entitled to obtain a cease-and-desist
or injunctive order from any court of competent jurisdiction to prevent
such conduct by the violator in the future and to recover damages from
the violator for any injury to Town property occurring as a result of such
violation.
No person shall operate a motorcycle, moped, motor scooter, scooter
(including, but not limited to, a vehicle known commonly as a "trail
bike," "minibike," "dirt bike" or "all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, or
other similar vehicle or motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the
Town or on Town property except upon public highways to the extent
permitted by state law.
A.
Use and operation of the vehicles defined in Subsection A above are
permitted within the Town only to the extent permitted by state or other
applicable law, and shall be further subject to the following conditions:
The vehicle may be walked but must not be operated on Main
Street (State Route 808) from Prospect Avenue to Hood Street, or
any property visibly marked so as to prohibit use of such vehicles
and shall not be operated on other public streets if such operation
is prohibited by state law.
(1)
Helmets must be worn by all drivers and passengers while the
vehicle is being operated.
(2)
Vehicles may be equipped with exhaust silencers, but shall not be
altered in any way to increase or enhance their noise level.
(3)
Violations shall be considered a municipal infraction and may be
based upon observations of any individual authorized to issue
citations or of any person upon affidavit.
(4)
B.
The restrictions identified in Subsection B above shall not apply to any
motorcycle required by state law to have a registration in accordance
with Section 13-402 of the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, as may be amended from time to time.
C.
As used herein, the terms "motorcycle," "moped," "motor scooter,"
"scooter," "snowmobile," "vehicle" and "motor vehicle" shall have the
meanings defined in the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, as may be amended from time to time.
D.
§ 70-18 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 74-2
74:140
Chapter 76
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, trash and litter — See Ch. 64.
Open burning — See Ch. 79.
Nuisances — See Ch. 82.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 85.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 107.
§ 76-1. Intent; enforcement.
Various nuisances, Code violations and municipal infractions are defined
and prohibited in other chapters of this Code, and it is the intent of the Town
Council in enacting this chapter to make it supplemental to those other
chapters where nuisances are defined; by defining in this section certain
Code violations and municipal infractions as nuisances; and by granting
the Town supplemental powers pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
relating to the abatement of nuisances and procedures for the abatement
of nuisances in those instances where other methods and procedures for
abatement are provided. This chapter shall be administered and enforced
by the Mayor or other staff or official designated by the Mayor and Town
Council.
§ 76-2. Nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, harbor, commit or maintain or
to suffer to be caused, harbored, committed or maintained any nuisance,
as defined by the statutes or common law of this state or as defined in this
section, by this Code or other ordinance of the Town of Mount Airy, at any
place within the Town.
§ 76-3. Partial enumeration of nuisances.
The following acts when committed or conditions when existing within
the Town of Mount Airy are hereby defined and declared to be
nuisances:
An act done or committed or aided or assisted to be done or
committed by any person or any substance, being or thing kept,
maintained, placed or found in or upon any public or private place
which is injurious or dangerous to the public health or safety.
(1)
All buildings, bridges or other structures of whatever character
kept or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning
or having control thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition
unsafe, dangerous, unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public,
(2)
A.
§ 74-2 MOTORCYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND § 76-3
74:141
including but not limited to the emission of dust, fumes, gas,
smoke, odor, noise, vibration or other noxious disturbances.
Creation of a noise disturbance, including but not limited to a noise
disturbance defined under Chapter 82 of this Code and noise which
is unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public.
(3)
All trees and other appendages of or to realty kept or maintained
or which are permitted by any person owning or having control
thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous,
unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public.
(4)
All ponds or pools of stagnant water and all foul or dirty water
or liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe or spout or
thrown into or upon any street, public place or lot to the injury or
annoyance of the public.
(5)
All obstructions caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk to
the danger or annoyance of the public, and all stones, rubbish, dirt,
filth, slops, vegetable matter or other article thrown or placed by
any person on or in any street, sidewalk or other public place which
in any way may cause injury or annoyance of the public.
(6)
All sidewalks, gutters or curbstones permitted to remain in an
unsafe condition or out of repair.
(7)
All stables, cattle yards, hog, sheep or cow pens or yards for poultry
permitted by the owner thereof or the person responsible therefor
to be in such a condition as to become offensive, annoying or
injurious to the public.
(8)
All houses or buildings used for special storage of powder,
dynamite or other explosive substances, except those maintained
pursuant to a permit issued by competent authority.
(9)
All abandoned or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators or freezer
cabinets which are uncrated and have a door or lock which cannot
be released for opening from the inside thereof and which are
placed outside of a building or dwelling in a place accessible to
children.
(10)
A disorderly property defined to mean a property where, within a
three-hundred-sixty-five-day period, two or more criminal arrests,
criminal citations, criminal indictments, criminal warrants,
criminal summonses, or civil citations have occurred or been
issued, arising out of separate and distinct facts and
circumstances, a defined by the statutes of the State of Maryland,
ordinances of the Town or of the county in which the property is
situated which occur on the property, within any building, house
or structure thereon, within the property's curtilage or otherwise
on other property in close proximity to the property where it can
be established that the conduct giving rise to the criminal or civil
(11)
§ 76-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 76-3
74:142
§ 76-4. Property maintenance.
No person owning or in possession of any lot, house, building or enclosure
shall allow or suffer to exist in or upon such premises any stagnant water,
animal or vegetable matter or other substance liable to become putrid,
offensive, annoying or unhealthy or otherwise allow any condition to exist in
violation of Chapter 85 of this Code. Persons owning or in possession of any
real estate shall provide proper and adequate drainage therefor so that no
offensive, baneful or disagreeable liquids shall flow or seep into any street.
Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 76-5. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Mayor or other staff or official designated to
cause inspections to be made from time to time of all portions of the Town
of Mount Airy to determine whether any condition exists or activity is
being practiced which constitutes a nuisance; and he or she shall cause an
investigation to be made upon complaint made by any responsible person.
§ 76-6. Right of entry.
The Mayor or other staff or official designated shall have the right to
enter upon private premises for the purposes specified in § 76-5 upon
compliance with all applicable provisions of law, including the issuance of
an administrative warrant. Unless it appears probable that advance warning
would defeat the purpose of such entry, occupants of premises to be entered
shall be given reasonable notice in advance, and, in any case, it shall be
action emanated from or is connected to the property. [Added
12-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-1614]
Any violation of Chapter 85 of the Town Code regarding Property
Maintenance. [Added 3-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-115]
(12)
Any other act or condition which is defined elsewhere in this Code
to be a nuisance.
(13)
The nuisances described in this section shall not be construed as
exclusive, and any act of commission or omission and any condition
which constitutes a nuisance by statute or common law of the state,
when committed, omitted or existing within the Town of Mount Airy is
hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
B.
Persons in possession and/or legal owners of property creating
nuisances described in this section shall be held legally responsible
for their creation, continuation and shall be required to comply with
all orders and/or citations issued under this section if duly notified as
required herein.
C.
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(11) as Subsection
A(12).
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(12) as A(13).
§ 76-3 MOTORCYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND § 76-6
74:143
unlawful for any owner or occupant to prevent such entry which is sought
to be made in compliance with law.
§ 76-7. Notice to cease and desist.
If at any time the Mayor or other staff or official designated shall find that
an activity or practice which constitutes a nuisance is occurring within the
Town of Mount Airy, he or she shall promptly and by the most expeditious
means notify the violator, person in charge, occupant and/or the property
owner to cease and desist forthwith.
§ 76-8. Notice to abate.
§ 76-8.1. Remedies for disorderly properties. [Added 12-1-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-16]
If at any time the Mayor or other staff or official designated shall find
that a condition which constitutes a nuisance exists within the Town,
he or she shall give notice, in writing, to the owner, occupant or person
in charge of the premises upon which such condition exists, stating
therein the condition which constitutes a nuisance and directing such
addressee to remedy the condition within the time stated in such notice,
which shall be not more than 10 days; and it shall be unlawful for any
such owner, occupant or person in charge to fail to comply with the
terms of such notice.
A.
Recourse of Town when notice to abate nuisance is ignored.
Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given
pursuant to Subsection A to comply with the terms of such notice
or with the terms imposed by the legislative body on appeal, as
the case may be, the Mayor or other staff or official designated
shall forthwith direct the appropriate Town staff or contractors
to remedy the condition which is the subject of such notice, and
the expense incurred by the Town in so doing shall be charged to
the addressee of such notice, to be collected as Town taxes; and
such expenses shall constitute a lien upon the premises where such
condition occurred, to be collected as Town taxes are collected if
not otherwise first paid to the Town.
(1)
Abatement by the Town of any condition which constitutes a
nuisance and reimbursement to the Town of expenses incurred
thereby shall not bar prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance.
(2)
The Town may seek any appropriate abatement orders from a court
of competent jurisdiction in prosecuting citations brought under
this section and in any other legal action may seek any appropriate
court orders to the extent permitted by law.
(3)
B.
In addition to the remedies otherwise set forth in this chapter, with
respect to a disorderly property as defined in § 76-3A(11) above, if after
A.
§ 76-6 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 76-8.1
74:144
issuance of a notice to abate pursuant to § 76-7 and/or a notice to cease
and desist pursuant to § 76-8 the owner and/or occupant of the property
has not achieved compliance, the Town shall have the right to:
Direct that the owner and/or occupant of the property attend an
abatement conference with the Town's Code Enforcement Officer
and/or other Town staff or officials to come to an agreement as
to the terms of an abatement agreement to be entered into with
the Town setting forth the specific actions that the owner and/or
occupant will undertake to abate the disorderly property nuisance;
(1)
Require that the owner and/or occupant enter into an abatement
agreement with the Town on terms agreed upon at the abatement
conference and/or other terms reasonably required by the Town in
order to abate the nuisance, including, but not limited to:
Specifications and a specific schedule of deadlines for said
actions to abate the nuisance;
(a)
Provisions for periodic assessment of compliance with the
agreement and/car the agreement's effectiveness;
(b)
The Town's sight to require modifications to the abatement
agreement in the event that the agreement's terms are not
effectively abating the nuisance;
(c)
Institution of eviction proceedings against identified
individuals from the property in question, including eviction of
any tenant;
(d)
An assignment to the Town of the owner's rights to evict
identified individuals from the property in question, including
any and all rights of the owner pursuant to any lease entered
into with any tenant of the property;
(e)
The reimbursement to the Town by the owner and/or occupant
for the Town attorney's fees and litigation costs in prosecuting
an action to abate the nuisance including any eviction
proceedings;
(f)
Written notification from the owner and/or occupant to
identified individuals that they are prohibited from entering
onto the property;
(g)
Utilization of written leases containing a provision or
provisions requiring eviction for criminal activity;
(h)
The completion of improvements upon the premises of the
dwelling which have the impact of mitigating crime, including
but not limited to the erection of fences, installation of security
devices upon entrances or increased lighting;
(i)
(2)
§ 76-8.1 MOTORCYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND § 76-8.1
74:145
The posting of a cash bond in an amount determined by the
Mayor reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the
specific condition or requirements imposed by the nuisance
abatement agreement, including but not limited to the
completion of improvements required by the abatement
agreement; or
(j)
Any other reasonable condition or requirement designed to
abate the nuisance.
(k)
Institute an action in a court of law in the event that owner and/or
occupant fails or refuses to comply with the terms of an abatement
agreement in order to enforce the abatement agreement, including
for specific performance and other equitable relief, forfeiture of
any bond or a portion thereof put up pursuant to an abatement
agreement, for eviction of any tenant or occupant of the property
pursuant to any assignment of the owner's rights pursuant to the
terms of the abatement agreement, to enjoin any person who shall
own, rent or occupy the property from using or permitting its
use in violation of the provisions of an abatement agreement, for
attorney's fees and costs of litigation and for other relief available
at law or in equity as the Court deems appropriate; or
(3)
Commence an action in a court of law in the event that an owner
and/or occupant does not attend a nuisance abatement conference
or fails or refuses to sign a proposed written nuisance abatement
agreement or proposed written modification thereof or otherwise
violates or fails to remedy violations of this chapter to seek, and
upon a finding that this chapter has been violated by a
preponderance of the evidence, the court shall be empowered to
grant one or more of the following as relief:
Imposition by court order upon the owner and/or occupant of
any of the terms that the Town is empowered to require in an
abatement agreement in Subsection A(2) above;
(a)
Imposition of a period of court supervision to monitor
compliance with any terms that the Court imposes on the
owner and/or occupant pursuant to Subsection A(4)(a) above;
or
(b)
Upon a determination by a preponderance of the evidence that
a court order issued pursuant to Subsection A(4)(a) above has
been violated by the owner or occupant and/or that terms
thereof have not been complied with, issuance of orders
requiring specific performance or other equitable relief,
forfeiture of any bond or a portion thereof, eviction of any
tenant or occupant of the property pursuant to any assignment
of the owner's rights, to enjoin any person who shall own, rent
or occupy the property from using or permitting its use in
violation of the provisions of the court's orders for attorney's
(c)
(4)
§ 76-8.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 76-8.1
74:146
§ 76-9. Additional remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any police officer from
arresting any person for committing or maintaining a nuisance when such
arrest is made pursuant to law.
§ 76-10. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be $100 for each initial offense and $300 for each
repeat offense. In addition, the Town may, to the extent permitted by law,
seek and obtain any appropriate court orders providing for additional fines
and remedies in the event of further violations, including the penalty of
contempt of court.
Chapter 79
OPEN BURNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention— See Ch. 60.
§ 79-1. Open fire restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit an open fire out of
doors within the limits of the Town of Mount Airy whenever the same is in
violation of any state statute or regulations.
§ 79-2. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
municipal infraction.
Chapter 80
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation and Park Board — See Ch. 31.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 41.
Animals — See Ch. 43.
Firearms and similar devices — See Ch. 58.
Motorcycles, snowmobiles and similar
vehicles — See Ch. 74.
Open burning — See Ch. 79.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 82.
fees and costs of litigation and for other relief available at law
or in equity as the Court deems appropriate.
§ 76-8.1 OPEN BURNING § 79-2
79:147
§ 80-1. Use of tobacco products and tobacco substitute products
prohibited.
Use of tobacco products and tobacco substitute products such as vapor
products is prohibited in Town parks, including the Town's Rails to Trails
pathways and associated properties, with the exception of specifically
designated areas. Violation of this section shall constitute a municipal
infraction subject to a fine of $25 for each violation.
Chapter 82
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 41.
Animals — See Ch. 43.
Curfew — See Ch. 51.
Nuisances — See Ch. 76.
§ 79-2 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 80-1
79:148
ARTICLE I
Fire Hydrants
[Adopted 9-10-1979 by Ord. No. 109]
§ 82-1. Unlawful use. [Amended 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 144]
It shall be unlawful for any person, without previous written permission
signed by an authorized official of the Town of Mount Airy, to open any fire
hydrant within the limits of the Town of Mount Airy and to cause in any
manner water to be discharged or withdrawn therefrom.
§ 82-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any employee of the Town of
Mount Airy acting within the scope of his authorized duties on behalf of the
Town.
§ 82-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 144;
amended 12-1-1986 by Ord. No. 155; 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-6]
Violation of any of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a
municipal infraction, and the amount of the infraction fine assessed therefor
shall be $500.
§ 82-1 OPEN BURNING § 82-3
79:149

ARTICLE II
Noise
[Adopted 1-13-1963]
§ 82-4. Unnecessary noise. [Amended 4-2-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-3;
1-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2000-10; 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-11;
3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
Purpose. The Town Council finds that excessive and unreasonable noise
harms public health and welfare and impairs enjoyment of property.
The intent of this article is to control noise, to protect public health
and welfare and to allow the peaceful enjoyment of property, but at
the same time permit such enjoyment of property as is consistent with
reasonable use of the property.
A.
Definitions. As used in this article, the terms and definitions contained
in COMAR 26.02.03.01, as amended from time to time, are adopted
by reference and shall apply in their entirety except where otherwise
indicated below. Further, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPLAINT — A statement attesting to a violation of this article.
DAYTIME — The hours from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 10.00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
for which Town Hall is closed.
NIGHTTIME — The hours from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., Monday
through Friday, and 10:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, for which Town Hall is closed.
NOISE — A sound created or controlled by human activity from one or
more sources.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any noise that is:
VALID COMPLAINT — A statement signed under oath or penalty of
perjury attesting to a violation of this article, or a complaint otherwise
validated and found credible by code enforcement officials.
(1) Continuous such that it lasts for more than 10 minutes; and
Offensive or obnoxious, considering its intensity, frequency and
duration, or unusual for the time of day or location where it is,
produced or heard.
(2)
B.
Prohibitions.
Any activity which generates a noise level in excess of the
permissible environment noise standards contained in COMAR
26.02.03.03, as amended, is expressly prohibited within the Town.
(1)
In addition to activity listed below in Subsection D, except for
normal retail or restaurant activity during the daytime, which
(2)
C.
§ 82-4 OPEN BURNING § 82-4
79:151
produces a noise disturbance which is not observed or heard by
police, law enforcement, or Town personnel but which
unreasonably interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of
residential property or the lawful conduct of business is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited, provided that valid
complaints have been received from two different addresses or
locations which substantiate the nature and extent of the same
activity.
Any activity listed below in Subsection D which produces a noise
disturbance which unreasonably interferes with the reasonable use
and enjoyment of residential property or the lawful conduct of
business is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
(3)
Prohibited noises enumerated. In addition to the prohibited noises set
forth in COMAR 26.02.03.03(A), as amended, the following acts are
hereby declared to be noise disturbances under this section and are
prohibited as follows:
During daytime or nighttime, use of any of the following on or near
any street, avenue, alley, highway, footway, sidewalk, parking or
other public space, area intended to be used by the public or area
to which the public is invited, including but not limited to areas in
or around barrooms, hotels or other public places, except under a
permit issued by the Town:
Any device or apparatus for the intensification or amplification
of sound, the human voice or music;
(a)
Use of any item for the purpose of producing or reproducing
sound, including any radio, audio system, television set; or
(b)
Use of any item for the purpose of noise-making, including but
not limited to bells, whistles and drums.
(c)
(1)
During daytime or nighttime, use of any of the following for the
purpose of advertising goods or services, or attracting attention to
any business or vehicle:
Any device or apparatus for the intensification or amplification
of sound, the human voice or music;
(a)
Use of any item for the purpose of producing or reproducing
sound, including any radio, audio system, television set; or
(b)
Use of any item for the purpose of noise-making, including but
not limited to, bells, whistles and drums.
(c)
(2)
During nighttime, use of any of the following out of doors except
under a permit issued by the Town for public events and
celebrations:
(3)
D.
§ 82-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 82-4
79:152
Any device or apparatus for the intensification or amplification
of sound, the human voice or music;
(a)
Use of any item for the purpose of producing or reproducing
sound, including any radio, audio system, television set; or
(b)
Use of any item for the purpose of noise-making, including but
not limited to bells, whistles and drums.
(c)
During nighttime, the construction, site preparation, assembly,
erection, repair, alteration or demolition of structures or roadways
or auto repair activity which produces noise that can plainly be
heard more than 100 feet away in a residential area.
(4)
During daytime or nighttime, any motor vehicle horn or signaling
device which is sounded repeatedly except as an emergency or
danger warning signal.
(5)
During daytime or nighttime, continual barking of a dog for 10
consecutive minutes or more.
(6)
During nighttime, delivery of building, construction or, building site
preparation materials which produces noise that can plainly be
heard more than 100 feet away in a residential area.
(7)
During nighttime, the pickup of trash or recyclables from
dumpsters or other containers more than 150 cubic feet in size
within 500 feet of any residential use.
(8)
Exemptions. This article does not apply to:
Devices used solely to warn, protect or alert the public of the
existence of an emergency or hazardous situation;
(1)
Household tools, portable appliances and lawn care and snow
removal equipment in normal usage during daytime hours;
(2)
Emergency operations, including emergency repairs to
commercial, industrial or residential property and training of
police, fire and rescue personnel;
(3)
Ordinary noise created by common carriers en route to their
destinations, including aircraft, trains, delivery trucks and buses;
(4)
Sporting events, including athletic contests and games in any
location within the town, and entertainment events, including
parades, public celebrations, festivals and carnivals in fairgrounds,
carnival grounds, Town parks or public property between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
(5)
A source or condition expressly subject to any state, county or
federal noise control law or regulation which is more stringent than
the provisions of this article, including noise during the daytime;
(6)
E.
§ 82-4 OPEN BURNING § 82-4
79:153
§ 82-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-2-1988 by Ord. No. 144]
Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a municipal infraction.
Any activity causing noise for which a variance has been obtained
by any state or county environmental authority, to the extent of the
variance so granted;
(7)
Any public event for which a government authority has issued
permission or a permit.
(8)
Exceptions. The provisions of this article may be temporarily waived
upon written request and prior approval by the Mayor, Zoning
Administrator or designated Town staff if, without an exception,
substantial hardship, loss or inconvenience would result to a party in
interest and if the public health or safety would not be impaired by an
exception. A temporary waiver granted under this subsection shall not
be valid for longer than 30 days, subject to renewal.
F.
Enforcement.
To the extent not personally observed by law enforcement or Town
personnel, a violation of this article may be deemed to exist and a
citation may, if appropriate, be issued to the individual or persons
responsible as well as to the property owner when a valid complaint
is received.
(1)
To the extent not personally observed by law enforcement or Town
personnel, a violation of § 82-4C(2) shall be deemed to exist and a
citation may, if appropriate, be issued to the individual or persons
responsible as well as to the property owner only in the event
that valid complaints are received from two different addresses or
locations about the same activity.
(2)
Violation of this subsection shall constitute a municipal infraction
and shall carry a fine of $50 for the first offense; $100 for the
second offense; $250 for the third offense and $500 for any further
offense.
(3)
Repeat violations of this article for which a citation may or could
be issued may also be enforced by a cease-and-desist, stop-work
or abatement order issued by any enforcement official, staff
authorized to issue citations, police officer, the Mayor, or any
Council member.
(4)
Citations shall only be issued based on observations of officials
authorized to issue citations or upon receipt of a valid complaint or
complaints which identify the complainants and in the judgment of
officials authorized to issue citations constitute a violation of this
article.
(5)
G.
§ 82-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 82-5
79:154
ARTICLE III
Trespassing
[Adopted 10-4-1982 by Ord. No. 12616]
§ 82-6. Unlawful acts.
Any person refusing or failing to leave or found to have entered any public
property within the Town of Mount Airy during those hours specified by
posting upon the same that the property is not open to public use shall be
deemed to have committed a municipal infraction.
§ 82-7. Violations and penalties.
The amount of the infraction fine assessed shall be $25 for a first offense
and $50 for each repeat offense.
§ 82-8. Posting of property.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to post any such property with respect to
hours of use as in his judgment may seem proper and the Council may
provide further for such posting by resolution from time to time.
16.Editor's Note: The provisions of this article are derived from Article 3, Section 3-30, of the
former codification, adopted 1-13-1963.
§ 82-6 OPEN BURNING § 82-8
79:155

ARTICLE IV
Loitering
[Adopted 10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-11]
§ 82-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and
shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACES — Includes not only streets, alleys and sidewalks, but
those establishments generally open for the public convenience.
§ 82-10. Prohibited activities.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 82-11. Refusal to comply.
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 82-10 and there is
a clear and imminent threat of a disturbance, then any police officer may
order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave
after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.
§ 82-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty
of an infraction, the fine for which shall be $50. Repeat offenses occurring
within a period of one year from the initial violation shall be subject to a fine
of $100 for each such additional offense.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
Create or cause to be created any excessive and unseemly noise to the
disturbance of the peace or the disturbance of any lawful assemblage
of persons in a public place.
B.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place by engaging in conduct that alarms or seriously annoys another
person with intent to harass, alarm or annoy such person after
reasonable warning or request to desist by the other person.
D.
§ 82-9 OPEN BURNING § 82-12
79:157
Chapter 83
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 85.
Sewers — See Ch. 91.
Water — See Ch. 109.
§ 82-12 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 82-12
83:158
ARTICLE I
Permits
[Adopted 12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-13]
§ 83-1. Requirements for issuance.
No plumbing permit for work to be performed within the Town of Mount
Airy shall be issued except upon application by a licensed master plumber
accompanied by a copy of his registration as such with Carroll County,
Maryland.
§ 83-1 PLUMBING § 83-1
83:159
Chapter 85
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 49.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
Garbage, trash and litter — See Ch. 64.
Nuisances — See Ch. 76.
§ 85-1. Definitions. [Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-13]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BLIGHTED STRUCTURE — Any dwelling, garage, or outbuilding, or any
factory, shop, store, office building, warehouse, or any other structure or
part of a structure, to include private driveways and parking lots thereto,
which:[Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-3]
BUILDING MATERIAL — Any lumber, bricks, concrete, cinder blocks,
plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or
equipment, shingles, mortar, cement, nails, screws, or other material
commonly used in the construction or repair of any buildings or structures.
Because of fire, wind, other natural disaster, vandalism or physical
deterioration is no longer habitable as a dwelling, is no longer useful for
the purpose for which it was originally intended, or, as respects private
driveways and parking lots, has been allowed to deteriorate to the point
where deep and numerous potholes, cracks and voids in paving have
developed which pose a risk of injury or of property damage and to
the point that commercial business operating in such structures or on
surrounding properties has been or is likely to be adversely affected; or
A.
Is partially completed and which is not presently being constructed
under an existing, valid building permit issued by or under the authority
of the Town of Mount Airy; or
B.
C. Is not structurally sound, weathertight, waterproof or verminproof; or
Is not covered by a water-resistant paint or other waterproof covering
so as to protect said structure from the adverse effects of the elements
or from physical deterioration; or
D.
Contains one or more exterior openings for a period of 60 days or more
not covered by a functional door or unbroken glazed window or which
is not in the case of a vacant building neatly boarded up and protected
against the elements and from vandals and rodents and other animals.
E.
§ 83-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 85-1
83:160
DWELLING — Any house or building or portion thereof which is occupied
in whole or in part as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more
human beings, either permanently or transiently.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms intended to be occupied by
one family or household as their home and where they sleep.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room which is designed or may be used for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking. Storerooms, bathrooms, toilets, closets, halls or
spaces in attics or basements are not habitable rooms except as permitted
in § 85-15, entitled "Basement dwelling units."
JUNK — Any abandoned, discarded, unusable, or unused objects or
equipment, including, but not limited to, furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, cans, implements, parts of motor vehicles, machinery, cloth,
rubber, bottles, any metals, boxes, cartons, or crates.
VACANT BUILDING — Any building which is unoccupied and which is
not securely locked, with the windows glazed or neatly boarded up and
protected against the elements and from vandals and rodents and other
animals.
§ 85-2. Appointment of Health Officer. [Amended 7-1-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991-9]
There may annually be appointed by the Mayor a Health Officer who shall
enforce the provisions of the health ordinances of the Town and who shall
possess such powers and perform duties as shall be prescribed by
ordinance. If no such appointment is made, the Mayor shall act as the
Health Officer.
§ 85-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require that dwellings be kept clean and
free from dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage and similar matter, that they be kept
free from vermin and rodent infestation and be kept in such repair as to
be fit for human habitation, and to provide for the removal of snow on
sidewalks by the owners or occupants of abutting property and to provide
for the control of weeds on vacant lots or other properties within the Town
and to authorize the Health Officer to issue orders compelling compliance
with the provisions hereof and to correct such conditions at the expense
of the property occupants or owners or owners of properties upon which
violations occur.
§ 85-4. Dwellings, commercial and industrial structures, yards and
lots to be kept clean; fees. [Amended 10-1-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-9;
7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-9; 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-23;
10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-13]
Every dwelling within the Town, including unoccupied dwellings in
residential districts, every commercial or industrial structure, whether
occupied or unoccupied, and every part thereof shall be kept so clean
A.
§ 85-1 PLUMBING § 85-4
83:161
and free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage or
similar matter as not to be a danger to the health of any occupant or
other person and shall be kept free from vermin and rodent infestation.
All yards, lawns and vacant lots shall be similarly kept clean and free
from weeds, grass or plants (other than trees, bushes, flowers or other
ornamental plants) exceeding 12 inches in height. It shall be the duty of
each occupant or owner of a dwelling unit or commercial or industrial
structure to keep in a clean condition that portion of the property which
he occupies or over which he has exclusive control.
Except as may otherwise be permitted by the holding of a specific
business license or by other Town ordinance, no person or entity shall:
Store, accumulate, or permit the storage or accumulation of junk
on premises owned, leased, rented, or occupied by such person or
entity;
(1)
Store, accumulate, or permit the storage or accumulation of any
building materials on property owned, leased, rented, or occupied
by such person or entity for any period longer than reasonably
necessary for the immediate use of such materials, but in no event
longer than 60 days;
(2)
Maintain or permit the maintenance or existence of any vacant
building on property owned, leased, rented, or occupied by such
person or entity; or
(3)
Maintain or permit the maintenance or existence of any blighted
structure on property owned, leased, rented, or occupied by such
person or entity.
(4)
B.
If the occupant or owner shall fail to keep his portion of the property
in accordance with this section, in addition to other remedies available
under this chapter, the Town Code and other applicable law, the Health
Officer may send a written notice to such occupant or owner requesting
him to remedy said condition within the time specified in said notice,
said time not to be less than 10 days. Failure of such occupant or owner
to comply with such notice within such time shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter. Notice to any owner shall be sufficient if mailed to the
owner at the address appearing on the tax records. If not complied with
within 10 days of the date of the mailing, or such greater time specified
in any written notice as prescribed above, the Town may enter upon
the property and may remove any dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage or similar
matter, or rodent or vermin infestation, trim, cut or remove any weeds,
grass or plants in excess of 12 inches in height, remedy and abate any
condition specified in Subsection B above, or take any other action in
order to bring the property into compliance with the Town Code and/
or remove any danger to health. The owner shall then be responsible
to reimburse the Town the reasonable cost of such actions, with a
minimum charge of $250 for each separate lot. Such charges shall
C.
§ 85-4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 85-4
83:162
§ 85-4.1. Sidewalk snow removal. [Added 6-7-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-3]
Owners and occupants of premises fronting upon any street with paved
sidewalks shall remove snow and ice from the traveled portions of the
sidewalk to a width of at least 30 inches within 24 hours after any
precipitation event producing such snow or ice shall end. For purposes of
this section, the term "sidewalk" shall refer to that paved portion of a street
between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no
curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
Violations of this section shall be deemed a municipal infraction punishable
by a fine of $25 for the first offense and $50 for each subsequent offense.
Each day on which the sidewalk shall not be cleared as required shall
constitute a separate municipal infraction.
§ 85-5. Refuse in streets. [Amended 3-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, cast, blow, track, deposit or
throw any ashes, filth or rubbish of any description, including any grass
clippings or other yard waste, on any of the sidewalks, streets, lanes or
alleys of Mount Airy, provided that ashes or rubbish may be deposited in
such streets, lanes or alleys to be hauled away within four hours.
§ 85-6. Dwellings to be kept in repair.
Every dwelling and every part thereof shall be maintained in such good
repair by the owner or agent as to be fit for human habitation.
§ 85-7. Abatement of dangers to life and health.
constitute a lien on the property to be collected in the same manner as
Town taxes are collected.
Whenever any dwelling or any building, structure, excavation, matter,
condition or thing in or about a dwelling or the lot on which it is
situated, or the plumbing, sewerage, drainage, light or ventilation
thereof, is found by the Health Officer to be dangerous or detrimental to
life or health, the Mayor and Council may order that matter, condition
or thing be removed, abated, suspended, altered or otherwise
improved, as the order shall specify. If any such order of the Mayor and
Council issued under the authority of the provisions of this section is
not complied with within 15 days after the service thereof, then such
order may be executed by Town of Mount Airy through its officers,
agents, employees or contractors, and the expense incurred incident to
the execution of said order shall be paid by the owner of said property,
and such expense may be recovered by the Town by appropriate legal
action or the Health Officer may order such premises vacated until such
premises shall be made to comply with the conditions of this chapter.
Before proceeding to execute such order, a copy of such notice shall be
sent to the owner of the property, or his agent, if names and addresses
A.
§ 85-4 PLUMBING § 85-7
83:163
§ 85-7.1. Vacant property; right of entry to secure. [Added
10-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-8]
on diligent search can be ascertained, and such notice shall be posted
on said premises at least three days before the Town proceeds to incur
such expenses, unless the condition is of such character as to require
immediate action, in which case the time of the notice shall be such
as, in the judgment of the Health Officer, is reasonable and proper.
[Amended 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 144]
Whenever it shall be found by the Health Officer that a dwelling is unfit
for human habitation, or dangerous to life or health by reason of want of
repair, of defects in the drainage, plumbing, lighting, ventilation or the
construction of the same, or by reason of the existence on the premises
of any condition likely to cause sickness of injury among the occupants
of said dwelling, or for any other causes affecting the public health,
the Mayor and Council may issue an order requiring such dwelling
to be vacated after the expiration of 15 days from the date that said
order was served on the owner or occupant and he has been given an
opportunity to be heard. A copy of such order shall be sent to the owner
of the property, or his agent, if names and addresses, on diligent search,
can be ascertained. The dwelling so ordered to be vacated shall not
again be occupied until a written statement shall have been secured
from the Health Officer showing that the dwelling has been made to
comply with this chapter or any other existing law and has been made
fit for occupancy.
B.
Whenever any property, dwelling or building within the limits of the
Town is determined by the Mayor, his designated Health Officer or
other staff of the Town to be vacant and in a state of disrepair due
to break-in, unauthorized entry, damage, fire or vandalism so as to
render the property, dwelling or building susceptible to future breakin,
unauthorized entry and/or to vandalism, the Mayor, his designated
Health Officer or other staff of the Town are hereby empowered to
issue an order that the property owner secure the property to prevent
future break-in, unauthorized entry and/or vandalism, to include repair
or replacement of broken windows, broken doors and broken locks,
and/or the securing, boarding up or closing off of openings or potential
points of entry to the property, dwelling or building. The order shall be
served upon the property owner either by hand delivery or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and shall specify the actions that the
Town directs the property owner to take in order to secure the property,
dwelling or building.
A.
If a property owner does not comply with an order issued pursuant to
Subsection A above within 15 days of service of the order, the Mayor,
his designated Health Officer, other staff of the Town, or any contractor
hired by the Town for the purpose of carrying out this subsection may
enter upon or into the property, dwelling or building to carry out the
actions that the property owner was directed to take in the order issued
B.
§ 85-7 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 85-7.1
83:164
§ 85-8. Applicability of provisions.
Whenever any person or persons shall be in actual possession of or have
charge, care or control of any property within the Town as executor,
administrator, trustee, guardian or agent, such person shall be deemed and
taken to be the owner or owners of such property within the intent and
meaning of this chapter, and shall be bound to comply with the provisions
of this chapter to the same extent as the owner, and notice to any such
person of any order or decision of the Mayor and Council shall be deemed
and taken to be a good and sufficient notice as if such person or persons
were actually the owner or owners of such property.
§ 85-9. Rules and regulations.
The Mayor and Council are hereby authorized and empowered to make and
adopt such rules and regulations as they may deem proper and necessary
for the enforcement of this chapter for the better production of the health
of the Town under authority granted by this chapter.
§ 85-10. Regulations governing hygiene and housing.
The rules and regulations set forth in §§ 85-11 through 85-25, both
inclusive, shall govern the erection, construction and maintenance of all
structures within the Town used for human habitation.
§ 85-11. Basement or cellars.
The basement or cellar of any dwelling shall be dry and ventilated and shall
be kept free from rubbish accumulation and rodent infestation.
§ 85-12. Heating.
Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be weatherproof and capable
of being adequately heated, and the heating equipment in every building or
dwelling unit shall be maintained in good order and repair.
§ 85-13. Dampness.
The floor and walls of every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be kept
free from dampness.
pursuant to Subsection A above. The property owner shall pay to the
Town the reasonable cost of securing the property, dwelling or building
pursuant to this Subsection B, with a minimum charge of $250. Such
charges shall constitute a lien on the property to be collected in the
same manner as Town taxes are collected.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to waive or otherwise impair
the rights or remedies that the Town may have under other provisions
of the Town Code or under other applicable law.
C.
§ 85-7.1 PLUMBING § 85-14
83:165
§ 85-14. Lighting and ventilation.
Every habitable room in a dwelling or dwelling unit shall contain a window
or windows, opening directly to the outside air, and the total area of such
window and windows shall not be less than 10% of the floor area of such
room. All window sashes shall be glazed and provided with suitable
hardware and shall be made to open to the extent of not less than 5% of the
floor area of such room.
§ 85-15. Basement dwelling units.
No room in any basement or cellar shall be occupied as a habitable room
unless:
§ 85-16. Sleeping rooms.
No room shall be used for sleeping purposes unless there are at least 400
cubic feet of air space and 50 square feet of floor space for each adult and
at least 200 cubic feet of air space and 30 square feet of floor space for
each child under the age of 12 years occupying such room. No room used
for sleeping purposes shall have a floor area of less than 60 square feet.
§ 85-17. Overcrowding.
The occupancy of any dwelling unit having more than one habitable room
shall not exceed an average of 1 1/2 persons per habitable room. For the
purpose of this regulation any child under one year of age shall be deemed
to be 1/2 person.
§ 85-18. Water supplies and sinks.
In every dwelling unit containing two or more rooms there shall be running
water and at least one sink connected to an approved sewage disposal
system.
§ 85-19. Cooking in sleeping rooms.
Where more than two persons occupy any dwelling unit, food shall not be
prepared or cooked in any room used for sleeping purposes.
A. The clear inner height is at least seven feet six inches; and
The uppermost three feet of the required clear inner height is above the
average outside ground level; and
B.
The floor and walls are water- and damp-proof in accordance with an
approved method if in contact with earth. Such waterproofing shall be
between the floor or wall finish and the ground.
C.
§ 85-14 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 85-20
83:166
§ 85-20. Toilet facilities.
There shall be at least one water closet for each 10 persons or fraction
thereof occupying a dwelling, which water closet shall be within and
accessible from within the building. The use of antifreeze toilets that have
cross connections between water supply and sewer is expressly prohibited.
§ 85-21. Plumbing.17
All plumbing, water closets and other plumbing fixtures in every dwelling or
dwelling unit shall be maintained in good order and repair.
§ 85-22. Lighting and ventilation of toilets and bathrooms.
Every toilet and every bathroom in a dwelling shall be provided with
adequate light and ventilation; four square feet of free air space or its equal
in forced ventilation.
§ 85-23. Garbage, rubbish and receptacles. [Amended 12-2-1985 by
Ord. No. 144]
Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be provided with such
receptacles to contain all garbage, rubbish and ashes as may be necessary,
and all such receptacles shall be at all times maintained in good order and
repair.
§ 85-24. Entrances.
There shall be for each dwelling unit a separate access either to a hallway,
landing, stairway or street.
§ 85-25. Drainage.
All courts, yards or other areas on the premises of every dwelling shall be
properly graded and drained.
§ 85-26. Conflicts. [Amended 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 144]
The aforegoing contain minimum requirements for the protection of health
and are in addition and supplementary to any other ordinances, laws, rules
and regulations, and nothing therein shall be construed to affect in any
manner any of the powers and duties of the State Board of Health, or County
Board of Health, or any Public General or Public Local Law relating to the
subject of health.
17.Editor's Note: As to plumbing standards, see Ch. 47, Building Construction.
§ 85-20 PLUMBING § 85-27
83:167
§ 85-27. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-2-1985 by Ord. No.
144]
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
municipal infraction.
Chapter 91
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Digging up streets — See Ch. 96, Art. II.
Water — See Ch. 109.
§ 85-27 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 85-27
83:168
Part 1
[AdopPtuebdli1c1 A-7n-d1 9P7ri2vaBtye OSredw.e Nrso. 93]
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 91-1. Terms defined; word usage. [Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-14]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms used in this Part 1 shall be as follows:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Practices determined to
be the most efficient, practical, and cost-effective measures identified
to guide a particular activity or to address a particular problem.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, the building drain terminating five feet outside the
inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
FOG — Any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is
used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process,
and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in
temperature or other conditions.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE) — Any facility where food is
prepared and intended for individual portion service, and includes the
site at which individual portions are provided.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
GREASE TRAP — A trap in a drain or waste pipe to prevent grease
from passing into a sewer system. The grease trap must comply with
Carroll County, state, Environmental Protection Agency, and industry
standards.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
A.
§ 91-1 PLUMBING § 91-1
83:169
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
Ph — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage to and which
stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally
admitted.
SEPTAGE — Material removed from septic tanks, cesspools, holding
tanks, or other sewage treatment storage units.
SEPTAGE HAULER — Any licensed person engaged in the removal or
transportation of septage.
SEWAGE/SEWER SYSTEM — A combination of the water-carried
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and
stormwaters as may be unintentionally admitted.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT/WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
(WWTP) — Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating
sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given consistency or in quantity of flows exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five
times the concentration of any consistency or flow over 24 hours'
concentration of normal operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer which
carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes
sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Sewage Works of the
Town of Mount Airy, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
§ 91-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 91-1
83:170
TOWN — The Town of Mount Airy, a municipal corporation, its duly
authorized officers or agents.
WATERCOURSE —
A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
A.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
§ 91-1 PLUMBING § 91-1
83:171

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers
§ 91-2. Discharge restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Town of Mount Airy, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 91-3. Treatment of sewage or polluted waters.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of
Mount Airy, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Part 1.
§ 91-4. Privy vaults and septic tanks.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
§ 91-5. Installation of toilet facilities; connection with public sewer.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the Town and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
Town, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1 within 365 days after date
of official notice to do so.
§ 91-2 PLUMBING § 91-5
83:173

ARTICLE III
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 91-6. Permit required for connections. [Amended 10-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-5]
§ 91-7. Classes of building permits.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and
commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Town.
§ 91-8. Installation and connection expenses.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 91-9. Mobile homes and trailer units.
Each mobile home and/or trailer unit used for residential or commercial
purposes, and having domestic water and/or sanitary facilities therein, shall
be considered a separate and independent building, and as such shall have
its own separate and independent building drain and building sewer.
§ 91-10. Old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Town, to meet all
requirements of this Part 1.
§ 91-11. Construction methods and material specifications.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements
or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town. In the absence of
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written water and sewer allocation
permit from the Town.
A.
Sewer capacity allocation and issuance of sewer allocation permits
shall be by means of the same process and methods set forth in Chapter
109, § 109-19.1 et seq., relating to water capacity allocation and
issuance of water allocation permits.
B.
§ 91-6 PLUMBING § 91-11
83:175
code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and
Materials and Water Pollution Control Federations Manual of Practice No. 9
shall apply.
§ 91-12. Elevation below basement floor.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 91-13. Roof downspouts, surface runoff or groundwater.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 91-14. Connection requirements for building sewer into public
sewer.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town
or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American
Society for Testing and Materials and the Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight utilizing extra strength clay pipe, "Y" saddles and/
or saddle hub trees, or as directed by the Town. All connections of building
sewer into the public sewer shall be performed by persons authorized by the
Town and duly licensed by it. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the Town before installation.
§ 91-15. Notice to be given for inspection purposes.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Town when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Town or its
representatives.
§ 91-16. Excavations.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
§ 91-11 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 91-16
83:176
ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers
§ 91-17. Discharge.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
§ 91-18. Stormwater and unpolluted drainage.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Town. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the Town, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
§ 91-19. Waters or wastes discharge restrictions.
No persons shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
§ 91-20. Substance, material or waste discharge restrictions.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of
the Town, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment
process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
A.
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance,
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two milligrams
per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
B.
Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 6.0, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
C.
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair
and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
D.
§ 91-17 PLUMBING § 91-20
83:177
can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Town
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes
in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction
of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability
of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The
substances prohibited are:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F. (65º C.).
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32º and 150º F. (0º and 65º C.).
B.
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 1/2
horsepower (0.46 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Town.
C.
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron-pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
D.
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement or excessive chemical treatment, to
such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at
the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Town
for such materials.
E.
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations, exceeding limits which
may be established by the Town as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or
other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters.
F.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Town in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
G.
H. Any water or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids, such as but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate.
(1)
Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(2)
I.
§ 91-20 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 91-20
83:178
§ 91-21. Discharges having a deleterious effect on sewage works
and appurtenances.
§ 91-22. Grease, oil and sand interceptors. [Amended 10-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-14]
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
(3)
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
(4)
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed,
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
J.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 91-20 of this article, and
which, in the judgment of the Town, may have a deleterious effect upon
the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Town may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(2)
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of § 91-26, of this article.
(4)
A.
If the Town permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
B.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Town, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand
or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
A.
§ 91-20 PLUMBING § 91-22
83:179
In addition to all other sections of this chapter, the following special
provisions apply to establishments required to provide a grease trap,
including but not limited to FSE:
Grease trap maintenance: over 50 gallons.
Grease trap maintenance is critical to the grease trap's
performance. Each FSE is required to maintain the grease trap
in satisfactory operating condition by the periodic removal of
the entire contents of the grease trap. All costs for inspections,
pumping, sampling, analysis, or other maintenance is the
responsibility of the FSE owner or operator. Property owners of
commercial properties are responsible for the installation and
maintenance of a grease trap that serves multiple FSEs that
are located on a single parcel or development. To ensure that
the grease trap is working as it was designed, the following
maintenance procedures are required for grease traps over 50
gallons:
Content removal. Maintenance must include the complete
removal of the entire contents, including floating
materials, wastewater, settled solids and grease
accumulated on the side of the device. Decanting or
discharging of removed waste or wastewater back into
the grease trap from which the waste or wastewater was
removed or any other grease trap for the purpose of
reducing the volume to be disposed of is strictly
prohibited. No FOG that has accumulated in a grease trap
is allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system,
storm drain, or public right-of-way during maintenance
activities.
[1]
Maintenance frequency. Unless a variance is granted by
the Town Council pursuant to § 91-36.2 below, all grease
traps must be pumped out completely by a permitted
waste hauler whenever the accumulation of grease and
solids is 25% of the grease trap's overall liquid depth or
at least once every 90 days, whichever is more stringent.
Exception to this minimum frequency of pumping may be
made with special written approval from the Town for
generators of small quantities of grease waste. In no case
will the frequency of pumping be less than once every six
months.
[2]
Prohibition of additives. The introduction of additives such
as bacteria, enzymes, emulsifiers, or similar chemicals
designed for the purpose of emulsifying or controlling FOG
discharge into grease traps or associated plumbing is
strictly prohibited.
[3]
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 91-22 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 91-22
83:180
Septage hauler. All FSEs must ensure that all recovered
contents of the grease trap be removed and disposed of by
a permitted septage hauler.
[4]
Self-cleaning grease trap maintenance: under 50 gallons.
Proper on-site material disposal methods shall be
demonstrated and implemented (e.g., absorb liquids into solid
form and dispose into trash, and collected grease is
transported by a permitted septage hauler).
(a)
The grease and floatable solids must be removed a minimum
of once a week, and the entire contents of the grease trap is
removed from the grease trap and baffles at a minimum of once
every 30 days.
(b)
All records of grease trap self-cleaning maintenance must be
handwritten with permanent ink and logged. Grease trap selfcleaning
maintenance logs must include, at a minimum, the
date and time of cleaning, total gallons removed, method of
disposal, and name of person witnessing the cleaning. The
maintenance logs must be readily available for inspection and
retained on site for a minimum of three years.
(c)
(2)
Employee training.
All employees are required to be trained on and made aware
of all required and recommended BMPs for preventing FOG
from entering the sewer system. They must have a general
knowledge of the function of the grease trap. New employees
must be initially trained within one week of employment. Each
employee must receive periodic refresher training at intervals
not to exceed one year. Documentation of BMPs employee
training must be kept on site at the establishment and readily
available for review by the Town.
(a)
(3)
Best management practices.
All FSEs are required to implement the following BMPs in
order to prevent and reduce the quantity of FOG discharged
to the grease trap, sanitary sewer system, and storm sewer
system. Each FSE shall adopt and create BMPs that work for
the establishment's needs.
[1] Scrape pots and pans prior to washing.
Do not pour, scrape, or otherwise dispose of fats, oils, or
grease into the sink or drains.
[2]
[3] Collect fryer oil and store in barrels for recycling.
Dry sweep floors prior to washing and mopping. Place
collected material from sweeping in trash receptacles.
[4]
(a)
(4)
§ 91-22 PLUMBING § 91-22
83:181
§ 91-23. Preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 91-24. Observation and sampling facilities.
When required by the Town, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the control structure to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement
of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Town. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall
be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Dump mop water only to drains connected to your FOG
treatment system.
[5]
Use absorbents to soak up spills containing fats, oils, and
grease.
[6]
Do not put food (including liquid food), including
milkshakes, syrups, batters and gravy down the drain.
Use strainers on sinks and floor drains to prevent solid
material from entering the sewer system.
[7]
Post "No FOG" signs near sinks and drains. If you have
an automatic grease recovery device, empty the collection
pan before it becomes full.
[8]
Provide your employees with the proper equipment for
cleaning your grease trap/interceptor or grease recovery
device.
[9]
Train all kitchen staff in the best management practices
for FOG disposal and the impacts of FOG accumulation in
the sewer system.
[10]
Provide regular refresher training/discussion for proper
disposal of fats, oils, and grease for all employees.
[11]
Establish a schedule for cleaning grease-laden areas (e.g.,
fryers, vents, grills, etc.).
[12]
Inspect grease traps/interceptors after pumping to ensure
adequate cleaning and proper functioning.
[13]
Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in
food preparation areas. This includes kitchen sinks, floor
drains, and mop sinks, Drain screens shall be cleaned as
needed.
[14]
§ 91-22 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 91-25
83:182
§ 91-25. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Part 1 shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control structure provided,
or upon suitable samples taken at said control structure. In the event
that no special structure has been required, the control structure shall
be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer
to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall
be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise
is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
§ 91-26. Special agreements with industrial concerns.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to the payment thereof, by
the industrial concern.
§ 91-26.1. FOG recordkeeping. [Added 10-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-14]
Users shall retain and make available upon request of authorized
representatives of the Town, the county, the state, or the Environmental
Protection Agency all records required to be collected by the user
pursuant to this chapter.
A.
These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years
after their collection. In addition, an FSE shall provide quarterly a copy
of the records required to be kept and created pursuant to § 91-26.1C
below and may be submitted to the Town with payment of the FSE's
water bill.
B.
Records shall include, when applicable, grease trap maintenance and
repair service statements, grease trap self-cleaning maintenance logs,
septage hauler statement of service for FOG removal, and employee
training logs.
C.
This period shall be extended during any litigation concerning
compliance with this chapter or permit conditions.
D.
§ 91-25 PLUMBING § 91-26.1
83:183

ARTICLE V
Protection From Damage
§ 91-27. Damage or destruction prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 91-27 PLUMBING § 91-27
83:185

ARTICLE VI
Inspectors
§ 91-28. Permission to enter properties.
The Town and other duly authorized employees or representatives of the
Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this Part 1. The Town or its representatives shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities
for waste treatment.
§ 91-29. Observance of safety regulations.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 91-28 above, the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the company and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the Town employees or representatives
and the Town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its
property by Town employees or representatives and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except
as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions as required in Article IV, § 91-24.
§ 91-30. Right to enter easements.
The Town and other duly authorized employees or representatives of the
Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work,
if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 91-28 PLUMBING § 91-30
83:187

ARTICLE VII
Charges and Rates
§ 91-31. Connection charge to be a connection condition.
The Town is authorized to require the payment of a connection charge as
a condition precedent to connecting to the Town sewer main as set out in
Article III, § 91-8.
§ 91-32. Sewer hookup fees. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-6; 12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-12; 5-4-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-3; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-19]
§ 91-33. Annual sewer service charge assessment.
An annual sewer service charge shall be assessed to each building sewer,
the amount of said charge to be in accordance with the aforesaid Sewer
Rate Ordinance, said charge to be due and payable quarterly and based
upon water consumption and said charges to be prorated the first quarter
from the date of connection.
Connection charge. All persons who connect to sewer mains shall pay
a connection charge, plus a fee to be allocated to sewer expansion and
replacement funds.
A.
Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL UNIT — Based on 350 gallons per day per capita
employed over a period of not more than eight hours. Day workers
rated in commercial units at a sewer flow per person over an eighthour
period of 35 gallons. For each 10 employees an equivalent unit
is generated. Minimum unit is one unit connection. All commercial
uses are based on the hydraulics information sheets used for a guide
for estimating sewerage flows and equivalents furnished by agencies
associated with the service controls of the sewerage system. Services to
other than day workers in a commercial unit will follow the information
sheets. A hydraulics information sheet is attached.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT — Based on a complete family dwelling
unit, consisting of one bath, one kitchen and normal living quarters.
Apartments consisting of more than one unit per building consist of
one equivalent unit per apartment therein, regardless of method of
construction of sewer from building to the Town tap. Single-family
dwelling based on 250 gallons per day; townhouse unit based on 225
gallons per day; senior housing unit based on 125 gallons per day.
B.
Benefit charge. All new construction will pay a benefit charge in
addition to the connection charge at the time a permit is issued. A ”new
construction” for this purpose shall be any property not occupied.
C.
§ 91-31 PLUMBING § 91-34
83:189
§ 91-34. Establishment of rates and charges; increases and
decreases.
The Town reserves the right to establish said rates and charges by a
future Sewer Rate Ordinance and to increase and decrease said rates and
charges from time to time by further ordinance and to establish different
classifications as to rates for residential with private sewer systems,
residential without private sewer systems, commercial and industrial use.
§ 91-35. Rates and charges to constitute liens.
All rates and/or charges referred to in this chapter shall constitute a lien on
the real estate served and shall be collectable in the same manner as Town
taxes or by suit at law.
§ 91-34 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 91-35
83:190
ARTICLE VIII
Penalties, Enforcement and Variances
[Amended 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 144; 10-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-1418]
§ 91-36. Violations and penalties.
§ 91-36.1. Enforcement.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, and the orders,
rules, and regulations of this chapter shall, in addition to all other
remedies available to the Town under this chapter or available by law,
be guilty of a municipal infraction and be subject to a fine of $150 for
each day in which the violation exists. Each day that a violation exists
shall be considered a separate violation subject to fine. In addition to
the penalties provided in this section, in any litigation arising from
the issuance of fines pursuant to this chapter, the Town may recover
reasonable attorneys' fees and other costs of litigation against any
person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules,
regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
A.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the
Town by reason of such violation.
B.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other
document required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or
industrial waste permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by
both.
C.
Violations of this chapter shall be a matter of public record and open
to public review and reproduction upon request. In addition, the Town
may in its discretion publish information pertaining to any violations of
this chapter in any newspaper of general circulation within the Town
and/or on the Town's website.
D.
Suspension of treatment. The Town may suspend the wastewater
treatment service, suspend a wastewater discharge permit or cut off
the sewer connection, when such suspension or cutoff is necessary,
in the opinion of the Town, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which:
Presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the
health or welfare of persons;
(1)
A.
18.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this article, which was formerly
Penalties.
§ 91-36 PLUMBING § 91-36.1
83:191
Presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the
environment;
(2)
(3) May cause or actually causes interference to the WWTP; or
Causes the WWTP to violate any condition of its state discharge
permit or county, state, or federal laws or regulations.
(4)
Reinstatement of service. The Town may reinstate the wastewater
discharge permit or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the noncomplying discharge.
B.
In the event of a suspension or cutoff under this section, within 15 days
the user shall submit a written report describing the event that caused
the suspension and the measures taken to prevent any recurrence.
C.
Suspension of water service. Should the Town be unable to suspend
wastewater treatment service, suspend a wastewater discharge permit
or cut off the sewer connection, the Town may suspend water service
until proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge is
submitted to the Town.
D.
Issuance of notice or order. After or concurrently with service of a
notice of violation under this chapter, the Town may:
Issue an order that requires the person to whom the order is
directed to take corrective action within a time set in the order; or
(1)
Send a written notice that requires the person to whom the notice
is directed to file a written report about the alleged violation.
(2)
E.
Hearings.
A person or entity that has been issued an order pursuant to this
section shall have a right to a hearing before the Town Council
upon written request served upon the Town Clerk within 10 days
after being served with the order.
(1)
A hearing requested pursuant to this subsection shall be informal,
and the formal rules of evidence shall not apply.
(2)
At the hearing, the Town shall bear the burden of proof by a
preponderance of the evidence that there has been a violation of
this chapter.
(3)
The Town Council shall have the power to affirm, overturn or
modify an order issued pursuant to this section.
(4)
F.
Finality of orders.
Unless the person served with an order makes a timely request for
a hearing, the order shall become final.
(1)
G.
§ 91-36.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 91-36.1
83:192
§ 91-36.2. Variances. [Amended 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-2]
The Mayor or his designee may grant a variance or exemption from the
requirements of this chapter if the applicant submits a written request
setting forth the reasons for such request and any supporting
documentation, including reports of experts. The written application shall
first be submitted to the Town's Water and Sewer Commission for a
recommendation to the Mayor or his designee. In order to receive a
If the person served with an order under this chapter makes a
timely request for a hearing, the order shall become a final
corrective order if the Town Council affirms the issuance of the
order in its decision following the hearing, as amended.
(2)
Other action permitted.
This section does not prevent the Town from taking any other
action against a violator that the law permits.
(1)
The Town may bring an action for injunctive relief against any
person who violates any provision of this chapter or any rule,
regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under this chapter.
(2)
In any action for injunctive relief under this section, findings of fact
by the Town Council as a result of any hearing that takes place
pursuant to Subsection F above shall be prima facie evidence as to
each such fact.
(3)
On a showing that any person is violating or is about to violate
this chapter or any rule, regulation, or order of the Town, the court
may grant an injunction without requiring a showing of a lack of an
adequate remedy at law.
(4)
If an emergency arises due to imminent danger to the public health
or welfare, or imminent danger to the environment, the Town may
seek an immediate injunction or ex parte temporary restraining
order to stop any pollution or other activity that is causing the
danger or to take other corrective action.
(5)
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes
into the Town's wastewater disposal system contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment
requirements, or any order of the Town, the Town may commence
an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
appropriate court.
(6)
In any proceeding pursuant to this chapter, including any hearing
before the Town Council, in which the Town prevails, the Town shall
be entitled to seek reimbursement of attorneys' fees and costs of
litigation against any party who is found to be in violation of this
chapter.
(7)
H.
§ 91-36.1 PLUMBING § 91-36.2
83:193
variance or exemption, the applicant must establish to the satisfaction of
the Mayor or his designee by a preponderance of the evidence that:
The strict enforcement of the provision of this chapter from which
a variance is sought would be manifestly unjust, considering all the
relevant facts and circumstances; and
A.
A level of protection to the Town sanitary sewer system at least
equivalent to that provided under this regulation can be achieved
without strict application of the provision from which a variance is
sought.
B.
§ 91-36.2 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 91-36.2
83:194
Part 2
Connection Charges And Service Rates From Properties Outside
[Adopted 12-T3o-w19n7 L9imByitsOrd. No. 110]
ARTICLE IX
Charges and Rates
§ 91-37. Application for service. [Amended 11-6-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-22; 8-5-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-12]
Any person or persons owning property outside of the Town limits
desiring to connect to the Town's sanitary sewer system who is an
owner of an existing residential or commercial building with a failing
septic system, may make application to the Town on forms to be
provided by the Town, which forms shall provide for an adequate
description of the property to be served, the legal ownership thereof;
certification that the septic system for the property is failing, and the
name and address of the contractor or plumber that is proposed to
be used for the making of the necessary connection and installation
of a water meter as hereafter set forth. Each application shall be
accompanied by a fee as hereafter set forth which shall be held by the
Town in a separate fund until connection to the system as hereunder
set forth.
A.
The Town reserves the right to reject any application unless the
property to be serviced has been approved for annexation into the
Town limits; or if it finds that: the septic system for the property is not
failing; that the applicant does not have the right of legal access to and
through property binding on the Town's sewer main; the contractor or
plumber proposed to do the work is not qualified; or the approval of
such application would create a danger of overloading the capacity of
said system.
B.
Application fees shall be computed as follows:
For residential applications, the fee shall be $1,900 per dwelling
unit.
(1)
For commercial applications, the fee shall be $1,900 for each
equivalent dwelling unit or fraction thereof. Each commercial
application shall state the number of employees per eight-hour
daytime shift, and each 10 employees or fraction thereof shall
constitute one equivalent dwelling unit. For example, five
employees are equivalent to one dwelling unit, 15 employees are
equivalent to two dwelling units.
(2)
For residential applications, the phrase "dwelling unit" shall mean
living accommodations intended for occupancy by a single family.
A "family" is deemed to mean any number of individuals living
together as a single housekeeping unit.
(3)
C.
§ 91-37 PLUMBING § 91-38
83:195
§ 91-38. Connections to conform to standards.
The connection to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of
the Plumbing Code of Carroll County, Maryland, and all other county and
state regulations.19 The applicant shall notify the Town when he proposes
to connect to the public sewer, and the connection thereof shall be made
under the supervision of a representative of the Town, and at said time
the applicant shall also cause a water meter to be installed at the owner's
well. Upon presentation of a proper voucher therefor, the Town shall cause
the cost of the installation of the water meter to be paid out of the
aforementioned application fee, and the water meter be and at all times
remains the property of the Town. The balance of the application fee shall
thereupon be considered a part of the Town's current revenues.
§ 91-39. Quarterly service charges; enforcement. [Amended
11-6-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-22]
Upon connection with the Town's sewer, the owner or owners of the
property so connected shall pay a quarterly service charge computed at
$46.50 per quarter per dwelling unit or equivalent dwelling unit, based
upon a minimum consumption of 12,000 gallons of water in each quarter,
plus $3 for every additional 1,000 gallons of water in excess of said
minimum for every quarter. Bills therefor shall be payable when rendered
and shall bear interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month beginning 30 days
from the billing date and shall constitute a lien upon the property served
until paid. In the event any charge remains unpaid for more than 90 days, it
shall be lawful for a representative of the Town to disconnect the property
from the Town's sewer system, to remove the water meter from the property
and to forcibly enter upon said property for said purposes if necessary. The
quarterly rates established hereby shall be subject to annual revision.
19.Editor's Note: As to the adoption by reference of plumbing standards, see Ch. 47, Building
Construction.
§ 91-38 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 91-39
83:196
Chapter 92
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 92-1. Removal from Town property. [Amended 11-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-17]
Any sign left or placed upon any street, alley, park, sidewalk or other public
place under the ownership or control of the Town may be immediately
removed by the Zoning Administrator or any person authorized by him or
her. The Zoning Administrator shall make reasonable efforts to ascertain
and provide prompt notice to the person responsible for the sign that the
sign has been removed and is in possession of the Town and shall advise the
person responsible for the sign of his/her right to request a conference. If
the person responsible for the sign cannot be determined with reasonable
effort, the Town shall promptly post such notice setting forth the text or
other description of the sign, and the date and location from which the
sign was removed, on the Town website. The sign once removed shall be
held by the Town for 30 days for retrieval by the person responsible for
the sign or destruction pursuant to § 92-8 below. A person whose sign
has been removed pursuant to this chapter may request a conference in
writing and otherwise seek judicial relief pursuant to § 92-3 to challenge the
Town's determination that the sign was unauthorized and/or removed from
property owned by the Town or to which the Town holds a right-of-way.
§ 92-2. Removal from other property. [Amended 11-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-17]
If a sign is posted, erected or left on any property not owned by the
Town but in violation of the zoning regulations of the Town, then the
Zoning Administrator shall give notice to the owner of the property or
the person who appears to be in possession of the property that the sign
is in violation of the Town zoning regulations. If no such person can be
found, the notice may be posted on the sign. The notice shall direct the
owner or person in possession of the property to remove the sign or
the sign will be removed by the Town within the time specified in the
notice. Such notice shall be given at least 48 hours before the sign is
proposed to be removed and shall notify the owner of the property or
the person who appears to be in possession of the property that it will
be removed unless that person requests a conference. If no request for
a conference is made, the sign may be removed at or after the time set
out in the notice. Any request for a conference must be in writing, at
which time the person requesting the same may show cause why the
sign should not be removed. The notice shall be delivered to the owner
A.
§ 91-39 PLUMBING § 92-2
83:197
§ 92-3. Conference; judicial relief. [Amended 11-5-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-17]
If a conference is requested, it shall be scheduled by the Zoning
Administrator and an effort made to resolve the matter. If the matter cannot
be resolved by agreement and the Zoning Administrator rules that the sign
must be removed, or shall not be reposted in the location from which it
was removed pursuant to § 92-1, it will not be removed or discarded for five
calendar days, or the balance of 30 days as set forth in § 92-8 whichever
shall be longer, in order to give any person aggrieved an opportunity to seek
judicial relief. A removed sign shall not be reposted on its original location,
on Town property or in a Town right-of-way pending judicial review if timely
sought, nor shall a sign be removed from property not owned by the Town
pending judicial review if timely sought.
§ 92-4. Removal of hazardous signs.
Regardless of the provisions of this chapter relating to an opportunity for a
conference before a sign is removed, any sign creating a hazard because its
size or location blocks the view of traffic or because its placement or size
endangers pedestrians or because it creates an immediate physical danger
for any other reason may be removed forthwith without prior notice by the
Zoning Administrator or any person authorized by him.
§ 92-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON RESPONSIBLE — Includes any of the following:
or possessor of the property posted on the property at least 48 hours
before the time set out in the notice. The notice shall be in substantially
the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE SIGN
To:
Please take notice that the sign described as follows: (here insert a
brief description of the sign)
Located at: (here insert location) is in violation of a municipal
ordinance and will be removed on or after the ____ day of _______
19___, at ________ O'Clock __ .m. unless you request a conference on the
matter before that time. You may request a conference by notifying the
Zoning Administrator in writing of your request. At such a conference,
you must show cause why the sign should not be removed or it will in
fact be removed.
If no request for a conference is made, the sign may be removed at or
after the time stated in the notice.
B.
§ 92-2 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 92-5
83:198
§ 92-6. Notice requirement.
It shall be sufficient for the purposes of this chapter with respect to the
notice required as to a particular sign that such notice be given to any one
of the persons responsible as defined above without the necessity of giving
notice to all of said persons.
§ 92-7. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit, affect or repeal any provisions of
the zoning regulations or other regulations of the Town relating to signs or
to affect or limit the right of any person to erect or display a sign for which
a valid permit has been issued in accordance with such regulations.
§ 92-8. Destruction. [Amended 11-5-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
Any signs removed by the Town pursuant to this chapter shall be stored
for a period of 30 days. During that time, the Town shall return the sign
to anyone appearing who satisfies the Town as to an ownership interest
therein upon payment to the Town of the sum of $25, and anyone so
receiving such sign shall thereafter indemnify, protect and save harmless
the Town from the claims of ownership or right of possession to said sign
asserted by anyone else. If the owner of, or the person responsible for, the
sign does not retrieve a sign removed by the Town pursuant to this chapter
and pay the sum of $25 to the Town within 30 days, the Town may discard
the sign.
§ 92-9. Violations and penalties.
Anyone placing or erecting a sign without the permission of the Town
upon any street, alley, park, sidewalk or other public place owned or under
the control of the Town shall be guilty of a municipal infraction, the fine
assessed in accordance with any citation issued therefor to be in the amount
of $100. Anyone erecting or placing a sign on property other than that
With respect to a political or campaign sign, the name of the candidate
thereon.
A.
With respect to a political sign concerning a ballot question or
referendum, the name of the person or organization (if any) appearing
thereon as the sponsor of said sign.
B.
With respect to any sign advertising or calling attention to the
furnishing of goods or services, the owner of the premises where such
goods or services are referred to, sold or provided or the person or
persons who appear to be in possession and charge of such business.
C.
If none of the above are applicable, then with respect to signs on
property other than public property, the owner of the property where
such sign is placed, erected or left or the person who is in possession of
such property.
D.
§ 92-5 PLUMBING § 92-9
83:199
owned or controlled by the Town in violation of the zoning regulations of
the Town shall be subject to the fines and penalties prescribed in said
regulations.
Chapter 94
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 91.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 96.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 98.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 94-1. Adoption of county provisions. [Amended 10-7-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-25; 10-2-2006, as revised 1-8-2007, by Ord. No. 2006-13]
§ 94-2. Facilities in developments owned by homeowners'
associations. [Added 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-1]
Stormwater management facilities in residential developments owned by a
homeowners' association will be accepted for maintenance by the Town of
Mount Airy in accordance with the following provisions and procedures:
The Carroll County Code, Chapter 191, Stormwater Management,
ordained by the County Commissioners of Carroll County, including all
amendments thereto, shall automatically be and become the Town of
Mount Airy Stormwater Management Ordinance without the necessity
of further action on the part of the Town of Mount Airy except as
delineated below.
A.
Any bonds required under said ordinance may, with the agreement
of Carroll County, Maryland, be combined with a letter of credit or
other suitable security required of any developer by the Town of Mount
Airy, provided that the amount thereof is separately stated in a public
works agreement and no part thereof may be released without the
concurrence of Carroll County, Maryland.
B.
The Mayor of the Town of Mount Airy is hereby authorized to enter into
agreement with the County Commissioners of Carroll County, a body
corporate and politic, with respect to enforcement of the Stormwater
Management Ordinance hereby adopted.
C.
That the owners of at least 60% of the properties served by the
stormwater management facilities as well as the homeowners'
association itself request, in writing, that the Town take over
maintenance of the specified stormwater management facility. Where
any unit or home within the homeowners' association is owned by two
or more persons, the signatures of all co-owners will be required for
A.
§ 92-9 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 94-2
94:200
Chapter 94A
STORM SEWER SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 61.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 85.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 94.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 98.
Water resource management — See Ch. 110.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 94A-1. Adoption of county provisions.
the purpose of determining whether 60% or more of the properties
served thereby have requested that the Town take over maintenance.
If the homeowners' association documents require a higher percentage
than 60% of owners to approve a conveyance of any homeowners'
association property, then the written request to the Town must meet
that higher percentage requirement; and
That the Town has caused a review of the facility to be undertaken
by the Town Engineer and/or by the appropriate agency of Carroll
County, Maryland, then charged with the responsibility for inspection
and approval of stormwater facilities generally within said county, and
that as a result thereof, it is determined that said facility is found to be
in proper operating condition; and
B.
That the homeowners' association shall reimburse the Town for the
reasonable costs of the above-mentioned inspection; and
C.
That the homeowners' association shall cause to be prepared, at its
expense, a deed which shall be subject to approval by the Town
Attorney as to form and legal sufficiency, which deed shall convey the
stormwater management facility in fee simple to the Town, including
a perpetual easement for sufficient access to the same from a public
road, together with sufficient area surrounding the said facility in order
to allow for proper future maintenance of the same; and
D.
Until said facility is accepted by the Town, maintenance shall continue
to be the responsibility of the homeowners' association.
E.
The Carroll County Environmental Management of Storm Sewer
Systems Ordinance, known as Chapter 105 of the Carroll County Code,
adopted by the County Commissioners of Carroll County, including
all amendments thereto, shall be automatically the Town of Mount
Airy Environmental Management of Storm Sewer Systems Ordinance
without the necessity of further action on the part of the Town of Mount
Airy except as delineated below.
A.
§ 94-2 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 94A-1
94A:201
§ 94A-2. Standards and specifications.
All storm sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with the Town
of Mount Airy Standards Specifications and Details and the Maryland State
Highway Administration Highway Drainage Manual.
Chapter 96
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 49.
Garbage trash and litter — See Ch. 64.
Motorcycles, snowmobiles and similar
vehicles — See Ch. 74.
Loitering — See Ch. 82, Art. IV.
Sewers — See Ch. 91.
Signs — See Ch. 92.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 98.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 105.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 107.
Section 105-2 of the Carroll County Environmental Management of
Storm Sewer Systems Ordinance, known as Chapter 105 of the Carroll
County Code, shall be amended for application within the Town of
Mount Airy to provide that:
COUNTY — The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, the Town
Council of the Town of Mount Airy, or its designee.
B.
The Mayor of the Town of Mount Airy is hereby authorized to enter into
agreement with the County Commissioners of Carroll County, a body
corporate and politic, with respect to enforcement of the Environmental
Management of Storm Sewer Systems Ordinance hereby adopted.
C.
§ 94A-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 94A-2
94A:202
ARTICLE I
Curbs, Gutters and Sidewalks
[Adopted 10-1-1973 by Ord. No. 94]
§ 96-1. Responsibility of property owners abutting public streets.
[Amended 6-2-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1]
Every property owner of real estate within the corporate boundaries of
the Town of Mount Airy abutting on a public street shall be required to
construct, install and maintain at the expense of said property owner a
sidewalk along the boundaries of said property and the public street or
streets upon which it abuts.
§ 96-2. Construction specifications.
This construction shall be to such specification as prescribed in
development guidelines adopted by said Town.
§ 96-2.1. Notice; hearing; compliance. [Added 6-2-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-1]
In furtherance of the power contained in §§ C8-4 and C8-5 of the Charter
of the Town of Mount Airy, the Mayor is authorized to give written notice
to any property owner concerning any necessary installation, repair or
maintenance of sidewalks. Said notice shall be mailed to the owners thereof
as shown upon the assessment records for real property located within the
Town of Mount Airy and shall also advise the owners of their right to appear
for a hearing at the next meeting of the Town Council in the event that they
desire to dispute the necessity or reasonableness of the work to be done.
In the event that the owners do not request such a hearing or having been
granted such a hearing and the Town Council having approved the issuance
of the notice as given by the Mayor, the owner shall then comply with such
notice within a reasonable time as shall be set by the Mayor. Upon failure
of the owner to do such work within the time specified, then the Town
may have such work performed, and the expense shall be a lien upon the
property and collected in the same manner as Town taxes, all as specified in
§ C8-5 of the Charter of the Town of Mount Airy.
§ 96-2.2. Hearing; powers of Council. [Added 6-2-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-1]
In any hearing conducted by the Town Council under the immediately
preceding section, it shall be lawful for the Town Council, by a motion
to approve the notice given by the Mayor, to disapprove and rescind said
notice or to approve said notice with such modifications as may be
determined by the Town Council.
§ 96-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 96-2.2
94A:203

ARTICLE II
Digging Up Streets
[Adopted 1-13-196320]
§ 96-3. Permit required.
It shall not be lawful for any person, persons or body corporate to dig up
any part of the streets or alleys of the Town of Mount Airy for the purpose of
putting down or laying gas or water pipes, cellar or other drains, or for any
other purpose in said Town, without first having a permit from the Mayor of
said Town for that purpose, and shall be required within 10 days from the
date of permit to restore the same to as good condition as it was before such
digging was done.
§ 96-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-2-1985 by Ord. No. 144]
Violation of this article shall be declared a municipal infraction.
20.Editor's Note: The provisions of this article are derived from Sec. 11-5, Article II of the
former codification adopted 1-13-1963.
§ 96-3 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 96-4
94A:205

ARTICLE III
Streets and Sidewalks Generally
[Adopted 1-13-196321]
§ 96-5. Trash receptacle damage.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to take and carry away or
willfully break, injure or destroy any box or other receptacle maintained
upon any street or alley in the Town for the reception of paper, filth or waste
matter; however, these receptacles shall not be used for the reception of
waste material from commercial establishments or residential homes.
§ 96-6. Trees and buildings; damage or destruction.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to, at any time or in any
manner, deface or injure or remove any tree, fence, gate, railing, porch,
building or other structure upon public land, by writing, cutting or in any
other manner within the corporate limits of the Town.
§ 96-7. Defacing trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to purposely injure or deface,
by cutting, breaking or otherwise, any tree or trees now planted or
hereafter to be planted along the sidewalks or within the public rights-ofway
within the corporate limits of the Town.
§ 96-8. Wheelbarrows on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride, drive, wheel, push or
in any manner propel or permit to remain on the sidewalks of the Town of
Mount Airy, any wheelbarrow, handcart, bicycle or any other such article,
or any sled or sleigh in such a manner so as to impede pedestrian traffic,
excepting however, baby carriages and grocery store carts.
§ 96-9. Exposed cellar openings.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupier of any premises in Mount Airy
to leave the opening to any cellar thereon located so exposed that persons
passing upon the street or sidewalks may fall into such opening.
§ 96-10. Improper gutter spouts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit water to fall or flow
from the gutters or spouts on any premises by him owned or occupied upon
or over any sidewalk upon such premises within the corporate limits of
Mount Airy so as to injure such sidewalks or inconvenience pedestrians.
21.Editor's Note: The provisions of this article are derived from Article 3, Secs. 3-13 through
3-20, 3-22 and 3-28 of the former codification adopted 1-13-1963.
§ 96-5 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 96-11
94A:207
§ 96-11. Pavement obstructions.
It shall be unlawful for any storekeeper or other person to encumber,
obstruct or in any manner interfere with the free and uninterrupted use
of the public streets and sidewalks of the Town of Mount Airy leaving any
goods, wares, merchandise or other articles or thing thereon, or by use of
a commercial lift, except for loading or during the erection or repair of a
building.
§ 96-12. Scattering refuse.
It shall be unlawful for any person residing within the corporate limits of
Mount Airy, Maryland, to allow paper, paper boxes and any inflammable
material to be thrown or packed so that wind may scatter it. All such matter
must be in boxes or crates, if kept outside of a building. All said paper and
paper boxes, if disposed of by burning, must be enclosed in some iron or
steel receptacle so that, in burning said matter, no danger of a fire shall
originate therefrom.
§ 96-13. Dirt and trash on highways.
No person engaged in excavating, repairs to structures or grounds
or construction or having charge or control of excavation, repairs to
structures or grounds or construction, or who may be engaged in or
have charge or control of conveying material to or from excavations,
repairs to structures or grounds or construction, shall deposit or permit
to be deposited, in any manner, upon the surface of any street, alley,
avenue, highway, footway, sidewalk, parking or other public space
within the corporate limits of the Town of Mount Airy, either by placing,
spilling, dropping or tracking from wheels of vehicles or from the
feet of animals, or otherwise, any earth, clay, mud, sand, gravel or
other material. If any such deposit occurs, every person whose duty
it is under this section to prevent such deposit shall promptly remove
the same. All macadamized or broken stone roadways adjacent to
excavations or traversed by vehicles either in the process of conveying
material from an excavation or in returning from the place of deposit
to place of excavation shall be covered with planking so far as may be
required to prevent any mud, earth, clay or other material from the
excavation or from the place of deposit from reaching the surface of
such roadway.
A.
No one being the owner, driver, manager or conductor of any cart or
other vehicle shall carry or convey or cause to be carried or conveyed
in such vehicle any coal, earth, sand, gravel, broken stone, dirt, ashes,
paper and other rubbish, or any loose fluid or offensive articles or
matter, or any articles whatsoever within the corporate limits of said
Town of Mount Airy so that the same shall or may be scattered,
dropped, let fall, blown or spilled therefrom; and all vehicles conveying
combustible refuse or foul, dusty or offensive matter of any sort shall
have tight bodies and be closely and securely covered. All vehicles
B.
§ 96-11 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 96-13
94A:208
§ 96-14. Playing games in streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to play baseball or football in
any manner upon any of the streets or roads of Mount Airy.
§ 96-15. Unauthorized signs or obstructions. [Added 8-1-1988 by
Ord. No. 1988-2]
§ 96-16. Skateboards and rollerblades. [Added 11-1-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999-322]
conveying wastepaper and wastepaper products, baled, sacked or
otherwise, shall be closely and securely covered.
Owners of lots abutting upon streets, avenues or alleys or upon public
parking or other public space, in the Town and which are above grade,
shall protect such lots so as to prevent dirt, sand or gravel or any
bushes, trees or like thing from falling or being washed upon the
sidewalks, streets, alleyways or other public space adjacent to the
same.
C.
Owners or occupants of lots abutting upon streets or sidewalks, and
those undertaking lawn or yard cleanup, lawn cutting or maintenance
on such lots, shall refrain from blowing, tracking or otherwise
depositing grass clippings or other yard waste onto sidewalks, roads
or gutters without removing same within at least four hours. [Added
3-4-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-1]
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to authorize,
aid, assist, participate or engage m the placing of any sign, marking,
obstruction, speed bump or in any way to alter, deface or change the
surface of any Town street or roadway without obtaining prior written
authorization therefor from the Mayor and Council of the Town of
Mount Airy which such written authorization shall describe the location
and of any work authorized thereunder and which shall be strictly to.
A.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be
subject to the fine and punishment prescribed in § C12-5A of Charter of
the Town of Mount Airy.
B.
The words "Town street" or "roadway" mean the entire width of any
way or thoroughfare which is used by the public for vehicular transit,
whether or not the same has been formally offered for dedication to the
public or formally accepted by the Town, except, however, any street or
roadway owned or maintained by any county or by the state.
C.
The Council of the Town of Mount Airy is hereby empowered to pass
resolutions from time to time, in its discretion, designating portions
A.
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 96-16 as § 96-17.
§ 96-13 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 96-16
94A:209
§ 96-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-2-1985 by Ord. No.
144; 8-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-2]
Violation of any provision of this article which is not elsewhere declared to
be a misdemeanor is hereby deemed to be a municipal infraction.
of sidewalks, streets and public rights-of-way as prohibiting the use of
skateboards or rollerblades thereon, provided that the following such
designation and prior to the issuance of any citation for violation of
such prohibition that the areas of sidewalks, streets or public rights-ofway
so designated shall be marked with appropriate signs at the end or
beginning of each block so designated or at intervals of not less than
500 feet, such signs to read "No rollerblades or skateboards" or similar
words.
Any violation of the provisions of Subsection A hereof by rollerblading
or skateboarding upon any area of a sidewalk, street or public rightof-
way as designated above shall be a municipal infraction subject to a
penalty for each violation of $25 for the first offense and $50 for each
subsequent offense.
B.
§ 96-16 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 96-17
94A:210
ARTICLE IV
Pedestrian Access to and Use of Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-7]
§ 96-18. Streets or sidewalks in front of residential, business or
public buildings.
It shall be unlawful to block a sidewalk which is in front of a residential,
commercial or public building, unreasonably interfere with normal
pedestrian movement in front of a residential, commercial or public
building, or interfere with reasonable access to a residential,
commercial or public building.
A.
Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
Emergency operations by fire and rescue services, police agencies,
public utilities or their contractors;
(1)
Emergency repairs to commercial, industrial or residential
property;
(2)
Any activity related to and created by public gatherings operating
as part of a parade or public celebration;
(3)
Any activity operating with appropriate government permits or
permission, or under the auspices of a governmental body.
(4)
B.
Persons who refuse to move to permit normal pedestrian movement or
reasonable access to a residential, commercial or public building are
subject to a citation and/or appropriate order to cease and desist, after
first being warned, in writing or verbally, by an Town official or staff
with authority to issue citations for municipal infractions.
C.
Citations for violations of this section may be based on the observations
of any Town official or staff with authority to issue citations for
municipal infractions, or two affidavits from affected persons, provided
that a warning, in writing or verbally, is first issued by the Town official
or staff.
D.
Violations of this section shall constitute a municipal violation and carry
a fine of $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second offense, $150
for the third offense and $250 for any further offense. Repeat violations
of this provision for which a citation may or could be issued may also
be enforced by a cease-and-desist or abatement order issued by any
Town official or staff with authority to issue citations for municipal
infractions, or issued by the court in any legal action brought to enforce
this article.
E.
§ 96-18 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 96-19
94A:211
§ 96-19. Blockages or impediments related to operation of
business.
If two violations of § 96-18 occur within 30 days and are connected with or
related to the operation of a retail, service or other commercial operation,
after due warning, including an opportunity to correct a continuing
violation, the owner or operator may be cited for a municipal violation
as detailed in § 96-18E and is further subject to a cease-and-desist or
abatement order as appropriate.
§ 96-20. Littering on streets or sidewalks.
§ 96-21. Littering related to operation of business.
If two violations of § 96-20 occur within 30 days and are connected with or
related to the operation of a retail, service or commercial operation, after
due warning, including an opportunity to correct a continuing violation, the
owner or operator of the business may be cited for a municipal violation
as detailed in § 96-20C and is further subject to a cease-and-desist or
abatement order as appropriate.
It shall be unlawful to throw or otherwise discard any paper, paper
product, cardboard, cartons, plastic product, bottles, glass, glass
product, metal object, wood object, lumber, wood scraps, food or any
other material, trash or garbage on streets or sidewalks.
A.
Citations for violations of this section may be based on the observations
of any Town official or staff with authority to issue citations for
municipal infractions, or two affidavits from persons who are witnesses.
B.
Violations of this section shall constitute a municipal violation and carry
a fine of $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second offense, $150
for the third offense and $250 for any further offense. Repeat violations
of this provision for which a citation may or could be issued may also
be enforced by a cease-and-desist or abatement order issued by any
Town official or staff with authority to issue citations for municipal
infractions, or issued by the court in any legal action brought to enforce
this article.
C.
§ 96-19 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 96-21
94A:212
Chapter 98
SUBDIVISION OF LAND AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 25.
Annexations — See Ch. 44.
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Forest conservation — See Ch. 62.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 94.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 96-21 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 96-21
94A:213

ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 98-1. Statement of purpose. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-11]
In the best interests of the Town of Mount Airy and to assist the
subdivider in harmonizing his interests with those of the Town of Mount
Airy, the following regulations are adopted in order that adherence
to same will bring results that are beneficial to both parties. It is
deemed necessary to establish minimum standards for the design and
development of all new subdivisions in order to eliminate piecemeal
planning, insure sound community growth, assure and safeguard the
provision of quality facilities, protect the interests of the home owner,
the subdivider, and the local government.
A.
It shall be the duty of the Mount Airy Planning Commission and the
Town Council to require that all regulations set forth in this chapter be
complied with, before giving their approval to subdivisions as defined
herein. It is the purpose of this chapter to make regulations and
requirements for the platting of land which the Town Council of Mount
Airy deems necessary for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens.
B.
These regulations are designed to provide for the control of erosion and
sedimentation; the protection from flooding, the proper arrangement
of streets in relation to other existing planned streets and the Town
Master Plan; the adequate and convenient placement of public school
sites and of open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of fire-fighting
apparatus, recreation, light and air, the avoidance of congestion of
population, including minimum width and area of lots; protection of
the Town water supplies, preservation of wetlands, compatibility of site
configuration and design within surrounding areas and protection of
the architectural character neighborhoods and business districts within
the community.
C.
§ 98-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-1
94A:215

ARTICLE II
Jurisdiction
§ 98-2. Statutory authority; applicability.
In accordance with the authority granted by Article 66B of the Annotated
Code of Maryland 1961 Edition, as amended, this chapter is adopted by the
Town of Mount Airy, Maryland, governing the subdivision of all lands within
the corporate limits of the Town.
§ 98-2 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-2
94A:217

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 98-3. Responsible agencies.
The following agencies of the government of Mount Airy are concerned with
the administration of this chapter.
The Town Council. The Town Council is vested with the following
responsibilities with regard to subdivision control:
Amendment of the regulations of this chapter when found
necessary and desirable.
(1)
Approval authority over all public improvement (public works)
plans and guarantees
(2)
A.
The Town Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
administer this chapter and, in furtherance of said authority, shall:
Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including
amendments thereto.
(1)
Initiate appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(2)
Receive, process and check all plats for compliance with these
regulations.
(3)
Forward copies of the subdivision plat to other town, county, and
state offices and agencies for their recommendations and report
wherever appropriate.
(4)
(5) Give preliminary and final approval of all subdivisions submitted.
(6) Make all other determinations required by the regulations herein.
B.
§ 98-3 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-3
94A:219

ARTICLE IV
General Requirements
§ 98-4. Preparation and recording of plat.
From and after the adoption of these regulations, any owner or proprietor
of any tract of land located in the territory to which these regulations may
apply, who creates a subdivision, shall cause a plat of such subdivision to
be made in accordance with the regulations set forth herein and Title V of
Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland. After having secured the
approval thereof by the Town Planning Commission, the subdivider shall
cause a copy of the said plat to be recorded in the office of the Clerk of
the county concerned. Any subdivision or portion thereof which may be in
the process of development, but has not had a plat recorded at the time of
adoption of these regulations, shall also be subject to the requirements and
procedures contained herein.
§ 98-5. Approval of plat required.
No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded until it shall have been
submitted to and approved by the Town Planning Commission as provided
herein. The Town Planning Commission shall not approve said plat unless it
is satisfied that the requirements of these regulations have been met.
§ 98-6. Timing and density of development.
The Town Council reserves the right to determine the rate and density of
development based upon other economic factors as well as the availability
of water and sewer for the development, anticipated demands upon water
and sewer facilities and protection of the Town's water supply, including
recharge areas for the Town's well fields.
§ 98-7. Annexation required.
Any subdivision having a part of its platted land outside the corporate limits
cannot have the plat approved by the Town Planning Commission unless
that land is annexed by the Town, except, however, subdivision approval
may be considered where only the nonbuildable portion of a lot is outside
the Town boundary.
§ 98-8. Final plat recordation required prior to transfer.
No lot in a subdivision created after the adoption of these regulations shall
be transferred, sold, or offered for sale, nor shall a zoning certificate be
issued for a structure thereon, until a final plat of such subdivision shall
have been recorded in accordance with these regulations.
§ 98-9. Minimum requirements to be met.
In planning and developing any property within the corporate limits of the
Town of Mount Airy, the owner, developer and his or her agent shall comply
§ 98-4 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-9
94A:221
with the design standards outlined in Article VI, provide improvements as
required in Article VII, and shall observe the requirements and procedures
described in Articles VIII, IX, X, and XI for review and approval of site plans,
subdivisions, minor subdivisions and amended plats. The Planning Board
Secretary or Town Planner shall review any plans submitted for compliance
with these regulations and may return any plans which are not complete for
resubmittal at a later date.
§ 98-10. Public improvements to be guaranteed.
In any instance where newly provided public improvements are necessary
to serve or provide access to a new building development, these
improvements must be completed or a satisfactory guarantee of completion
must be submitted prior to site plan or final plat approval and the issuance
of any zoning certificate for such building development.
§ 98-11. Violations and penalties.
Any subdivider who violates these regulations shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in Section 5.05 of Article 66B, Annotated Code of
Maryland, which are as follows:
Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located
within a subdivision, transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to
sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of
a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the Town Planning
Commission and recorded or filed in the office of the appropriate County
Clerk, shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of not less than $200 and not
more than $1,000 in the discretion of the Court, for each lot or parcel so
transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold; and the description
of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer
or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall
not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies
herein provided. The municipal corporation may enjoin such transfer or
sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity
jurisdiction or may recover the penalty by civil action of competent
jurisdiction. (Article 66B, dated June 1994)
§ 98-12. More restrictive standards to apply.
Wherever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or
dimensions noted herein and those contained in the Zoning Ordinance or
other official regulations of Mount Airy, Frederick or Carroll County, or
other governmental agencies, the more severe standards shall apply.
§ 98-9 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-12
94A:222
ARTICLE V
Definitions
§ 98-13. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLEY — A right-of-way which provides secondary service access for
vehicles to the side or rear of abutting properties.
BLOCK — A tract of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad
rights-of-way, waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the Town.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line beyond which the foundation wall and/
or any enclosed porch, vestibule or other enclosed portion of a building shall
not project as determined by the yard requirements.
COUNCIL — The Town Council of Mount Airy.
COUNTY MASTER HIGHWAY PLANS — The official major roads, highways,
streets, and other ways adopted by the Board of County Commissioners
of Frederick and Carroll Counties in accordance with Article 66B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
COUNTY PLANS — The officially adopted master plans for the
comprehensive development of Frederick County and Carroll County, or any
part of such plans or any amendments thereto.
CROSSWALKS — A public or private right-of-way which cuts through a
block and is used exclusively by pedestrians.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPERS — The owner(s) or agent(s) under legal authority of the
owner(s) who undertakes to cause a parcel of land to be designed,
subdivided, developed, and recorded as a subdivision.
EASEMENT — A grant by a property owner of the use of land for
construction, maintenance of facilities, utilities, drainage, or other use or
access without giving up title to the land.
HABITAT OF THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES — Areas, which
due to their physical or biological features, provide important elements
for the maintenance, expansion, and long-term survival of threatened or
endangered species listed in COMAR 08.03.08. This area may include
breeding, feeding, resting, migratory, or overwintering areas. Physical or
biological features include, but are not limited to, structure and composition
of the vegetation; faunal community; soils, water chemistry and quality; and
geologic, hydrogeologic, and microclimatic factors.
IMPROVEMENTS — Changes and additions to land necessary to prepare it
for building development sites and future use, including street paving and
curbing, grading, monuments, drainageways, sewers, fire hydrants, water
mains, sidewalks, and other public works and appurtenances.
§ 98-13 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-13
94A:223
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions,
either by descriptions, as on a subdivision plat or a recorded survey map,
or by metes and bounds, for the purpose of transfer, sale, lease or other
changes in ownership or use or to be occupied by a building and its
accessory buildings together with open spaces as required.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within the rear, side and
front lot or proposed street lines of the lot excluding any streets or
highways, whether dedicated or not dedicated to public use, but including
off-street automobile parking areas and areas of easements.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (THROUGH LOT) — An interior lot, fronting on
two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
MASTER PLAN — The Master Plan of Mount Airy which consists of maps,
data and other descriptive matter, as a guide for the physical development
of the Town or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions
or additions thereto adopted by the Commission and the Town Council, or
public open spaces, public building sites, routes for public utilities, zoning
districts or other similar information.
NONTIDAL WETLAND — An area defined under COMAR, Title 08.05.04.01,
that is generally inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic
vegetation." (COMAR + CC)
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN — That area which, assuming
ultimate development of its watershed based on current zoning, would be
inundated by water runoff from the one-hundred-year storm.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land within a subdivision which has been included
on a preliminary or final plat but not designated as a buildable lot due to
insufficient size and/or frontage or peculiar site or topographical problems.
Outlots can be shown only for the purpose of providing access to adjoining
properties or where necessary to provide for the extension or continuation
of future street pattern.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A surety bond or cash deposit made out to the
Town of Mount Airy in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements
which are required by this chapter, and said surety bond or cash deposit
being legally sufficient to secure to the Town that said improvements will be
constructed in accordance with this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Town of
Mount Airy, Maryland.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas with a slope of greater than 25%.
STREAM — That part of a watercourse, either naturally or artificially
created, that contains intermittent or perennial base flow of groundwater
origin. Ditches that convey surface runoff exclusively from storm events are
not included in this definition.
§ 98-13 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-13
94A:224
STREAM BUFFER — An area which extends a minimum of 50 feet from the
top of each stream bank along both sides of a stream.
STREET — A public or dedicated way, or a public proposed right-of-way,
widening or extension of an existing street or public way shown on any plan
approved by the Commission which serves as a primary means of access to
abutting lands.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which, in addition to providing ingress to
properties abutting thereon, is intended to collect traffic from or distribute
it to a series of local access streets within a neighborhood.
STREET, LOCAL — A street intended to serve and provide access
exclusively to the properties abutting thereon and not to be used as a
channel for through traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE — Any street which is under the jurisdiction of an
individual, corporation, or trustee, or any street which is privately owned,
established, constructed, or maintained.
STREET, SERVICE ROAD — A road not serving as a collector road, but
merely providing access to properties fronting on a highway, which road
is contiguous with and parallel to the major highway. "Adjacent" here shall
mean that no structure shall be built between the service road and the
major highway.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes
resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process
of resubdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.
WETLAND BUFFER — A regulated area, 25 feet in width, surrounding a
nontidal wetland, measured from the outer edge of the nontidal wetland.
§ 98-13 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-13
94A:225

ARTICLE VI
Construction, Architecture and Design Standards23
§ 98-14. Minimum requirements; compliance with Master Plan.
[Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
The standards of construction, architecture and design herein contained
are intended only as minimum requirements. The Town, through planning
staff or the Planning Commission, may require additional specific site
configuration and design elements that may include site layout,
architectural, style, streetscape, lighting and other aspects in order to
achieve compatibility with the character of the surrounding area and
vicinity, and carry out the intent of this Code to assure a high-quality,
pleasant, sustainable and durable neighborhood. All development, including
commercial, residential and industrial (including infill and redevelopment)
shall conform to the Town Comprehensive Master Plan.
§ 98-14.1. Environmental site delineation. [Added 10-6-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-04]
The Town of Mount Airy hereby adopts Chapter 103, Development and
Subdivision of Land, Article IV, Environmental Site Delineation (§§ 103-12,
103-13 and 103-14), of the Carroll County Code and all amendments thereto
to be effective within the limits of the Town of Mount Airy and enforceable
in accordance with the provisions thereof, except that once plans or permits
are approved, new environmental site delineation approval is not required
if construction begins within nine years. Whenever Chapter 103, Article IV,
of the Carroll County Code refers to "the County," these words shall be
construed to refer to the Town of Mount Airy whenever such construction
would be reasonable.
§ 98-15. Environmental protection standards.
One-hundred-year floodplain. No grading, filling or other alteration
shall take place within the one-hundred-year floodplain except for
construction of road or utility crossings when no feasible alternative
location exists. Land within the one-hundred-year floodplain shall be
considered nonbuildable and shall not be considered as part of the
required minimum lot area.
A.
Nontidal wetlands and wetland buffer.
On all concept, preliminary, or final subdivision plans, on all site
plans, and on any plan submitted in conjunction with building
permit applications, the plans shall show any nontidal wetlands and
wetland buffer area present on the site.
(1)
(2) Identification of nontidal wetlands.
B.
23.Editor's Note: This article title, which formerly read "Design Standards," was amended
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-12.
§ 98-14 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-15
94A:227
For purposes of this chapter, nontidal wetlands must have at
least two of the following characteristics:
[1] Land must support hydrophytes.
[2] The substrate is an undrained hydric soil.
The substrate is saturated with water or covered by water
at some time during the growing season.
[3]
(a)
Alternatively, nontidal wetlands may be identified by using
the Unified Federal Delineation method (available from the
Wetland Training Institute, P.O. Box 1022, Poolesville, Md.
20837).
(b)
For the initial indication of the presence of nontidal wetlands on a
site, the developer shall consult one or more of the following:
Soils classified as hydric by Carroll County, Frederick County
or the U.S. Soil Conservation Service;
(a)
(b) Mapped wetlands on the National Wetlands Inventory;
Mapped wetlands on any maps which may hereafter be
prepared by the State of Maryland, Carroll County, or
Frederick County; or
(c)
The presence of wetland vegetation and/or wet soils as
determined in the field by qualified personnel of the Town of
Mount Airy or other government agencies.
(d)
(3)
If any of the foregoing indicates the possible presence of nontidal
wetlands on a site, it shall be the responsibility of the developer
to have the nontidal wetland areas identified and delineated by
qualified personnel. The nontidal wetlands and surrounding
wetland buffer areas shall be delineated on the preliminary
subdivision plan or site plan and supporting evidence shall be
included with the plan submittal. The delineated nontidal wetland
and wetland buffer limits shall be approved by the Town of Mount
Airy or other public agency or consultant acting as its
representative.
(4)
No grading, filling or other alteration shall take place within a
delineated nontidal wetland or wetland buffer except for
construction of roads, utilities or facilities for stormwater
management when no feasible alternative location exists outside
the wetlands area.
(5)
The nontidal wetlands area and wetland buffer area shall be
dedicated in fee to the Town of Mount Airy, at the Town's request,
or dedicated as an easement to the Town of Mount Airy, and shall
be shown as such on all record plats.
(6)
§ 98-15 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-15
94A:228
When any construction or grading is proposed within a delineated
nontidal wetlands area or wetland buffer area, all required permits
shall be obtained from the Army Corps of Engineers, Maryland
Department of the Environment, Maryland Division of Natural
Resources, or such other public agencies as may be authorized
to regulate activity in wetlands. Application shall be made to the
appropriate agencies prior to the final approval of the subdivision
or site plan by the Planning Commission. Any required wetlands
permits shall be obtained prior to the issuance of grading or
building permits. Preliminary or final approval of a site plan or
subdivision by the Town of Mount Airy shall not supersede any
requirements or conditions imposed by the permitting agencies.
A copy of each wetland permit shall be included with the initial
grading or building permit application.
(7)
Streams and stream buffers. No grading, filling or other alteration
shall take place within a delineated stream or stream buffer except for
construction of road or utility crossings when no feasible alternative
to the stream crossing exists. Streams and stream buffers shall be
considered nonbuildable and shall not be considered as part of the
required minimum lot area.
C.
Steep slopes. Areas of existing grading in excess of 25% shall be
considered nonbuildable and shall not be considered as part of the
required minimum lot area except upon approval of the Planning
Commission.
D.
Water supply protection requirements.
For all subdivisions and site plans, the developer, at the time of
filing a development plat or earlier, shall contact the Planning
Commission for a determination of whether the development or any
part of it is within the water recharge area of any of the Town's well
fields. If it is determined by the Commission that the development
does not lie within any recharge area, the developer may proceed
with the normal processing of the development plan.
(1)
If the Commission determines that any part of the development is
within a recharge area, the following procedure will apply:
The preliminary plan or site plan shall contain information
prepared and certified to by a professional hydrogeologist
which plan will delineate the portion of the development within
any recharge area and shall contain projected water demand
of the development and projected effect upon aquifer recharge
rate, which projections shall be made upon assumption of
development to maximum density as permitted by zoning and
these regulations and separate projections based upon any
lesser density the developer chooses to propose.
(a)
Said plan shall also state in terms of square footage and
percent of the overall area of the development the amount
(b)
(2)
E.
§ 98-15 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-15
94A:229
§ 98-16. Street design standards.
of impermeable surface that will be within the proposed
development, the phrase "impermeable surface" meaning to
include roof areas, walks, roads, streets and other paved or
covered areas. If a final development plan is approved, the
same shall state the maximum percent of impervious area for
each lot within the recharge area and building permits shall
not be issued when their effect would be to exceed the amounts
of impermeable surface as shown when taken in conjunction
with areas of streets, etc. constructed or planned for the
development
If the projections provided for in Subsection E(2)(a) show an
adverse or negative impact upon aquifer recharge, the
developer may propose means of reducing areas of
impermeability and measures of increasing the recharge rates
or amounts, such as catchment basins, roof drain collection,
open space areas, dry ponds and the like.
(c)
All preliminary or site plans for development wholly or partly
within a recharge area shall be referred to the Town Council
for review and comments prior to Planning Commission action
thereon.
(d)
The Commission may disapprove the preliminary or site plan if,
in its judgment, the proposed development can be reasonably
expected to decrease the current recharge rate of the site
by more than 10%, or create a water demand on the site
greater than the estimated groundwater recharge rate for the
property. In approving any development hereunder, the
Commission may do so subject to such conditions and
restrictions as it may consider reasonably necessary to protect
the sources of the Town's water supply, including a reduction of
density that would otherwise be permitted if the development
was not within a recharge area.
(e)
In approving any plan hereunder, the Commission shall not
allow any modification of housing types or cluster development
except as permitted in the zoning district where the
development is proposed, nor shall street standards as
elsewhere provided in these regulations be reduced or
modified.
(f)
These regulations shall apply to future well recharge areas as
well as to existing well recharge areas.
(g)
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all
streets shall conform to a plan for the most safe, advantageous
development of adjoining areas and the entire neighborhood.
A.
§ 98-15 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-16
94A:230
All streets shall be considered in their relation to:
(1) Existing and planned streets.
(2) Topographical conditions.
(3) Public conveniences and safety.
(4) Uses of the land.
(5) Comprehensive Master Plan (Major Highway Plan Section).
B.
Where such is not shown on the Comprehensive Master Plan, the
arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
Provide for the continuation or appropriate projections of existing
principal streets; or
(1)
Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by
the Planning Commission to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or
conformance to existing streets impracticable.
(2)
C.
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed street,
major thoroughfare, or other disadvantageous use, the Commission
may impose requirements concerning streets, access drives, reverse
frontage lots, or any other such requirements as may be necessary to
insure the character of the neighborhood.
D.
Access. Reserve strips controlling access to streets or alleys shall be
prohibited.
E.
Alignment.
Where appropriate to design, proposed streets shall be continuous
and in alignment with existing, planned, or platted streets with
which they are to connect.
(1)
Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
(2)
When connecting street lines deflect by more than 10º, the radii of
curves on the center lines shall not be less than the following:
(a) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(b) Local streets and service roads: 150 feet.
(3)
Between reverse curves on collector and local access streets there
shall be a tangent at least 100 feet long.
(4)
Minimum sight distances (over a hill) shall be 150 feet on local
streets and 200 feet on collectors. The height of objects when
determining the minimum sight distances shall be as follows:
(5)
F.
§ 98-16 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-16
94A:231
(a) Driver's eye height: 3.75 feet.
(b) Height of object: 4.50 feet.
(c) Height of headlamp: 2.00 feet.
Alleys. Alleys shall be included in all commercial and industrial areas
if no other provisions are made for adequate access to parking and
loading spaces. Alleys will not be approved in residential districts. In
the absence of alleys, easements will be required for utility lines or
drainage, such easements being a minimum width of 12 feet or 6 feet
on each side of a property line.
G.
Cul-de-sac. Cul-de-sac-type streets shall not be permitted unless the
Planning Commission finds that it is the best alternative to serve the
area. When approved by the Planning Commission, cul-de-sac-type
streets shall be no longer than 800 feet in low-density residential zones
and 500 feet in medium- and high-density residential zones. All culsde-
sac shall be provided with a turnaround at the closed end having
a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet and the roadway (pavement)
having a minimum radius of 50 feet to the exterior curbline. The center
of a cul-de-sac shall be a landscaped area with curbing around the
perimeter. A minimum of 14 feet of paved width shall be provided
between the landscaped area and outside curb.
H.
Grades.
Grades will not be less than 1/2 of 1% in order to promote proper
drainage. Unless approved by the Town Council, grades shall not
exceed the following:
(a) Local access streets, service roads and alleys: 8%.
(b) Collector streets: 7%.
(c) Major thoroughfares: 5%
Driveways: 12%. A waiver permitting a maximum grade of 17%
may be granted by the Zoning Administrator.
(d)
(1)
All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient length to provide smooth transition and proper sight
distances.
(2)
Grades at the point of intersection of two streets shall be 3% or less
for a distance of 50 feet in all directions from the point of right-ofway
intersection.
(3)
I.
Half-width streets. Subdivisions adjoining dedicated, reserved or
platted and recorded half-width streets or alleys shall dedicate or
reserve an additional right-of-way width sufficient to bring the overall
street to the width requirements of this chapter.
J.
§ 98-16 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-16
94A:232
Spacing. Streets shall be spaced to allow for blocks meeting the
dimensional requirements specified herein. The number of
intersections along highways and other major roads shall be held to a
minimum, normally spaced as indicated in Subsection L following.
K.
Minimize interference with through traffic. Land abutting the major
thoroughfare and principal collectors as designated by the Town's
Major Highway Plan should be platted with the view of making the lots,
if for residential use, desirable for such use by cushioning the impact
of heavy traffic upon them; also minimizing interference with traffic on
such highways, roads, and streets as well as accident hazards from all
kinds of subdivisions.
This may be done:
By backing the lots upon the highway so that they front on, and
have access from a parallel minor street one-half block away.
(a)
By arranging the lots around a series of loop streets or deadend
streets stemming from a collector street. Such loops or
dead ends shall be one lot depth away from the highway.
(b)
(1)
The choice between the foregoing or other methods for
accomplishing the desired purpose in a specific case must
necessarily be made in consideration of topography and other
physical conditions, the character of existing and contemplated
developments, and other pertinent factors. In all cases the
minimum distance between street connections shall be as follows:
Along
Arterials
Along
Collectors
Along
Locals
Minimum distance
between center lines of
intersections (feet)
750 500 200
(2)
New residential lot driveways will not be permitted on arterial and
collector streets.
(3)
L.
Outlots. Outlots shall be provided where necessary for access to
adjoining properties or where necessary to provide an appropriate
future street pattern.
M.
Private streets. Private streets will not be approved. This condition
will be noted on the final plat. Driveways leading to individual lots or
driveways leading to common parking spaces such as in multifamily
residential projects shall not be considered streets. Any lot of record
not fronting on an existing street shall have access to an existing street
through a right-of-way sufficiently wide to be developed as a public
street.
N.
Street names. Street names shall be subject to approval by the Town.
Names shall not duplicate or closely approximate existing street names
O.
§ 98-16 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-16
94A:233
in the Town or adjoining counties except for extension of existing
streets.
Right-of-way width and pavement width. Minimum widths for the rightof-
way of streets, alleys and easements shall be as follows (Extra widths
may be required where necessary):
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Pavement
(feet)
Collector streets:
Residential 60-70 36-40
Commercial and
industrial
70 40
Local access:
Residential 50-60 34-36
Industrial and
commercial
60 36
Service roads 40 24
Culs-de-sac 60 radius 50 radius
Alleys 20 --
Crosswalks 10 5 if needed
Easements (utility) 6 --
Easements (drainage) What the Town Planning Commission feels is
necessary.
NOTE: Residential right-of-way and pavement requirements depend
upon density of development. Refer to Street Design Standards Table
(Subsection S) for specific details. Parking is not intended on service
streets.
P.
Specifications. All streets, alleys and other public ways, whether
temporary or permanent, shall be constructed or installed under the
supervision of the Town Engineer and in accordance with these
regulations and the approved Mount Airy's Standard Specifications
and Details for Construction. Some standardized construction drawings
are available from the Town. Curbs and gutters shall be provided for
all streets and shall be installed under the supervision of the Town
Engineer and in accordance with specifications approved by the
Planning Commission and Town Council. Sidewalks shall be provided by
the developer of each subdivision across the full extent of the lot which
abuts a street or streets. Sidewalks shall be provided by the developer
at his own expense. All sidewalks shall be installed in accordance
with specifications provided by the Town Engineer as approved by the
Planning Commission and Town Council.
Q.
R. Intersections.
§ 98-16 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-16
94A:234
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than 60º. (Requirements for
intersection with state roads shall not be less than 70º nor greater
than 110º.) The block corner of street intersections with county
or state highways shall be rounded on the right-of-way line with a
curve having a radius of not less than 25 feet; at minor residential
street intersections the minimum radius shall be not less than 20
feet.
(1)
Curbs at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of a
minimum distance as specified in Subsection S, that the Planning
Commission deems it necessary for purposes of public safety. At
street intersections with state highways, the street curb or edges of
paving shall be rounded off by an arc, the minimum radius of which
shall be 30 feet. A street intersection with the state highway will be
subject to the rules and regulations of the Maryland State Highway
Administration.
(2)
Intersections of more than two streets at a point shall be
prohibited.
(3)
Street design standards summary. [Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-19]
Local Street Collector Street
Development
Density(a) Low Medium High Low Medium High
Right-of-way
width (feet)
50 60 60 60 60 70
Pavement
width (feet)
34 34 36 36 36 40
Vertical face
curb
Maybe Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Sidewalk
width (feet)
4 5 5 5 5 6
Sidewalk
distance
from back of
curb (feet)
5 6 6 6 6 6
Minimum
site distance
over a hill
(feet)
150(b) 150(b) 150(b) 300 300 300
Maximum
grade
8% 8% 8% 7% 7% 7%
S.
§ 98-16 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-16
94A:235
§ 98-17. Block design standards.
Local Street Collector Street
Development
Density(a) Low Medium High Low Medium High
Maximum
cul-de-sac
length (deadend
street
with a
turnaround)
(feet)
800 500 500
Minimum
center-line
radii around
curve (feet)
150 150 150 300 300 300
Minimum
curbing
radius (feet)
20 20 25 25 30 40
Design speed
(mph)
20 20 20 30 30 30
On-street
parking
(feet)
8
width,
22
length
8 width,
22
length
8
width,
22
length
8 width,
22 length
8 width,
22
length
8 width,
22
length
Off-street
parking
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Streetlighting Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
NOTES:
(a) Density refers to the residential zoning classification of the land
being subdivided. Commercial or industrial subdivision roads must
meet the design standards of high-density development either local or
collector streets as determined by the Planning Commission.
(b) If this is impractical because of topographic conditions, may be
decreased to 110 feet for local and 200 feet for collectors upon
approval by the Town Planning Commission.
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of
the type of use contemplated.
(1)
A.
§ 98-16 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-17
94A:236
§ 98-18. Building lines.
Building lines along each street shall be drawn on the plat, and side and
rear building lines noted as required by zoning regulations. The locations of
these lines shall be clearly indicated by dimensions.
§ 98-19. Easements.
§ 98-20. Lot design standards.
Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
(2)
(3) Limitation and opportunities of topography.
B. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet or be less than 500 feet.
Business and industrial blocks may be specially designed to serve their
particular purposes, which designs shall be subject to approval by the
Town Planning Commission.
C.
Crosswalks. In any block more than 1,000 feet long, a crosswalk may be
required to improve access to a school, church, playground, bus stop,
or other pedestrian objective.
D.
Easements shall be provided for utilities on all lot lines other than those
abutting a street right-of-way line and shall be centered on rear or side
lot lines. Such easements shall be designed to provide continuity from
block to block.
A.
An easement running along all property lines shall be shown and shall
be a minimum of 6 feet on each side of the line.
B.
Where a subdivision is traversed or borders a stream or watercourse,
there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way
not less than 20 feet wide dedicated to the Town of Mount Airy.
C.
Lots shall be of such size, shape, and orientation as will be appropriate
for the location, and for the type of development contemplated.
A.
B. The creation of panhandle or pipe stem lots shall be prohibited.
Corner lots shall have widths sufficient to meet the yard requirements
of such lots in the Zoning Ordinance.
C.
All lot measurements shall be net measurements, not including any part
of any street, alley, or cross walkway. Easements, however, shall be
regarded as within the lot.
D.
Where unusual soil conditions or other physical factors exist which may
impair the health and safety of the residents of the neighborhood in
which a subdivision may be located, the Town Planning Commission
may increase lot area requirements.
E.
§ 98-17 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-20
94A:237
§ 98-21. Large lot subdivisions.
Whenever the area is divided into lots larger than ordinarily used in the
area for building purposes, and there is reason to believe that such lots will
eventually be resubdivided into smaller building lots, consideration shall
be given to the street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so
that additional minor streets can be opened which will permit a logical
arrangement of smaller lots. Easements or deeds providing for the present
or future opening and extension of such streets, may, at the discretion of the
Town Planning Commission, be made a condition of the approval of the plat.
§ 98-22. Public sites and open spaces.
Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown on
the Comprehensive Master Plan for Mount Airy is located in whole or in part
in a subdivision, such sites shall be indicated on the subdivision plat. School,
park and other public sites other than the reserve recreation area required
pursuant to § 98-23 of these regulations are to be reserved and negotiated
within one year of the recording date of the subdivision.
§ 98-23. Required open space/recreation areas to be dedicated.
[Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-2]
Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A proportion
of 2 1/2 in depth to one in width shall normally be considered as a
desirable maximum.
F.
Front and rear lot lines. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-3]
Such plans shall designate a front and rear lot line for each
residential lot, including through lots, subject to approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. If no front and/or rear lot line
are delineated on the plat, the Zoning Administrator or Planning
and Zoning Commission shall determine which is the front and rear
lot lines based on the following factors:
Front and rear lot lines should coordinate with front and rear
doors of the residences and/or subdivision.
(a)
Yards with buffers, including planned fencing or landscaping
over three feet in height are generally considered adjacent to
rear lot lines.
(b)
If Subsection G(1)(a) and (b) above do not provide guidance,
yards with main entrances or driveways should be considered
adjacent to front lot lines.
(c)
(1)
Front and rear lot lines shall be uniform for each street or road in
a subdivision.
(2)
G.
For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
A.
§ 98-20 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-23
94A:238
BASE DENSITY — The original density permitted under the property's
residential zoning category (dwelling units per acre).
COMMUNITY OPEN SPACE — The area of open space remaining after
natural open space has been designated. The area may be used for
passive or active recreation and must be suitable for dry ground
activity. Central parks and tot-lots are encouraged.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE AREA — The area of a site that
includes wetlands and submerged areas, slopes of 25% or more and the
historical floodplain. These areas are considered unbuildable land.
GREEN SPACE — Open space maintained in a natural, undisturbed
or revegetated condition, but could or should include a walk path or
bike path to encourage connectivity and promote an added benefit
throughout.
HISTORICAL FLOODPLAIN — That area which, assuming ultimate
development of its watershed based on current zoning, would be
inundated by water runoff from the one-hundred-year storm.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Any surface in the urban/suburban landscape
that cannot effectively absorb or infiltrate rainfall.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a housing lot (in feet) that fronts along the
street.
NATURAL CONDITION — The topography and vegetation of an area
that is unaltered by clearing and grading during construction and
protected in perpetuity.
NET DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE — The result of subtracting the
environmental resource area and any recreation area dedicated in
accordance with § 98-23 of Chapter 98, Subdivision of Land and Site
Plan Review, from the gross developable acreage.
OPEN SPACE — A portion of a development site that is permanently set
aside for public or private use and will not be developed. Open space
may be community open space or green space. However, open space
does not mean land considered unbuildable, existing rights-of-way and
utility easements, setbacks and lawns, stormwater management (unless
unique forms are used that preserve the area in a natural or forested
condition) or roads and parking areas.
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT — A development pattern that arranges
the layout of buildings in a compact area of the sites to reserve a
portion of the site for community open space or green space that is
protected in perpetuity.
OPEN SPACE EASEMENT — An easement conveyed by the owner
of real property to the Town protecting open space from future
development and environmental damage by restricting future
construction of any improvements to those improvements expressly
reserved in the easement and/or restricting removal of soil, trees,
other vegetation or other natural features of the property except as is
§ 98-23 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-23
94A:239
consistent with conservation, recreation or agricultural uses in order
to preserve and protect the open space and natural condition of the
property in perpetuity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The width of a public roadway that encompasses the
pavement width and/or land needed for placement of sidewalks, utilities
and storm drainage.
SETBACK AREA — The area between the street right-of-way line or
lot line and setback lines within which no principal structures shall be
erected or placed.
SETBACK LINE — The line that is the required minimum distance from
the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area
within which no principal structure shall be erected or placed.
STREAM BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering a stream which exists
or is established to protect a stream system. Alteration of this vegetated
area is strictly limited.
Open space development shall be required in the Town of Mount Airy
and shall apply, along with the provisions of this section, to all
residential zones or special exemption residential uses in commercial
zones, except that plats recorded before the adoption of this section are
exempt from the provisions of this section.
B.
All concept plans, preliminary plans, final plans and record plats shall
set forth and clearly delineate:
(1) The total gross area of the lot or parcel;
(2) Environmental resource area;
(3) Net developable acreage;
(4) The boundaries of designated open space;
(5) Recreation areas;
(6) Stormwater management facilities; and
(7) Green space.
C.
Open space shall be marked in the field with signage approved by the
Planning Commission to distinguish it from private property.
D.
A percentage of open space must be reserved as detailed in this section
and is based on housing density. The denser a development is, the
greater the amount of open space required will be. However, when the
Planning Commission determines it appropriate, it shall recommend to
the Town Council that such development shall be required to pay a fee
in lieu of dedication of land. The Council, in such case, shall request
the recommendation of the Board of Recreation and Parks. Any such
fee shall be equal to the value of the land which otherwise would be
required to be dedicated (based upon the average appraisal value of
E.
§ 98-23 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-23
94A:240
the site at its new or current zoning, whichever is higher) based upon
any bona fide sale of the land to be developed that occurred within 12
months prior to preliminary subdivision approval or if there is no such
sale, determined by an appraiser selected and paid for by the Town
and reimbursed by the developer and approved by the Town Council.
The fee shall be used for recreational purposes in the Town's park
system and shall be paid prior to recording the final plat. The Planning
Commission and the Board of Recreation and Parks shall make their
recommendations, in writing, regarding the proposed open space, or
fee in lieu thereof, and the final decision in each case shall be made by
the Town Council.
At least 50% of designated open space shall be designated as green
space and shall be maintained in a natural, undisturbed condition. The
remaining percentage may be used/improved as community open space
for dry ground activity. Centralized open space areas with the lots are
encouraged.
F.
The total number of residential units allowable within an open space
development shall not exceed the number of units that would otherwise
be allowed in the existing zoning district using conventional
development. The total number of units allowed shall be determined
using the following formula:
T = BD*[A – (U+R)]
Where:
T = Total units (dwelling units)
BD = Base density (dwelling units/acre)
A = Total site area (acres)
U = Unbuildable land as defined in Section II24 (acres)
R = Road and utility right-of-way (acres)
G.
Lot width, rear, front and side yard setbacks may be reduced to 25% of
the requirements in the base zoning, subject to the following rules:
Lot size may be reduced to 25% of base density but no smaller than
1/8 of an acre;
(1)
(2) Conservation zoned lots may be reduced up to 75%; and
(3) R-1 zoned lots may be reduced by 50%.
H.
The total area of dedicated open space shall equal the amount by which
all dwelling unit lots are reduced below the base zoning and shall meet
the requirements outlined in Table 1 below.
I.
24.Editor's Note: See Section II of the United States Environmental Protection Agency's
model open space ordinance.
§ 98-23 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-23
94A:241
Table 1: Open Space Required For Various Densities
Base Density
(du/ac)
Open Space Required
(percentage of net developable
acreage)
Conservation/R-1 25%
R-2/RE 35%
R-3 – R-5 45%
R-5 – R-7 50%
A request for the adjustment of the above percentages can be
made to the Planning Commission based upon any unique features
of the parcel. The Planning Commission, in its discretion, may
grant an adjustment to the percentages set forth in Table 1 if it
is established by the property owner that the adjustment will be
more beneficial to the needs of the community for that specific
parcel. In determining whether to grant such an adjustment, the
Planning Commission may seek input from the Board of Parks and
Recreation or from any other source that the Planning Commission
deems beneficial.
(1)
The following activities or land uses shall not be counted as a part of
designated open space:
(1) Land considered unbuildable;
(2) Existing rights-of-way and utility easements;
(3) Setbacks and lawns;
Stormwater management (unless unique forms are used that
preserve the area in a natural or forested condition); or
(4)
(5) Roads and parking areas.
J.
The following areas shall be high priorities for inclusion in designated
open space:
(1) Resource buffers;
(2) High quality forest resources;
(3) Individual trees;
(4) Critical habitat areas;
(5) High quality soil resources; and
Interconnectivity between neighborhoods, via pathways,
encouraged to maximum open space.
(6)
K.
§ 98-23 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-23
94A:242
If open space is to be used for active recreation, impervious cover shall
be limited, where possible.
L.
Open space shall be contiguous, where possible, with bike and walking
paths which should be allowed as open space and utilized throughout
where it is deemed an amenity.
M.
An open space basement shall be established and conveyed to the
Town. The open space easement shall:
Protect open space from future development and environmental
damage by restricting future construction of any improvements
to those improvements expressly reserved in the easement and/or
restricting removal of soil, trees, other vegetation or other natural
features of the property except as is consistent with conservation,
recreation or agricultural uses in order to preserve and protect the
open space and natural condition of the property in perpetuity; and
(1)
(2) Provide that the public have access to the open space at all times.
N.
An open space easement may be transferred to an established,
designated land trust organization, among whose purposes it is to
conserve open space and/or natural resources, provided that:
The organization is acceptable to the Planning Commission and is
a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual existence;
(1)
The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper reverter
or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling
or unable to continue carrying out its functions;
(2)
A maintenance agreement acceptable to the homeowners'
association is entered into by the developer and the organization;
and
(3)
Open space that is within property governed by any homeowners'
association, condominium association, planned unit development
association or other similar entity shall be open to the public.
(4)
O.
Any person or entity responsible for the maintenance or management
of open space shall assure that the open space will be protected in
perpetuity from all forms of development, except as shown on an
approved development plan, and that it will never be changed to
another use and shall:
Prescribe all allowable and unallowable uses and activities within
such open space;
(1)
Provide detailed standards and schedules for maintenance of the
open space, including vegetative management; and
(2)
Allow for maintenance by the Town of open space in the event
that maintenance specified under a homeowner's agreement is not
(3)
P.
§ 98-23 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-23
94A:243
§ 98-24. Access to stormwater management ponds. [Added 6-4-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-4]
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall require that all site plans
provide fencing with a gate not less than eight feet wide for access around
all stormwater management ponds, which fence and gate shall be not less
than four feet in height and constructed of durable materials other than
wood.
complied with as provided for under Town Code § 85-4, Dwellings,
commercial and industrial structures, yards and lots to be kept
clean; fees, and § 85-27, Violations and penalties.
§ 98-23 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-24
94A:244
ARTICLE VII
Improvements
§ 98-25. Conformity required.
All improvements in a subdivision shall conform with Mount Airy's Standard
Specifications and Details for Construction and with these standards and
specifications, and other requirements which may be adopted by the Town
or Frederick and Carroll Counties, or by such other governmental agencies
which may have jurisdiction over each facility, as stipulated below. Nothing,
however, shall be construed as prohibiting a subdivider from installing
improvements of a higher type than the minimum required herein.
§ 98-26. Minimum requirements.
General.
(1) All subdivisions will provide curb and gutter and sidewalks.
The developer will provide all storm drains necessary to give
adequate drainage within the subdivision.
(2)
All water and sewer lines in the development will be installed by
the developer to the Town's specifications. All taps shall be made
by the Town, and the regular tap fees currently in force shall
be imposed. All water meters will be provided by the Town and
installation cost is to be paid by the developer.
(3)
All engineering services necessary for the installation of streets,
curb and gutter and of water and sewer will be provided by the
developer with the approval of the Town.
(4)
A.
Streets.
All new streets shall be graded and drained, base material applied,
curb and gutter constructed, surface treatment applied, utilities
installed, all in accordance with the standards of design and
construction adopted by the Town or as may hereafter be adopted.
(1)
Existing roads and streets within a proposed subdivision that do
not meet these specifications as to width or construction shall be
brought up to standards.
(2)
B.
Water facilities. Every subdivision shall be provided with a community
water supply and distribution system including a connection for each
lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants. The source of supply shall
be the municipal water system.
C.
Sewer facilities. Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete
sanitary sewer system connected to the municipal system. When
connected to the municipal system, it shall be constructed to meet the
standards and requirements of such system and shall become a part
thereof.
D.
§ 98-25 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-26
94A:245
Drainage. Every subdivision shall be provided with storm drains,
culverts, drainageways, or other works adequate to collect and dispose
of all water originating on or flowing across the property, without
inundating or damaging roads, lots, or other properties. The
construction of these facilities shall be in conformity with the standards
and specifications adopted or as may hereafter be adopted by Town
or county. The appropriate County Engineer shall review the plans of
those facilities which may be within the Engineer's jurisdiction and
give a recommendation to the Town Council. Every subdivision shall
include a stormwater management plan or application for waiver of
stormwater management in accordance with the requirements of the
Mount Airy Stormwater Management Ordinance, No. 84-136,25 and as
amended and in accordance with the requirement that all site plans
provide fencing with a gate not less than eight feet wide for access
around all stormwater management ponds, which fence and gate shall
be not less than four feet in height and constructed of durable materials
other than wood. [Amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-4]
E.
Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but
shall be redistributed to its former depth, and in all cases, good soil
conservation practices shall be used to prevent soil erosion and siltation
during and after subdivision development.
F.
Street signs. A street name sign of a Town-approved design shall be
furnished and erected at the developer's expense at each new street or
road intersection.
G.
Monuments and pipes. Permanent monuments shall be placed, as
required for markers in the Code of Maryland, Real Property Article,
Title 3, Subtitle 1, § 3-108, 1981 Replacement Volume, as amended.
After the grading is completed, the subdivider must see that
monuments are at proper locations. Iron pipes shall be set along the
property line of all streets and roads at points of intersection, curvature
or tangency, and at such points along the subdivision boundaries not
already marked by monuments.
H.
Streetlighting. All streetlighting shall be installed by the developer in
accordance with design and plans approved by the Town and utility
company.
I.
Sediment and erosion control. The sediment and erosion control plan
and procedures shall be as required under the Mount Airy Grading
Sediment Control Ordinance No. 1989-15.26
J.
Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
Landscape Manual of the Town of Mount Airy.27
K.
25.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 84-136 was repealed 10-7-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-11. See Ch.
94, Stormwater Management.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 47, Building Construction, § 47-10, Grading and sediment control.
27.Editor's Note: The Landscape Manual is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 98-26 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-27
94A:246
§ 98-27. Improvement plans.
Plans for public improvements shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer for review by the appropriate public authorities prior
to plat approval. The improvement plan drawing size shall be no larger
than 30 inches by 42 inches and shall contain approval signature blocks
for the Mayor and Town Council; Soil Conservation District; owner; design
engineer; Town Engineer; and other agencies (State Highway, Health)
where appropriate. Such plans shall be sufficient to show the proposed
location, sizes, type, grades and design features of each facility, including
the following:
§ 98-28. Inspection and acceptance.
Profiles: profile of each street center line, with grades (including
projections beyond the subdivision boundaries where significant), and
showing water and sewer lines, manholes, culverts, streams, etc., with
a scale of one inch to 50 feet horizontal, one inch to five feet vertical.
A.
Cross sections: typical street cross sections for all streets, at a scale not
smaller than one inch to five feet, showing width of curbs, sidewalks,
trees, utilities, etc. Where considerable cuts or fills are required,
special cross sections shall be shown on the plan. A grading plan
showing existing and proposed contours may be furnished in lieu of
special cross sections.
B.
Sanitary and storm drains: location plans and profiles for proposed
sanitary and storm sewers or drains, with grades and pipe sizes
indicated.
C.
Water system: location plan of proposed water distribution system
showing pipe sizes and locations for valves and fire hydrants.
D.
All construction work on improvements required herein shall be subject
to inspection during and upon completion of construction by an
authorized engineering representative of the Town. The costs of such
inspection shall be borne by the developer and be part of the public
works agreement. Approval and acceptance may be made by such
representative on behalf of the Town, if found to be in accordance with
the approved plan.
A.
If the final inspection is not made within 60 days after improvements
are completed and a written request for inspection has been submitted
by the developer, the said improvements will be deemed approved and
the Town Council shall accept them by duly executed deed.
B.
§ 98-27 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-28
94A:247

ARTICLE VIII
Site Plan Approval Process
[Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-5]
§ 98-29. Site plan required. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-12]
When the Zoning Administrator determines that a site plan is required
in accordance with the requirements of the Town of Mount Airy Zoning
Ordinance, the site plan shall be prepared in conformance with the
requirements set forth herein, and shall be reviewed and approved
according to the procedures outlined herein.
§ 98-29 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-29
94A:249
§ 98-30. Procedures for site plan review and approval.
§ 98-29 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-30
94A:250
Presubmittal conference. A presubmittal conference is required with
the Town Planner prior to application to ensure general compliance
with planning and zoning regulations and procedures.
A.
Compliance with Forest Conservation Ordinance.28 Prior to the concept
plan submittal, the applicant must have prepared and received approval
for the forest stand delineation, or have an approved letter of
exemption.
B.
Concept plan submission. After the presubmittal conference, a concept
plan shall be submitted to the Town Planner, who shall thereupon
review the concept plan for completeness. The applicant will be sent a
letter acknowledging acceptance of the submittal, or, if incomplete, the
submittal will be returned with the reasons for its return. The plans will
be transmitted by the Town Planning Department to review agencies for
comments, Routine agency review normally includes the agencies listed
on the concept plan transmittal form. Other agencies may be involved
based on the scope and location of the project, including the Maryland
Department of the Environment and the Army Corps of Engineers.
Review comments will be compiled by the Town Planning Department
and forwarded to the applicant within 30 days of acceptance of the
submittal. If revised plans are submitted, the revision block must be
updated, and any plan changes must be identified by a cloud on the
concept plan.
C.
Water and sewer allocation application. If the project proposes
allocation of Town water and/or sewer capacity, at the time of the
submission of the proposed concept site plan, the owner and/or
developer of the proposed project shall also submit to the Town's
Planning Department an application for water and/or sewer allocation
on a form to be provided and updated from time to time by the Town
and made available at Town Hall for allocation of water and/or sewer
capacity to the project pursuant to Chapter 109, § 109-19.1 et seq.
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
D.
The Town Planning Commission shall determine at the concept plan
review stage the availability of water and sewer capacity to the
allocation category from which capacity is sought, the proposal's
consistency with the Town's Water and Sewer Master Plan and
otherwise shall review the water and/or sewer allocation application
in accordance with Chapter 109, § 109-19.1 et seq. [Amended
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
E.
Concept plan and water and sewer allocation application review and
approval. Upon receipt of comments from the agencies and submission
of any revised proposed concept plan as set forth in Subsection B
above, the Town Planning Commission shall schedule the concept plan
for review and approval for a regularly scheduled meeting or for a
special meeting, if applicable. At the meeting, the Planning Commission
F.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Forest Conservation.
§ 98-30 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-30
94A:251
shall undertake review of the concept plan, shall undertake an
Adequate Public Facilities Ordinance review pursuant to Chapter 25,
§ 25-4 et seq., and shall review the water and/or sewer allocation
application in accordance with Chapter 109, § 109-19.1 et seq. In
advance of the meeting at which the Planning Commission is to
undertake concept plan review, the Town of Mount Airy Planning
Department shall prepare a staff report to the Mount Airy Planning
Commission and shall make a recommendation on whether to approve,
conditionally approve, disapprove, continue action or take other action
on the concept plan and water and sewer allocation application. The
staff report may also recommend continued review to the next
scheduled Planning Commission meeting. If water and/or sewer
capacity is available, the extension of water and sewer capacity is
consistent with the Town's Water and Sewer Master Plan and otherwise
the standards for extension of water and/or sewer allocation pursuant
to Chapter 109, § 109-19.1 et seq., are established for only a portion of
the concept site plan, the Town shall notify the applicant of the option
to revise the plan to phase the project. If the applicant chooses to
revise the concept site plan so as to phase the project, the applicant
must also revise the water and sewer allocation application and concept
site plan submission accordingly. The date of the application for water
and/or sewer allocation shall remain the original date of application
for the first phase only, and shall be the date of submission of a
phased concept plan and water and/or sewer allocation application
for the remaining phases. No concept plan may be approved without
an adequate public facilities approval pursuant to § 25-4 et seq. and
a determination that water and sewer capacity is available for the
concept plan and that extension of water and/or sewer capacity is
feasible and consistent with the Town's Water and Sewer Master Plan,
though a concept plan may be approved pending water and sewer
capacity availability pursuant to § 25-7A(1) for the sole purpose of
the development project's placement on the waiting list established in
§ 109-19.5I of the Town Code (hereinafter throughout this chapter, "the
waiting list"). The Planning Commission by a majority vote may take
one or more of the following actions: [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-12]
Approve the concept plan. If water and/or sewer capacity is
available for the project from the allocation category for which
allocation is sought when the concept plan is approved, such
allocation shall be reserved and set aside for the project or
applicable phase thereof pending and conditioned upon final site
plan approval and water and/or sewer allocation permit issuance.
The applicant may proceed to final site plan submittal.
If water and/or sewer capacity is not available for the project,
or any phase thereof, from the allocation category for which
allocation is sought when the concept plan is considered, the
concept plan may be "approved pending water and/or sewer
capacity availability," in which case the applicant may proceed
(a)
(1)
§ 98-30 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-30
94A:252
to final site plan submittal and may be placed on the waiting
list.
Conditionally approve the site plan. All conditions of the approval
must be met prior to final approval. Revisions that address minor
conditions may be reviewed and approved by staff. Major revisions
may be required to be resubmitted to the Planning Commission.
The time required for this process varies depending on the nature
of the conditions.
(2)
Disapprove the concept plan, in which case the applicant may
revise the plan to address the reasons for disapproval, and reapply,
beginning at Subsection C above.
(3)
Continue action on the concept plan, in which case the applicant
may be required to submit additional information for continued
discussion at the next meeting.
(4)
Take any other action that is lawful and which the Planning
Commission determines to be in the best interests of the Town.
(5)
Final site plan submittal. A final site plan application must be submitted
to the Town within six months of receiving concept plan approval from
the Planning Commission. Failure to timely submit a proposed final
site plan shall result in withdrawal of the adequate public facilities
certification and water and/or sewer allocation capacity to the project
and/or withdrawal of the project from the waiting list and shall require
that the project restart at the concept plan stage of development plan
submission. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
Information to accompany submittal. The final site plan submittal
must include all information listed on the final site plan application,
required review fee computation sheets29 and review fees, and the
appropriate number of copies of plans and supporting data with a
transmittal attached to each. The final site plan submittal should be
filed with the Town of Mount Airy, Planning Department, P.O. Box
50, 110 S. Main Street, Mount Airy, Maryland 21771.
(1)
Forms. Copies of the final site plan application, water and/or sewer
allocation application, review fee computation sheets, and site plan
transmittal are available at the Mount Airy Town Hall and the
Carroll County Bureau of Development Review. These forms must
be filled out completely or submittals will be returned.
(2)
Final site plan. Refer to the Site Plan Requirements Checklist30 for
required site plan format and information to be included on the
plans. Plans must be drawn by a licensed engineer, surveyor, or
(3)
G.
29.Editor's Note: See Appendix B, Site Plan Application, and Appendix C, Site Plan Review
Fee Computation Sheets, included as an attachment to this chapter.
30.Editor's Note: See Appendix A, Site Plan Requirements Checklist, included as attachments
to this chapter.
§ 98-30 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-30
94A:253
architect and properly sealed. The site plan must conform to all
applicable ordinances, including the Town of Mount Airy Zoning
Ordinance,31 Subdivision Regulations and Landscape Ordinance,
and certain Carroll County ordinances that the Town has adopted.
All projects are subject to the Town ordinances and regulations.
It is the applicant's responsibility to check with Carroll County
to confirm applicability of any of the Carroll County ordinances;
however, a rough guideline for applicability is provided below:
Carroll County Grading and Sediment Control Ordinance No.
100. All site plans that involve over 5,000 square feet of
grading, or that involve over 90 cubic yards of dirt are subject
to the requirements of the Grading and Sediment Control
Ordinance.
(a)
Carroll County Stormwater Management Ordinance No. 22-C.
All commercial site plan submissions that disturb over 5,000
square feet of land area shall include, with the site plan
submittal, stormwater management plans or an application
for a waiver. If stormwater management is required, a
maintenance schedule and certification blocks shall be
included on the site plan.
(b)
Carroll County Forest Conservation Ordinance No. 106. All
commercial site plan submissions that result in the cumulative
disturbance of 25,000 square feet of any property are subject
to the requirements of the Forest Conservation Ordinance
(unless exempted by the provisions of Section 2B of the
ordinance.) All projects subject to the Forest Conservation
Ordinance shall include with the site plan submittal an
approved forest stand delineation or approved letter of
exemption, and a forest conservation plan.
(c)
Plan review and distribution. The final site plan submittal will be
reviewed for completeness. The applicant will be sent a letter
acknowledging acceptance of the submittal, or, if incomplete, the
submittal will be returned. The plans will be transmitted by the Town
Planning Department to review agencies for comments. Routine agency
review normally includes the agencies listed on the site plan transmittal
form. Other agencies may be involved based on the scope and location
of the project, including the Maryland Department of the Environment
and the Army Corps of Engineers. Review comments will be compiled
by the Town Planning Department and forwarded to the applicant
within 30 days of acceptance of the submittal. If revised plans are
submitted, the revision block must be updated, and any plan changes
must be identified by a cloud on the plan.
H.
Water and sewer allocation permit. Water and/or sewer allocation
permits shall only be issued if a final site plan has been approved and
I.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Zoning.
§ 98-30 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-30
94A:254
subject to the requirements of Chapter 109, § 109.1 et seq. [Amended
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
The Town Planning Commission shall determine at the final site plan
review stage whether the final site plan proposal, or any phase thereof,
increases the demand for water and/or sewer allocation from that
proposed in the approved concept plan. If the Planning Commission
determines that the final site plan proposal, or a phase thereof, does
not increase the demand for water and/or sewer allocation, the final
site plan review and approval process shall proceed. If it is determined
that the final plan proposal increases the demand for water and/or
sewer allocation from that proposed in the approved concept plan, the
owner and/or developer may resubmit a final plan in accordance with
the approved concept plan or may submit an amendment to the concept
plan for consideration as to the additional allocation requested, which
shall be reviewed in accordance with the concept plan process outlined
above. The application date for the additional allocation requested shall
be the date of submission of an amended concept plan. [Amended
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
J.
Review and approval of final site plan. All review agencies must
approve or conditionally approve the site plan at least 15 days prior to
the scheduled Planning Commission meeting. The Town of Mount Airy
Planning Department will then prepare a staff report to the Mount Airy
Planning Commission and shall make a recommendation on whether to
approve, conditionally approve, disapprove, or continue action on the
site plan. The staff report may also recommend continued review to the
next scheduled Planning Commission meeting. The unconditional final
site plan approval from the Planning Commission must be achieved
within 12 months of the final site plan application or within six months
of an offer by the Town to extend water and sewer allocation which
would remove the project, or a phase thereof, from the waiting list,
whichever shall be later. Failure to timely obtain approval of a final
site plan shall result in withdrawal of the adequate public facilities
certification and water and/or sewer allocation capacity to the project
and/or withdrawal of the project from the waiting list and shall require
that the project restart at the concept plan stage of development plan
submission. The Planning Commission will vote on the final site plan
and water and sewer allocation permit with one of the following
actions: [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
If the final site plan is approved and a water and sewer permit is
issued, the applicant may proceed to Subsection L.
(1)
If the final site plan is conditionally approved, all conditions of
the approval must be met prior to final approval. Revisions that
address minor conditions may be reviewed and approved by staff.
Major revisions may be required to be resubmitted to the Planning
Commission. The time required for this process varies depending
on the nature of the conditions. However, the unconditional final
site plan approval must occur within 12 months of the original
(2)
K.
§ 98-30 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-30
94A:255
application submittal or within six months of an offer by the Town
to extend water and sewer allocation which would remove the
project, or a phase thereof, from the waiting list, whichever shall
be later.
If the final site plan is disapproved, the water and sewer allocation
shall continue to be reserved for the application pending approval
of the final site plan. The applicant may revise the plan to address
the reasons for disapproval, and reapply, beginning at Subsection
H. However, unconditional final site plan approval by the staff
(minor) or Planning Commission (major) must occur within 12
months of original application submittal or within six months of
an offer by the Town to extend water and sewer allocation which
would remove the project or any phase thereof from the waiting
list, whichever shall be later.
(3)
If a water and sewer allocation permit cannot be issued solely
because the Town lacks available water and/or sewer capacity for
the allocation category from which the project seeks an allocation,
but the final site plan may otherwise be approved, the final site plan
shall be "approved pending water and sewer capacity availability,"
and the project shall remain in line on the waiting list for water
and sewer allocations subject to the terms contained therein until
such time as water and sewer allocation becomes available to the
project from the allocation category from which the project seeks
an allocation. A project that has been approved pending water and
sewer capacity availability pursuant to this subsection and is on the
waiting list shall come before the Planning Commission, upon the
Town's offer of water and/or sewer allocation, at which time the
Planning Commission shall review issuance of an adequate public
facilities certification and water and/or sewer allocation permit
issuance for the project or any phase thereof, as applicable.
(4)
If continued action, the applicant may be required to submit
additional information for continued discussion at the next
meeting.
(5)
Application for building permits. Building permits must be applied for
within 24 months of receiving a water and sewer allocation permit.
Building permits may be applied for after the Town of Mount Airy has
issued a letter of acceptance for the final site plan submittal. Building
permits are issued at Town Hall. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-12]
L.
Establishment of security and/or public works agreement. If the site
plan describes any of the following improvements, the applicant may
be required to provide security to the Town to guarantee completion of
that work: stormwater management, sediment control, improvements
within the public right-of-way, landscaping, reforestation or
afforestation. If security is required, the applicant must submit a cost
M.
§ 98-30 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-30
94A:256
estimate for said work to be approved by the Town and applicable
county agencies.
Landscaping only. If landscaping is the only work requiring
security, the applicant may provide a check or cash for 110% of the
approved estimate.
(1)
Improvements other than landscaping.
If other improvements are involved, the applicant may be
required to enter into a public works agreement with the Town,
and provide security for 110% of the total estimate for said
improvements.
(a)
Approval by Town Council. The public works agreement will be
prepared by the Town's attorney, and any costs associated with
the preparation or recordation of the PWA will be charged to
the applicant. The public works agreement must be approved
by the Town Council at a regular Council meeting. The Town
Council meets the first Monday of each month at the Town
Hall at 8:00 p.m. To be considered for approval at a Council
meeting, the applicant must submit the cost estimate for said
work no less than 15 days prior to the Council meeting.
(b)
(2)
Final approval, signatures and distribution of site plan. Once the final
site plan has been revised to meet all conditions of approval, and the
PWA, if required, has been established, the Town will request that
the applicant submit two Mylar copies and one print set of the final
site plans for signature by approving agencies and the printing fee
to cover the cost of copy and distribution of approved plans. (Do not
submit original plans.) The Mylar copies must be signed, sealed and
dated by the engineer or surveyor, originally. The owner must also sign
and date the certification, originally. The Town will have the final site
plans signed by the Planning Commission Chairman, and will then have
the Mylars picked up by the Carroll County Bureau of Development
Review Plan's expeditor to be circulated to all applicable state and
county agencies for signature approval. When all signatures have been
obtained, one of the Mylar sets will be kept by the Carroll County
Bureau of Development Review, one will be kept by the Town of Mount
Airy, and one will be returned to the engineer or surveyor. Carroll
County will make prints for distribution to agencies listed in Appendix
K.32
N.
Application and issuance of grading permits. After the Carroll County
Bureau of Stormwater Management and Sediment Control has received
a copy of the approved site plan, the applicant may apply to that office
for a grading permit. (From the date of submission of Mylars to the
Town for final signature and approval, it may be approximately two
weeks until this Bureau receives a copy of the approved site plan.)
O.
32.Editor's Note: Appendix K is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 98-30 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-30
94A:257
After the Town receives a copy of the approved site plan, the Town may
issue the building permit. Building permits and grading permits must
be issued within 24 months of receiving final site plan approval from the
Planning Commission. An owner and/or developer of a project may, at
his/her/its own risk and without vesting rights to further construction,
apply for and obtain a grading permit for the project, and may, at
his/her/its own risk and without vesting rights to further construction,
grade the site in accordance therewith if the project has a received
final site plan approval conditioned on receipt of water and/or sewer
allocation, thereby being placed onto the waiting list, if the owner and/
or developer agrees to execute a public works agreement that waives
any claim that grading the project vests rights in the owner and/or
developer to continue with development of the project. No owner or
developer of a project shall, pursuant to this subsection, install footers,
foundations or otherwise construct the project beyond grading the
site without the issuance of a water and sewer allocation permit and
building permits. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
§ 98-30 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-30
94A:258
ARTICLE IX
Subdivision Plan Approval Process
§ 98-31. Subdivision plan required. [Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-5; 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
Whenever a subdivision is proposed that consists of six or more lots, or
involves the construction of new streets or extension of existing streets,
the developer is required to submit plans for approval by the Mount Airy
Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions and procedures set
forth in this article. Subdivision plan approval involves the submittal and
approval of four plans: the concept plan, the preliminary subdivision plan,
the improvement plan, and the final plat. Additional information may be
required depending on the scope of the proposed subdivision.
§ 98-31 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-32
94A:259
§ 98-32. Sale of lots and houses.
No lot shall be sold and no zoning certificate shall be issued until a final plat
of such subdivision shall have been approved and recorded in accordance
with these regulations and provisions of the State Code.
§ 98-33. Concept plan review and approval. [Amended 10-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-5; 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
The concept plan review is intended to generate a consensus between the
applicant and the Town regarding the appropriate design of the subdivision.
The concept plan does not require fully detailed information, but should
include some basic information regarding environmental features, a rough
street and lot layout, and should be specific enough to allow for an adequate
public facilities review and review of any water and/or sewer allocation
application submitted with the concept plan and other items as listed in
the concept plan requirements list.33 The concept plan is not required to
address the specifics of all applicable ordinances; however, the applicant
should be familiar with basic regulatory requirements so that the concept
plan can be developed into a preliminary subdivision plan without major
design changes. The following procedures must be followed in order to
receive concept plan approval.
Presubmittal conference. A presubmittal conference is required with
the Town Planner prior to application to ensure general compliance
with planning and zoning regulations and procedures.
A.
Submit forest stand delineation. The forest stand delineation (FSD)
must be submitted and approved prior to submission of a concept plan.
The FSD must conform to requirements of the Carroll County Forest
Conservation Ordinance No. 106, which has been adopted by the Town
of Mount Airy.34
B.
Submit concept plan After the FSD is approved, the applicant must
submit a concept plan for review by the Town Planning Commission.
The concept plan must be submitted 30 days prior to the Planning
Commission hearing at which the plan will be reviewed. This submittal
must include all information listed on the Concept Plan Requirements
Checklist,35 including a completed Subdivision plan application,
required review fee computation sheets36 and review fees, and the
appropriate number of copies of plans and supporting data with a
transmittal attached to each. The concept plan submittal should be filed
with the Town of Mount Airy Planning Department, 110 S. Main Street,
P.O. Box 50, Mount Airy, Maryland 21771.
C.
33.Editor's Note: See Appendix D, Concept Plan Requirements Checklist, included as an
attachment to this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Forest Conservation.
35.Editor's Note: See Appendix D, Concept Plan Requirements Checklist, included as an
attachment to this chapter.
36.Editor's Note: See Appendix B, Site Plan Application, and Appendix C, Site Plan Review
Fee Computation Sheets, included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 98-32 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-33
94A:260
Water and sewer allocation application. If the project proposes
allocation of Town water and/or sewer capacity, at the time of the
submission of the concept plan and other information required by this
section, the owner and/or developer of the proposed project shall also
submit to the Town's Planning Department an application for water and
sewer allocations on a form to be provided and updated from time to
time by the Town and made available at Town Hall for allocation of
water and/or sewer capacity to the project pursuant to Chapter 109,
§ 109-19.1 et seq.
D.
Forms. Copies of the concept plan application, review fee computation
sheets, subdivision plan review transmittal, and Concept Plan
Requirements Checklist are available at the Mount Airy Town Hall and
the Carroll County Bureau of Development Review. These forms must
be filled out completely or submittals will be returned with the reasons
for their return.
E.
The Town Planning Commission shall determine at the concept plan
review stage the availability of water and sewer capacity, the proposal's
consistency with the Town's Water and Sewer Master Plan and
otherwise shall review the water and/or sewer allocation permit
application in accordance with Chapter 109, § 109-19.1 et seq.
F.
Staff review. Town planning staff will review the concept plan(s) and
send copies to appropriate agencies for review and comment.
Approximately three working days prior to the scheduled Planning
Commission meeting, staff will prepare a report to the Planning
Commission, including comments from other agencies, for its review
prior to the meeting.
G.
Planning Commission meeting. At the meeting, staff will review the
report. The applicant may then make a presentation, and comments
from the public will be heard. The staff report will include a
recommendation regarding approval of the plan and the water and
sewer allocation proposal, if applicable. The Planning Commission may
comment on any issue, such as to the general layout of streets, blocks,
lots and parcels, and any other item of relevance to appropriate design
and development of the property. No concept plan may be approved
without an adequate public facilities approval pursuant to § 25-4 et
seq., a determination that water and sewer capacity is available for
the concept plan and that extension of water and/or sewer capacity
is consistent with the Town's Water and Sewer Master Plan, though
a concept plan may be approved pending water and sewer capacity
availability pursuant to § 25-7A(1) for the sole purpose of the
development project's placement on the waiting list. The Planning
Commission, by a majority vote, may take one or more of the following
actions:
Approve the concept plan. If water and/or sewer capacity is
available for the project from the allocation category for which
allocation is sought when the concept plan is approved, such
(1)
H.
§ 98-33 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-33
94A:261
§ 98-34. Preliminary subdivision plan review and approval.
[Amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-5; 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-12]
Once the Planning Commission has recommended a concept plan, a
preliminary subdivision plan may be submitted for review. The preliminary
subdivision plan may consist of several plan sheets that describe accurately
and in detail planned lot dimensions and improvements to be constructed.
The preliminary subdivision plan must be consistent with the recommended
concept plan. If significant changes are made to the recommended concept
plan, regardless of whether the changes resulted from decisions of the
applicant or were necessitated by review agency comments, a revised
concept plan must be resubmitted for Planning Commission review and
recommendation. The Zoning Administrator will determine what changes
are deemed significant.
allocation shall be reserved and set aside for the project pending
and conditioned upon final plan approval and water and/or sewer
allocation permit issuance. The applicant may proceed to
preliminary plan submittal.
If water and/or sewer capacity is not available for the project
from the allocation category for which allocation is sought
when the concept plan is considered, the concept plan may be
"approved pending water and/or sewer capacity availability,"
in which case the applicant may proceed to preliminary plan
submittal and may be placed on the waiting list.
(a)
Conditionally approve the concept plan. All conditions of the
approval must be met prior to final approval. Revisions that
address minor conditions may be reviewed and approved by staff.
Major revisions may be required to be resubmitted to the Planning
Commission. The time required for this process varies depending
on the nature of the conditions.
(2)
Disapprove the concept plan, in which case the applicant may
revise the plan to address the reasons for disapproval, and reapply,
beginning at Subsection C above.
(3)
Continue action on the concept plan, in which case the applicant
may be required to submit additional information for continued
discussion at the next meeting.
(4)
Take any other action that is lawful and which the Planning
Commission determines to be in the best interests of the Town.
(5)
Required information. This submittal must include all information listed
on the preliminary subdivision plan application. The plan must conform
to all applicable ordinances, including the Town of Mount Airy Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations and Landscape Ordinance. The
following Carroll County ordinances have also been adopted by the
A.
§ 98-33 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-34
94A:262
Town of Mount Airy and must be complied with. It is the applicant's
responsibility to consult with these county offices regarding
requirements of the following ordinances:
(1) Carroll County Grading and Sediment Control Ordinance No. 100.
(2) Carroll County Stormwater Management Ordinance No. 22-C.
(3) Carroll County Forest Conservation Ordinance No. 106.
The Town Planning Commission shall determine at the preliminary plan
stage whether the preliminary plan proposal increases the demand
for water and/or sewer allocation from that proposed in the approved
or conditionally approved concept plan. If the Planning Commission
determines that the preliminary plan proposal does not increase the
demand for water and/or sewer allocation, the preliminary plan review
and approval process shall proceed. If it is determined that the
preliminary plan proposal increases the demand for water and/or sewer
allocation from that proposed in the approved concept plan, the owner
and/or developer may resubmit a preliminary plan in accordance with
the approved concept plan or may submit an amendment to the concept
plan for consideration as to the additional allocation requested, which
shall be reviewed in accordance with the concept plan process outlined
above. The application date for the additional allocation requested shall
be the date of submission of an amended concept plan.
B.
Plan distribution. The preliminary subdivision plan will be reviewed for
completeness. Once the Town Planning Commission has verified water
allocations are available for the full proposed subdivision, the applicant
will be sent a letter acknowledging acceptance of the submittal, or,
if incomplete, the submittal will be returned. The plans will be
transmitted by the Town Planning Department to review agencies for
comments. Routine agency review includes the agencies listed on the
subdivision transmittal form. Other agencies may be involved based
on the scope and location of the project, including the Maryland
Department of the Environment and the Army Corps of Engineers.
C.
Applicant addresses agency comments and revises plan(s). Review
comments will be compiled by the Town Planning Department and
a staff report will be forwarded to the applicant within 30 days of
acceptance of the submittal. Outstanding agency comments will be
forwarded to the applicant upon receipt by the Town. The applicant
must address the comments, and submit revised plans if required.
If revised plans are submitted, the revision block must be updated,
and any plan changes must be so noted on the plan. After each
resubmission, the Town Planning Department will have 30 days to
compile comments and forward a staff report to the applicant.
Preliminary plan approval must be received from all reviewing agencies
at least 15 days prior to the Planning Commission hearing at which
preliminary plan review is sought.
D.
§ 98-34 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-34
94A:263
The preliminary subdivision plan approval from the Planning
Commission must be received within 12 months of preliminary
subdivision plan application. Town staff will compile any outstanding
comments received from reviewing agencies and prepare a staff report
with a recommendation. The Planning Commission will review the plans
and staff report, take comment from the applicant, and hear public
comment. The Planning Commission will vote on the preliminary
subdivision plan and the water and sewer allocation permit with one of
the following actions:
If the preliminary subdivision plan is approved, the applicant may
proceed to the final subdivision plan process.
(1)
If the preliminary subdivision plan is conditionally approved, all
conditions of the approval must be met prior to final approval.
Revisions that address minor conditions may be reviewed and
approved by staff. Major revisions may be required to be
resubmitted to the Planning Commission. The time required for this
process varies depending on the nature of the conditions. However,
preliminary subdivision plan approval must occur within 12 months
of original application submittal.
(2)
If preliminary subdivision plan is disapproved, the water and sewer
allocation shall continue to be reserved for the application pending
approval of the preliminary subdivision plan. The applicant may
revise the preliminary subdivision plan to address the reasons for
disapproval and reapply.
(3)
If a water and sewer allocation permit cannot be issued solely
because the Town lacks available water and/or sewer capacity for
the allocation category from which the project seeks an allocation,
but the preliminary plan may otherwise be approved, the
preliminary plan shall be "approved pending water and sewer
capacity availability," and the project shall remain in line on the
waiting list for water and sewer allocations subject to the terms
contained therein until such time as water and sewer allocation
becomes available to the project from the allocation category from
which the project seeks an allocation.
(4)
If continued action, the applicant may be required to submit
additional information for continued discussion at the next
meeting.
(5)
E.
Submission of final approved plan. When approved, the subdivider must
submit the original and one Mylar copy of the preliminary plans for
signature by the Planning Commission Chairman. The Mylar copy will
be kept by the Town. The original will be returned to the subdivider,
who must submit blueprint copies to the Town for distribution to
agencies listed in the Approved Plan Distribution List, Appendix K.37
F.
37.Editor's Note: Appendix K is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 98-34 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-34
94A:264
§ 98-35. Final plans review and approval. [Amended 11-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-12]
After the Planning Commission Chairman has signed the preliminary
subdivision plan, the subdivider shall prepare final plans, which shall
consist of both the final plats and improvements plans. These plans must
include all information listed on the Final Subdivision Plans Requirements
Checklist,38 and shall be filed simultaneously with the Town of Mount Airy
for review and approval. Any deviations from the approved preliminary
subdivision plan that were not previously approved by the Planning
Commission must be resubmitted for its approval. The Town Staff shall
determine at the final subdivision plan stage whether the final plan
proposal, or any phase thereof, increases the demand for water and/or
sewer allocation from that proposed in the approved or conditionally
approved preliminary plan. If the Town Staff determines that the final
plan proposal, or any phase thereof, does not increase the demand for
water and/or sewer allocation, the final plan review and approval process
shall proceed. If it is determined that the final plan proposal increases
the demand for water and/or sewer allocation from that proposed in the
approved concept plan, the owner and/or developer may resubmit a final
plan in accordance with the approved concept plan or may submit an
amendment to the concept plan for consideration as to the additional
allocation requested, which shall be reviewed in accordance with the
concept plan process outlined above. The application date for the additional
allocation requested shall be the date of submission of an amended concept
plan.
Expiration of approval. Preliminary subdivision plans shall remain valid
so long as there occurs final plat approval within one year of
preliminary subdivision plan approval, and recording of at least 40 lots
per year or 10% of the total lots shown on the approved preliminary
subdivision plan per year. If this does not occur, the preliminary plan
approval shall become void unless an extension of the approval is
requested by the applicant and granted by the Planning Commission
for delays attributable to Town or county agencies. If a project is
on the waiting list, then the number of lots per year that must be
recorded pursuant to this subsection set forth above shall occur within
the time frames set forth above or within six months of water and sewer
allocation permit issuance, whichever shall be later.
G.
Improvement plans. Improvement plans shall be prepared in
accordance with Article VII of these regulations. All improvements shall
be designed in compliance with the standards, plans and specifications
set forth in Mount Airy's Standard Specifications and Details for
Construction.
A.
Final plats. The final plat shall conform in all respects to the
requirements of the Maryland Code, Real Property Article, Title 3,
B.
38.Editor's Note: See Appendix F, Final Plat Requirements Checklist, included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 98-34 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-35
94A:265
§ 98-36. Establishment of security and/or public works agreement.
After the improvement plans have been approved and signed, and the
subdivider has received written notice that the final plats are approved, he
will be required to provide security to the Town to guarantee completion
Subtitle 1, § 3-108, 1981 Replacement Volume, as amended, which
relates to the making, filing, and recording of plats. If desired by the
subdivider, the final plat submitted may constitute only that portion
of the approved preliminary subdivision plan which is proposed to
be recorded and developed at that time; provided, however, that the
approved preliminary subdivision plan specified that the development
would be constructed in phases and that each phase was dearly
identified in order of construction on the plan.
Other plans or documents required. Any other final plans or documents
associated with the project and subject to Town approval shall also
be submitted at this time. This may include items such as homeowner
association documents, restrictive covenants to be established, forest
conservation easement agreements, and other items required of the
subdivision.
C.
Plan distribution and review. Town staff will forward copies of these
plans to Town and county agencies for review and comment. Review
comments will be compiled by the Town Planning Department, and
a staff report will be forwarded to the applicant within 30 days of
acceptance of the submittal. Outstanding agency comments will be
forwarded to the applicant upon receipt by the Town. The applicant
must address the comments, and submit revised plans if required.
If revised plans are submitted, the revision block must be updated,
and any plan changes must be so noted on the plan. After each
resubmission, the Town Planning Department will have 30 days to
compile comments and forward a staff report to the applicant.
D.
Approval of improvement plans. Once all agencies have issued an
approval, the original and one Mylar set of the improvement plans
must be submitted for signature by the Town Engineer and Mayor.
Once signed, the Town will then have the Mylars picked up by the
Carroll County Bureau of Development Review Plans expediter and
taken to the Carroll Soil Conservation District for signature approval.
When required signatures have been obtained, Carroll County will
make prints from the original set for distribution to the review agencies
listed on the Approved Plan Distribution List, and will bill the owner for
the cost of copies. The Mylar set will be returned to the Town of Mount
Airy and the original will be returned to the engineer or surveyor.
E.
Approval of final plats. Once all agencies have issued an approval, the
Town will notify the subdivider of such approval. Plats may not be
submitted for final signature by the Planning Commission Chairman
until after the public works agreement has been recorded and any other
required documents have been approved and recorded.
F.
§ 98-35 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-36
94A:266
of the following work in accordance with the approved plans: stormwater
management, sediment control, street paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
landscaping, reforestation or afforestation and any other work deemed as a
required public improvement.
Submit cost estimate. The applicant must submit a cost estimate from
the contractor to do said work, based on the approved improvement
plans. This estimate shall be approved by the Town and applicable
county agencies.
A.
Prepare and approve PWA. If approved by the Town and applicable
agencies, this estimate will be forwarded to the Town Attorney with
other pertinent information by Town staff, and the Town Attorney will
prepare a public works agreement (PWA). Any costs associated with the
preparation or recordation of the PWA will be charged to the applicant.
The PWA must be approved by the Town Council at a regular Council
meeting. The Town Council meets the first Monday of each month at
the Town Hall at 8:00 p.m. To be considered for approval at a Council
meeting, the applicant must submit the cost estimate for said work no
less than 15 days prior to the Council meeting.
B.
Guarantee of improvements. The Mayor and Town Council may approve
one of the following methods of guarantee of the improvement: funds
placed in escrow with an escrow agent satisfactory to the Town Council,
or an irrevocable letter of credit or similar agreement from a financial
institution or a recognized lender satisfactory to the Town Council. The
amount of security held shall be equal to the approved cost estimate
plus the sum of 10%, provided that the developer causes to be
incorporated in each contract for the construction of improvements
required hereunder, the standard contract clause, and furnishes fully
executed copies of said contracts to the Town prior to issuance of any
building permits and prior to commencement of any work called for
by the improvement plans. If the subdivider fails to incorporate the
standard contract clause in all of said agreements, then to the contract
price there shall be added the sum of 50%. Periodic reductions may be
permitted in the amount of surety held to pay invoices for public works
improvements which have been satisfactorily completed. Any request
for a reduction in the amount of the guarantee is to be submitted to
the Town at least 15 days prior to the Town Council meeting at which
approval of the reduction is to be considered. The request for reduction
must first be reviewed by the Town Engineer or other designated Town
representative and is subject to final approval by the Council.
C.
PWA required by other agencies. If any improvements identified on the
plans involve work to property under the jurisdiction of another agency
such as the County or State Highway Administration, the subdivider
is responsible for meeting requirements of that agency, and final plat
recordation will not be permitted by the Town until that agency notifies
the Town that its requirements have been satisfied by the subdivider.
D.
§ 98-36 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-37
94A:267
§ 98-37. Recordation of final plat.
After the PWA has been approved, the applicant may submit the final plat
for approval, signature and recordation. Follow the process listed below for
the county the project is located within:
§ 98-38. Application for grading permit. [Amended 11-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-12]
After the Carroll County Bureau of Stormwater Management and Sediment
Control has received a copy of the approved improvements plans and
recorded final plats, the applicant may apply to that office for a grading
permit. From the date of submission of Mylars to the Town for final plat
approval and recordation, it may be approximately two weeks until this
Carroll County. Submit three diazo-Mylar copies, three photo-cronoflex
Mylar copies, and one print copy of the final plat for approval
signatures and recordation, and the printing fee to cover the cost of
plan copies for distribution. (Do not submit original plans.) The Mylar
copies must be signed, sealed and dated by the engineer or surveyor,
originally. The owner must also sign and date the certification, and have
this notarized. The Town will have the final plat copies signed by the
Planning Commission Chairman. The Town will then have the copies
picked up by the Carroll County Bureau of Development Review Plans
expediter and taken to the County Health Department for signature
approval, and then have the plats recorded with the Clerk of the Court.
Once recorded, one diazo-Mylar copy will be kept by the Carroll County
Bureau of Development Review, and one will be sent back to the Town
of Mount Airy. (Two of the photo-cronoflex Mylars will stay at the
Clerk of the Courts office; one photo-cronoflex, one diazo-Mylar and one
blueprint will be given the Tax Assessment Office.) Carroll County will
make prints for distribution to the agencies listed in Appendix K,39 and
will bill the owner for the cost of copies.
A.
Frederick County. Submit the original plats, one photo-Mylar copy, and
three diazo-Mylar copies for approval. The applicant must also include
a check to cover recording costs at the county. The Town will have
the plats signed by the Planning Commission. The Town will then take
the signed plats and the check to the Frederick County Department
of Planning, who will transmit the plats to the Health Department for
signature. The Planning Department will then have the plats recorded.
Once recorded, the Planning Department will notify the Town to pick
up the original and one diazo-Mylar copy of the recorded plats. The
Town will return the original to the engineer/surveyor, and will retain
the diazo-Mylar copy for Town records. The engineer/surveyor will
be required to make prints for distribution to the agencies listed in
Appendix J,40 and submit these copies with a transmittal attached to
each to the Town for distribution.
B.
39.Editor's Note: Appendix K is included at the end of this chapter.
40.Editor's Note: Appendix J is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 98-37 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-38
94A:268
Bureau receives a copy of the approved plan. An owner and/or developer of
a project may, at his/her/its own risk and without vesting rights to further
construction, apply for and obtain a grading permit for the project, and may,
at his/her/its own risk and without vesting rights to further construction,
grade the site in accordance therewith if the project has a received final
site plan approval conditioned on receipt of water and/or sewer allocation,
thereby being placed onto the waiting list, if the owner and/or developer
agrees to execute a public works agreement that waives any claim that
grading the project vests rights in the owner and/or developer to continue
with development of the project. No owner or developer of a project shall,
pursuant to this subsection, install footers, foundations or otherwise
construct the project beyond grading the site without the issuance of a
water and sewer allocation permit and building permits.
§ 98-39. Public release. [Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-22]
Upon completion, satisfactory to the Town Council, of the work
required by the improvement plans, the Town Council shall accept,
by duly executed deed, the land dedicated to public use and the
improvements thereon.
A.
Final acceptance of public improvements shall not occur until one year
following the final construction inspection unless:
(1) The improvement passes final construction inspection;
The Town obtains a performance guarantee for a minimum of one
year after final acceptance; and
(2)
The Town retains, for at least one year after final acceptance, at
least 10% of the total amount of the original security guarantee
as a performance guarantee until expiration of the performance
guarantee period.
(3)
B.
In all cases, the Town shall retain at least 10% of the total amount of the
original security guarantee as a performance guarantee for completed
improvements until final acceptance and release of the performance
guarantee by the Town. Final acceptance and release of the
performance guarantee is to be reviewed first by the Town Engineer or
other designated Town representative and is subject to final approval
by the Council.
C.
§ 98-38 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-39
94A:269

ARTICLE X
Minor Subdivision Plan Approval Process
§ 98-40. Minor subdivision plan approval required. [Amended
10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-5; 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
Whenever a subdivision is proposed that consists of five or fewer lots and
does not involve the construction of new streets or extension of existing
streets, nor involves the construction of any other improvements to be
dedicated to or maintained by the Town, the developer is required to submit
plans for approval by the Mount Airy Planning Commission in accordance
with the provisions and procedures set forth in this article. Minor
subdivision plan approval involves the submittal and approval of two plan
sets, the concept plan and the final plat, for approval by the Mount Airy
Planning Commission. Additional information may be required depending
on the scope of the proposed subdivision.
§ 98-40 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-41
94A:271
§ 98-41. Concept plan review and approval. [Amended 10-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-5; 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
The concept plan review is intended to generate a consensus between the
applicant and the Town regarding the appropriate design of the subdivision.
The concept plan does not require fully detailed information, but should
include some basic information regarding environmental features and a
rough street and lot layout, and should be specific enough to allow for
an adequate public facilities review and review of any water and/or sewer
allocation application submitted with the concept plan and other items as
listed in the Concept Plan Requirements List.41 The concept plan is not
required to address the specifics of all applicable ordinances; however, the
applicant should be familiar with basic regulatory requirements so that
the concept plan can be developed into a final plat without major design
changes. The following procedures must be adhered to, in the following
order, to receive concept plan approval.
Presubmittal conference. A presubmittal conference is required with
the Town Planner prior to application to ensure general compliance
with planning and zoning regulations and procedures.
A.
Submit forest stand delineation. The forest stand delineation (FSD)
must be submitted and approved prior to submission of a concept plan.
The FSD must conform to requirements of the Carroll County Forest
Conservation Ordinance, No. 106, which has been adopted by the Town
of Mount Airy.42 If the project is exempted from the requirements of
the Forest Conservation Ordinance, the Town Planner must receive an
approved letter of exemption prior to submission of a concept plan.
B.
Submit concept plan. After the FSD is approved, the applicant must
submit a concept plan for review by the Town Planning Commission.
The concept plan must be submitted 30 days prior to the Planning
Commission hearing at which the plan will be reviewed. This submittal
must include all information listed on the Concept Plan Requirements
Checklist,43 including a completed subdivision plan application,
required review fee computation sheets and review fees, and the
appropriate number of copies of plans and supporting data with a
transmittal attached to each. The concept plan submittal should be filed
with the Town of Mount Airy Planning Department, 110 S. Main Street,
P.O. Box 50, Mount Airy; Maryland 21771.
C.
Water and sewer allocation application. If the project proposes
allocation of Town water and/or sewer capacity, at the time of the
submission of the concept plan and other information required by this
section, the owner and/or developer of the proposed project shall also
submit to the Town's Planning Department an application for water and
D.
41.Editor's Note: See Appendix D, Concept Plans Requirements Checklist, included as an
attachment to this chapter.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Forest Conservation.
43.Editor's Note: See Appendix D, Concept Plans Requirements Checklist, included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 98-41 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-41
94A:272
sewer allocation on a form to be provided and updated from time to
time by the Town and made available at Town Hall for allocation of
water and/or sewer capacity to the project pursuant to Chapter 109,
§ 109-19.1 et seq.
Forms. Copies of the subdivision plan application, water and/or sewer
allocation application, review fee computation sheets, plan review
transmittal, and Concept Plan Requirements Checklist are available
at the Mount Airy Town Hall and the Carroll County Bureau of
Development Review. These forms must be filled out completely or
submittals will be returned with the reasons for their return.
E.
The Town Planning Commission shall determine at the concept plan
review stage the availability of water and sewer capacity, the proposal's
consistency with the Town's Water and Sewer Master Plan and
otherwise shall review the water and/or sewer allocation permit
application in accordance with Chapter 109, § 109-19.1 et seq.
F.
Staff review. Town planning staff will review the concept plan(s) and
send copies to appropriate agencies for review and comment.
Approximately three working days prior to the scheduled Planning
Commission meeting, staff will prepare a report to the Planning
Commission, including comments from other agencies, for its review
prior to the meeting.
G.
Planning Commission meeting. At the meeting, staff will review the
report. The applicant may then make a presentation, and comments
from the public will be heard. The staff report will include a
recommendation regarding approval of the plan and water and sewer
allocation proposal, if applicable. The Planning Commission may
comment on any issue, such as to the general layout of streets, blocks,
lots and parcels, and any other item of relevance to appropriate design
and development of the property. No concept plan may be approved
without an adequate public facilities approval pursuant to § 25-4 et
seq. and a determination that water and sewer capacity is available
for the concept plan and that extension of water and/or sewer capacity
is consistent with the Town's Water and Sewer Master Plan, though
a concept plan may be approved pending water and sewer capacity
availability pursuant to § 25-7A(1) for the sole purpose of the
development project's placement on the waiting list. The Planning
Commission, by a majority vote, may take one or more of the following
actions:
Approve the concept plan. If water and/or sewer capacity is
available for the project from the allocation category for which
allocation is to be made when the concept plan is approved, such
allocation shall be reserved and set aside for the project pending
and conditioned upon final plan approval and water and/or sewer
allocation permit issuance. The applicant may proceed to final plan
submittal.
(1)
H.
§ 98-41 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-41
94A:273
§ 98-42. Final plat review and approval. [Amended 10-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-5; 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
After the Planning Commission has recommended a concept plan layout,
the subdivider shall prepare the final plat(s). These plans must include all
information listed on the Final Plat Requirements Checklist,44 and shall be
filed simultaneously with the Town of Mount Airy for review and approval.
If the final plat is not consistent with the layout, the applicant will be
required to resubmit a revised concept plan to the Planning Commission
for recommendation. The Town Staff shall determine at the final plan stage
whether the final plan proposal increases the demand for water and/or
sewer allocation from that proposed in the approved or conditionally
approved concept plan. If the Town staff determines that the final plan
proposal does not increase the demand for water and/or sewer allocation,
the final plan review and approval process shall proceed. If it is determined
that the final plan proposal increases the demand for water and/or sewer
allocation from that proposed in the approved concept plan, the owner and/
or developer may resubmit a final plan in accordance with the approved
concept plan or may submit an amendment to the concept plan for
consideration as to the additional allocation requested, which shall be
reviewed in accordance with the concept plan process outlined above. The
application date for the additional allocation requested shall be the date of
submission of an amended concept plan.
If water and/or sewer capacity is not available for the project
from the allocation category for which allocation is to be made
when the concept plan is considered, the concept plan may be
"approved pending water and/or sewer capacity availability," in
which case the applicant may proceed to final plan submittal
and may be placed on the waiting list.
(a)
Conditionally approve the concept plan. All conditions of the
approval must be met prior to final approval. Revisions that
address minor conditions may be reviewed and approved by staff.
Major revisions may be required to be resubmitted to the Planning
Commission. The time required for this process varies depending
on the nature of the conditions.
(2)
Disapprove the concept plan, in which case the applicant may
revise the plan to address the reasons for disapproval and reapply,
beginning at Subsection C above.
(3)
Continue action on the concept plan, in which case the applicant
may be required to submit additional information for continued
discussion at the next meeting.
(4)
Take any other action that is lawful and which the Planning
Commission determines to be in the best interests of the Town.
(5)
44.Editor's Note: See Appendix F, Final Plat Requirements Checklist, included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 98-41 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-42
94A:274
§ 98-43. Recordation of final plat.
After the final plat has been approved by the Planning Commission, the
applicant may submit the final plat for signatures and recordation. Follow
the process listed below for the county the project is located within:
Final plats. The final plat shall conform in all respects to the
requirements of the Maryland Code, Real Property Article, Title 3,
Subtitle 1, § 3-108, 1981 Replacement Volume, as amended, which
relates to the making, filing, and recording of plats.
A.
Other plans or documents required. Any other final plans or documents
associated with the project and subject to Town approval shall also
be submitted at this time. This may include items such as homeowner
association documents, restrictive covenants to be established, forest
conservation easement agreements, and other items required of the
subdivision.
B.
Plan distribution and review. The final plat submittal will be reviewed
for completeness. Once the Town Planning Commission has reviewed
the plan and verified its completeness, the applicant will be sent a
letter acknowledging acceptance of the submittal, or, if incomplete, the
submittal will be returned. If accepted, the Town Planning Department
will forward copies of these plans to Town and county agencies for
review and comment.
C.
The applicant addresses agency comments and revises plat(s). Review
comments will be compiled by the Town Planning Department and
a staff report will be forwarded to the applicant within 30 days of
acceptance of the submittal. Outstanding agency comments will be
forwarded to the applicant upon receipt by the Town. The applicant
must address the comments, and submit revised plans if required.
If revised plans are submitted, the revision block must be updated,
and any plan changes must be so noted on the plan. After each
resubmission, the Town Planning Department will have 30 days to
compile comments and forward a staff report to the applicant. Approval
or conditional approval must be received from all reviewing agencies at
least 15 days prior to the Planning Commission hearing at which final
plat approval is sought.
D.
Carroll County. Submit three diazo-Mylar copies, three photo-cronoflex
Mylar copies, and one print copy of the final plat for approval
signatures and recordation, and the printing fee to cover the cost of
plan copies for distribution. (Do not submit original plans.) The Mylar
copies must be signed, sealed and dated by the engineer or surveyor,
originally. The owner must also sign and date the certification, and have
this notarized. The Town will have the final plat copies signed by the
Planning Commission Chairman. The Town will then have the copies
picked up by the Carroll County Bureau of Development Review Plans
expediter and taken to the County Health Department for signature
approval, and then have the plats recorded with the Clerk of the Court.
A.
§ 98-42 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-43
94A:275
§ 98-44. Application for building permits.
After the Town of Mount Airy has received a copy of the recorded final plats,
the applicant may apply to that office for building permits.
§ 98-44.1. Public works agreements and grading permits. [Added
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
The provisions of §§ 98-36, 98-38 and 98-39 shall apply likewise to minor
subdivision plans.
Once recorded, one diazo-Mylar copy will be kept by the Carroll County
Bureau of Development Review, and one will be sent back to the Town
of Mount Airy. (Two of the photo-cronoflex Mylars will stay at the
Clerk of the Courts office; one photo-cronoflex, one diazo-Mylar and one
blueprint will be given the Tax Assessment Office.) Carroll County will
make prints for distribution to the agencies listed in Appendix K,45 and
will bill the owner for the cost of copies.
Frederick County. Submit the original plats, one photo-Mylar copy, and
three diazo-Mylar copies for approval. The applicant must also include
a check to cover recording costs at the county. The Town will have
the plats signed by the Planning Commission. The Town will then take
the signed plats and the check to the Frederick County Department
of Planning, who will transmit the plats to the Health Department for
signature. The Planning Department will then have the plats recorded.
Once recorded, the Planning Department will notify the Town to pick
up the original and one diazo-Mylar copy of the recorded plats. The
Town will return the original to the engineer/surveyor, and will retain
the diazo-Mylar copy for Town records. The engineer/surveyor will
be required to make prints for distribution to the agencies listed in
Appendix J,46 and submit these copies with a transmittal attached to
each to the Town for distribution.
B.
45.Editor's Note: Appendix K is included as an attachment to this chapter.
46.Editor's Note: Appendix J is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 98-43 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-44.1
94A:276
ARTICLE XI
Amended Plat Approval Process
§ 98-45. Amended plat required.
Whenever the owner of a lot or parcel wishes to add land to the existing
parcel, delete land from an existing lot or parcel, consolidate several lots or
parcels into one, or otherwise modify an existing recorded plat, the owner
shall be required to submit an amended plat for review and approval by the
Mount Airy Planning Commission.
§ 98-45 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-46
94A:277
§ 98-46. Review and approval.
The owner shall have a licensed surveyor or engineer prepare the amended
plat. These plans must include all information listed on the Final Plat
Requirements Checklist.47
Presubmittal conference. A presubmittal conference is required with
the Town Planner prior to application to ensure general compliance
with planning and zoning regulations and procedures.
A.
Required information. The amended plat shall conform in all respects
to the requirements of the Maryland Code, Real Property Article, Title
3, Subtitle 1, § 3-108, 1981 Replacement Volume, as amended, which
relates to the making, filing, and recording of plats. The submittal must
include all information listed on the final plat application.
B.
Other plans or documents required. Any other final plans or documents
associated with the project and subject to Town approval shall also
be submitted at this time. This may include items such as homeowner
association documents, restrictive covenants to be established, forest
conservation easement agreements, and other items required of the
subdivision.
C.
Plan distribution and review. The amended plat will be reviewed for
completeness. The applicant will be sent a letter acknowledging
acceptance of the submittal, or, if incomplete, the submittal will be
returned. If accepted, the Town Planning Department will forward
copies of these plans to Town and county agencies for review and
comment.
D.
Applicant addresses agency comments and revises plat(s). Review
comments will be compiled by the Town Planning Department and
a staff report will be forwarded to the applicant within 30 days of
acceptance of the submittal. Outstanding agency comments will be
forwarded to the applicant upon receipt by the Town. The applicant
must address the comments, and submit revised plans if required.
If revised plans are submitted, the revision block must be updated,
and any plan changes must be so noted on the plan. After each
resubmission, the Town Planning Department will have 30 days to
compile comments and forward a staff report to the applicant. Approval
or conditional approval must be received from all reviewing agencies
at least 15 days prior to the Planning Commission hearing at which
amended plat approval is sought.
E.
Planning Commission meeting. Town staff will compile any outstanding
comments received from reviewing agencies, and prepare a staff report
with a recommendation. The Planning Commission will review the plans
and staff report, take comment from the applicant, and hear public
comment. The Planning Commission may vote to approve, conditionally
F.
47.Editor's Note: See Appendix F, Final Plat Requirements Checklist, included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 98-46 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-46
94A:278
§ 98-47. Recordation of plat.
After the Planning Commission has approved the amended plat, or
conditions of approval have been met, the applicant may submit the
amended plat for approval, signature and recordation. Follow the process
listed below for the county the project is located within:
approve, continue review to the next meeting, or disapprove the
amended plat.
Carroll County. Submit three diazo-Mylar copies, three photo-cronoflex
Mylar copies and one print copy of the final plat for approval signatures
and recordation, and the printing fee to cover the cost of plan copies
and distribution. (Do not submit original plans.) The Mylar copies must
be signed, sealed and dated by the engineer or surveyor, originally. The
owner must also sign and date the certification, and have this notarized.
The Town will have the final plat copies signed by the Planning
Commission Chairman. The Town will then have the copies picked up
by the Carroll County Bureau of Development Review Plans expediter
and taken to the County Health Department for signature approval,
and then have the plats recorded with the Clerk of the Court. Once
recorded, one diazo-Mylar copy will be kept by the Carroll County
Bureau of Development Review, and one will be sent back to the Town
of Mount Airy. (Two of the photo-cronoflex Mylars will stay at the
Clerk of the Courts office; one photo-cronoflex, one diazo-Mylar and one
blueprint will be given the Tax Assessment Office.) Carroll County will
make prints for distribution to the agencies listed in Appendix J,48 and
will bill the owner for the cost of copies.
A.
Frederick County. Submit the original plats, one photo-Mylar copy, and
three diazo-Mylar copies for approval. The applicant must also include
a check to cover recording costs at the county. The Town will have
the plats signed by the Planning Commission. The Town will then take
the signed plats and the check to the Frederick County Department
of Planning, who will transmit the plats to the Health Department for
signature. The Planning Department will then have the plats recorded.
Once recorded, the Planning Department will notify the Town to pick
up the original and one diazo-Mylar copy of the recorded plats. The
Town will return the original to the engineer/surveyor, and will retain
the diazo-Mylar copy for Town records. The engineer/surveyor will
be required to make prints for distribution to the agencies listed in
Appendix J,49 and submit these copies with a transmittal attached to
each to the Town for distribution.
B.
48.Editor's Note: Appendix J is included at the end of this chapter.
49.Editor's Note: Appendix J is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 98-46 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-47
94A:279

ARTICLE XII
Modifications and Exceptions
§ 98-48. Variations for self-contained developments.
The general principles and standards of subdivision development stipulated
in Articles VII and VIII may be varied by the Town Planning Commission
in case of a subdivision large enough to constitute a more-or-less selfcontained
neighborhood to be developed in accordance with the Town
Comprehensive Master Plan, safeguarded by appropriate restrictions,
which in the judgment of the Planning Commission make adequate
provisions for all essential conditions; provided, however, that no
modifications shall be granted which would conflict with the intent of the
Town or County Master Plan, or with the intent and purpose of these
regulations and the Town or appropriate County Zoning Ordinance, and
provided that the Town or counties shall not be obligated to accept any
improvements constructed under the permission granted through this
section.
§ 98-49. Hardships.
Where the Planning Commission finds that unusual hardships may result
from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations
so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured.
§ 98-50. Exemptions to platting regulations.
Recording of a subdivision plat under this chapter shall not be required in
the following cases, subject to Planning Commission approval:
Court action. Partition of lands by will or through action of a court
of competent jurisdiction unless or until development of the lands is
proposed.
A.
Public taking. Where a property has been changed in size or shape
by reason of the taking of a part of such property for public use by
reference to a properly drawn and recorded plat, such as a right-of-way
plat, provided that the outlines and dimensions of such remainder may
be clearly determined by reference to the previously recorded plats.
B.
Utility rights-of-way. A bona fide division of a tract of land in order
that one or more of the resulting parcels may be used as part of an
electric transmission line right-of-way or other public utility right-ofway,
provided that if a parcel resulting from such division is ever to be
used as a building site for other than an electric transmission line or
other public utility right-of-way, then before a building permit may be
issued for such other use, a plat must be filed and recorded.
C.
Commercial shopping center. Parcels of land located within a shopping
center, owned by persons or parties other than the developer of the
shopping center, provided that the perimeter property lines of the
D.
§ 98-48 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-50
94A:281
entire shopping center are platted and the owner/developer of the
shopping center provides assurances that all improvements, including
parking, are located within the perimeter lot lines and are available for
use by the parcel being created.
§ 98-50 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-50
94A:282
ARTICLE XIII
Fees
§ 98-51. Plan fees established.
The following plan fees shall be paid by the subdivider at the time of
submission to the Planning Commission:
Type of Plan Fee
Residential (acres)
5 or fewer $500.00
6 to 49 $1,000.00
50 or more $1,500.00
Commercial/industrial $1,500.00
§ 98-52. Filing fees.
The filing fee will include review by the Town's employees and consultants.
At the conclusion of the review process, the Town will review the charges
incurred and if less than the fee imposed, will refund the difference, or if
greater, the subdivider shall pay the additional amount. Fifteen percent will
be added to actual charges to cover administrative overhead.
§ 98-53. Review costs.
In addition to the filing fee, the subdivider, prior to plat approval, shall
pay to the Town all costs associated with review by the Town Engineer
of the subdivision plat and required improvement plans for engineering
details for conformance to the Town's regulations.
A.
The rates for charges for review by the Town's employees, consultants
and Town Engineer shall be established from time to time by resolution
of the Town Council. Charges will be billed monthly if in excess of the
fee imposed as set forth above. If any charges are not paid within 60
days of billing the Town will withhold further review and may issue a
stop work order for the project.
B.
§ 98-51 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-53
94A:283

ARTICLE XIV
Amendments
§ 98-54. Amendment permitted.
The procedures, standards and specifications contained in these
regulations, when deemed necessary, may from time to time be amended,
changed, supplemented or modified.
§ 98-55. Public hearing.
The Town Council, upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning
Commission concerning the adoption of any amendments or changes, shall
hold a public hearing, giving 15 days' notice of said hearing in a newspaper
of general circulation.
§ 98-56. Approval, disapproval or modification of proposed changes.
The Town Council, after considering the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, other agencies and interested parties, shall approve,
disapprove, or modify the proposed changes and amendments. Such
decision shall be binding upon the Planning Commission and all parties
affected by the regulations.
§ 98-54 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-56
94A:285

ARTICLE XV
Appeals
§ 98-57. Procedures.
Any party adversely affected by a decision of the Planning Commission may
appeal to the Circuit Court of Frederick or Carroll Counties in accordance
with the Maryland Rules.
§ 98-57 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-57
94A:287

ARTICLE XVI
Homeowners' Associations
§ 98-58. Associations required in certain instances; purpose.
Homeowners' associations are required by the Town in any new residential
development where common area is to be dedicated and/or maintained by
an association. The Town's interests in the association involve assurance
that the common areas are properly transferred to the association by the
developer, that the homeowners are involved in the operation of the
association at an early phase of development, that the common areas are
constructed according to the approved plans, and that all common areas
will be properly maintained in perpetuity.
§ 98-59. Requirements.
Common areas to be indicated on preliminary plan: All common areas
to be dedicated to a homeowners' association shall be clearly indicated
on the preliminary plan.
A.
Homeowners' association documents. Homeowners' association
documents, including the articles of incorporation, bylaws, and
declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, and a metes and
bounds description of the common area to be conveyed, must be
submitted for review and approval with the initial submittal of the final
plat to the Town. The documents will be reviewed by the Town Attorney
and Town Planner, and given final approval in writing by the Town
Attorney. The HOA documents must provide for the following:
Declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions: Include the
following:
"Section (X), Rights of the Town of Mount Airy: The Declarant
hereby grants to the Town of Mount Airy, a municipal corporation,
the right at its discretion to audit the financial records of the
Association not more often than annually, the cost of the audit to
be an expense of the Association, and upon recommendation to the
Town of Mount Airy of any certified public accountant engaged by
it for such purpose, to levy special assessments sufficient for the
purpose of insuring the maintenance of common areas."
(1)
Articles of incorporation and bylaws: Provide that homeowners will
be given representation on the Board of Directors as follows:
(2)
B.
§ 98-58 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-59
94A:289
"At the next annual meeting after 25% of the units have been sold
by the developer, the Class A membership shall be entitled to elect
such number of directors as will equal not less than 20% of the
entire Board as then provided for; at the next annual meeting after
50% of the units have been sold by the developer, the Class A
members shall be entitled to elect such number of members as will
equal not less than 40% of the membership of the Board as then
constituted, and at the next annual meeting, to occur after 75% of
the units have been sold by the developer or within 7 1/2 years of
the incorporation of the Association, the Class A members shall be
entitled to elect all members of the directors of the Board as then
constituted."
Submittal of final plats. The final plats shall clearly indicate what
property will be owned and/or maintained by the association. The
homeowners' association documents and the deed transferring the
common area to the association shall be recorded prior to or
simultaneously with the final plats. Include in the general notes on the
final plats:
(a) "The area shown as Parcel(s) _____, containing _____ acres is to
be conveyed to the (name of Homeowners' Association) by deed
intended to be recorded simultaneously herewith." and
(b) "The 'Articles of Incorporation,' 'Bylaws' and 'Declaration of
Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions' of the (name of
Homeowners' Association) are intended to be recorded
simultaneously herewith." or
(c) "The 'Articles of Incorporation,' 'Bylaws' and 'Declaration of
Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions' of the (name of
Homeowners' Association) were recorded on (date.)"
C.
Recordation of documents and final plats. If the HOA documents are
recorded prior to submittal of the final plats to the Town for signatures
and recordation, copies of the recorded documents and the recordation
receipts shall be provided to the Town with the submittal of the final
plats for signatures.
D.
§ 98-59 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-59
94A:290
ARTICLE XVII
Special Development Regulations
§ 98-60. Townhouse developments.
Purpose and scope. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide
minimum standards for townhouse developments to ensure the
necessary amenities normally associated with such developments; to
provide for design requirements that will promote appropriate and
acceptable layout and grouping of such units to create a quality
environment to live in; to provide minimum standards for the ownership
and maintenance of common areas; to ensure adequate public
improvements such as streets, walks, etc., are provided, to prevent
detrimental effects on the use and development of adjoining properties;
and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
development and neighborhood. The provisions of this section shall
apply to all townhouse developments regardless of zoning district in
which located, except that this section shall not apply to properties
approved as mixed-use developments within the CC District (MXU-CC).
[Amended 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
A.
Density. The overall density shall not exceed the maximum density
permitted within the zoning district in which the development is
located.
B.
Lot size, width and yards. The minimum lot size, lot width and yard
areas shall be as required by the zoning district in which the
development is located, except when adjacent to collector or higher
classification streets as designated on the Town Master Plan, the yard
area abutting the street shall be at least 35 feet.
C.
Street frontage. All townhouse lots shall front on a public street
constructed to Town standards.
D.
Access drives to off-street parking. All access drives to off-street
parking may be private but shall be constructed to minimum Town
standards for local access streets. The total length of the private access
drive and off-street parking area shall not exceed 300 feet.
E.
Off-street parking areas. Off-street parking shall not be located between
the front of the townhouse building and the public street. No parking
area shall be more than 100 feet from the townhouse lot it is to serve.
Parking area pavement shall be constructed according to the standards
for Town streets.
F.
Buffers. Where a townhouse development abuts a single-family
residential or commercial or industrial development, a minimum buffer
yard of at least 50 feet in width shall be provided.
G.
Maintenance of common land and facilities. Any proposed common
areas, property or facilities shall be conveyed to an incorporated
H.
§ 98-60 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-60
94A:291
§ 98-61. Mixed-use Development within CC District (MXU-CC).
[Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
nonprofit homeowners' association in accordance with provisions of the
Subdivision Regulations.
Other site improvements. The townhouse development shall provide
for other necessary on-site improvements, such as lighting, sidewalks,
firelanes, signing, landscaping, dumpsters and recreation facilities, as
necessary to meet the needs of the development. The Planning
Commission must approve the location and extent of all on-site
improvements.
I.
Variations. The Planning Commission, upon written application, shall
have the power to modify the requirements of Subsections C through
G upon finding of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and that
such modification will not substantially impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property or be detrimental to the public safety
and welfare.
J.
Purpose and scope. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide
supplemental requirements for the approval of development plans for
properties zoned in the CC District in order to implement the mixed-use
development as set forth in §§ 112-39C(12) and 112-62F(29).
A.
Pattern book. As part of the site plan phase of the development approval
process, the applicant shall provide the Commission with a Pattern
Book that will address the site planning, architectural, and signage
requirements for the proposed development. Once approved by the
Commission, the Pattern Book shall govern development of the MXUCC.
The applicant will follow the Design Guideline provisions adopted
by the Town of Mount Airy. The Pattern Book shall be prepared by a
licensed professional landscape architect, architect, or engineer. The
Pattern Book shall include, at a minimum, the following sections:
An introduction that shall contain:
(a) Description of the overall development.
(b) Market analysis for the proposed uses.
Relationship between the proposed development and the
existing Town.
(c)
(1)
Site planning components:
(a) Relationship of uses within the development.
Focal points of the development and how they have been
maximized.
(b)
Vehicular and pedestrian connectivity within the development
and to the Town, to include walking and cycling paths.
(c)
(2)
B.
§ 98-60 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-61
94A:292
Proposed recreational areas within and adjacent to residential
areas, including proposed improvements to recreational areas
to serve the intended residential population.
(d)
(e) Building and parking setbacks.
(f) Parking ratios per use shall be in accordance with § 112-7.
(g) Proposed service and loading spaces.
(h) Pedestrian-oriented scale and design.
(i) Any area utilized for outdoor storage, as defined in § 112-71.
(j) The locations for outdoor displays.
(k) Drive-through service location and layout.
Setback requirements from public streets, other structures
within the development, the property boundaries and with
respect to property lines that abut less intensive zoning
districts, buffers.
(l)
Architectural design:
(a) Architectural style and overall design principles.
(b) Graphic examples of selected style.
(c) Design details and materials.
(3)
Landscape architectural design:
(a) Public spaces.
(b) Hardscape and softscape design details and materials.
(c) Streetscape design.
(d) Site furnishing details and products.
Landscape screening (perimeter buffers, parking lots, service
and loading areas.)
(e)
(f) Lighting details and materials.
(4)
Signage plan. All sign regulations under Town Code § 112-11 shall
apply unless expressly waived by the Planning Commission or are
otherwise expressly waived or made inapplicable by the provisions
of this Code that apply to MXU-CC.
(5)
Management and maintenance program:
(a) For privately owned property.
(b) For common areas.
(6)
§ 98-61 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-61
94A:293
Phasing of the development:
The anticipated timeframe when various milestones of the
development are anticipated to be developed. Consideration
as to balancing the development of various uses to maximize
the fiscal benefit to the development and the Town should
be given. In addition, consideration as to the availability of
planned community amenities should be balanced with the
development of retail services.
(a)
The relative mix of uses and the development milestones and
phasing of permits for each stage of development shall be
determined to be reasonable in the discretion of the Planning
Commission.
(b)
(7)
The Pattern Book shall be evaluated based on the purpose and
objectives of the MXU-CC as outlined in § 112-39.1A and B.
C.
Approval process. A MXU-CC shall follow the two-step approval process
of concept plan and final site plan in accordance with Article VIII of this
chapter. In addition, the Planning Commission may require a charrette
or special work session to facilitate collaboration on the conceptual
design and layout.
An applicant shall submit all concept and final plans to the Planning
Commission for consideration, in order for the Commission to have
sufficient information to determine the practicality and suitability
of the proposed development.
(1)
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing when
considering the final plan (including the Pattern Book). The
following notice shall be given:
At least 30 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town.
(a)
Property upon which a mixed-use development is proposed
shall be posted conspicuously by a notice at least 24 inches by
36 inches in size, for at least 30 consecutive days before the
date of the hearing.
(b)
Notice of the hearing shall be sent by first-class mail to that
person making application to the Commission no less than 30
days prior to the first scheduled hearing.
(c)
At least 30 days prior to the first scheduled hearing, notice of
the hearing shall be sent by first-class mail to those persons
identified by the applicant as persons owning property
contiguous to the property which is the subject of the
proceeding. Notice shall be sufficient if given to the person
(d)
(2)
D.
§ 98-61 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-61
94A:294
shown as the owner on the tax rolls and sent to the address
where tax bills are sent.
The Commission may approve or disapprove the concept plan
(including the Pattern Book) after a public hearing.
(3)
Should the Planning Commission determine that additional
assistance to review an application is required, the Town may hire
licensed professionals (such as a landscape architect, architect,
and/or engineer) to assist in the review of the application. The cost
of any outside professionals shall be paid for by the applicant. The
Town shall make every effort to minimize all costs associated with
any outside professional assistance.
(4)
Amendments to concept plans must be approved by the Planning
Commission in the following instances:
(a) A change in use is involved;
Increases in the height of building structures by 10 feet or
more;
(b)
Changes in the orientation or location of buildings or parking
areas;
(c)
Any decrease in the number of off-street parking spaces
required by code or as agreed upon by the Planning
Commission;
(d)
An increase of nonresidential building floor area by more than
10% or by more than 5,000 square feet; and
(e)
An increase in the number of residential dwelling units by
more than 10% or more than five units.
(f)
(5)
Any application for amendment of concept plans and final site
plans that must be approved by the Planning Commission must be
submitted in accordance with Appendix A to this chapter.50
(6)
Elements of a concept plan not materially affected by a proposed
amendment may move forward in the development process while
the amendment is processed and considered by the Planning
Commission.
(7)
Drive-through services. Drive-through services permitted pursuant to
§ 112-39.1C(1)(c), (f), (h) and (k) shall be subject to the following
development standards unless the Planning Commission grants a
variation pursuant to § 98-49:
Drive-through lanes and service windows shall be located only in
the back or sides of buildings.
(1)
E.
50.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 98-61 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-61
94A:295
Drive-through lanes shall not be located along the street
frontage(s) of a building.
(2)
(3) A maximum of two lanes shall be permitted.
Drive-through services must be designed so as to not interfere with
the circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the adjoining
streets, sidewalks, or drive aisles.
(4)
Drive-through speakers shall not be audible from adjacent
residential uses or residentially zoned properties.
(5)
Drive-through canopies and other structures, where present, shall
be constructed from the same material as the primary building and
with a similar level of architectural quality and detailing.
(6)
Outdoor storage areas. Inventory shall be delineated on the final site
plan and shall be screened from view of public and private right(s)-ofway
and adjacent property. Landscaping, or screening, will be required
along the perimeter of the outdoor storage area in a manner acceptable
to the Planning Commission. Only those outdoor storage areas
approved on the approved final site plan or concept plan shall be
permitted.
F.
Seasonal displays. Seasonal sidewalk displays shall be conducted in
a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or with any other business establishment or
residences.
G.
§ 98-61 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 98-61
94A:296
Chapter 101
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 91. Water — See Ch. 109.
§ 98-61 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 98-61
94A:297

ARTICLE I
Manufactured Products Exemption
[Adopted 1-18-1965 by Ord. No. 91]
§ 101-1. Exemption from valuation and assessment.
Pursuant to the authority contained in Article VI of the Charter of the
Town of Mount Airy, as revised in 1951, only for the purposes of taxation
by the Town of Mount Airy beginning July 1, 1965, and thereafter, the
stock in business, raw materials on hand and manufactured products in
the hands of the manufacturer, of every person, firm or corporation in
any manufacturing or commercial business shall be entirely exempt from
valuation and assessment.
§ 101-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 101-1
94A:299

ARTICLE II
Admissions and Amusement
[Adopted 8-2-1976 by resolution]
§ 101-2. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby levied a tax at the rate of 10% of the gross receipts of
every person, firm or corporation derived from the amounts charged in the
Town of Mount Airy for admission to any place, whether said admission be
by single ticket, season ticket or subscription, including a cover charge for
seats or tables at any roof garden, cabaret or other similar place where
there is furnished a performance when payment of such amount entitles
the patron thereof to be present during any portion of such performance;
admission within an enclosure in addition to the initial charge for admission
to such enclosure; and refreshment, service or merchandise at any roof
garden, cabaret or other similar place where there is furnished a
performance.
§ 101-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROOF GARDEN OR OTHER SIMILAR PLACE — Includes any room in any
hotel, restaurant, hall or other place where music or dancing privileges or
other entertainment, except mechanical music, radio or television, alone,
and where no dancing is permitted, are afforded the members, guests or
patrons in connection with the serving or selling of food, refreshment or
merchandise.
§ 101-4. Sporting and recreational facilities or equipment.
There is hereby levied a tax at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts of every
person, firm or corporation derived from the amount charged in the Town
of Mount Airy for the use of sporting or recreational facilities or equipment,
including the rental of sporting or recreational equipment.
§ 101-5. Admission without charge or reduced rates.
There is hereby levied an additional tax of $0.05 for each person provided
with an admission without charge or at reduced rates whenever a charge
for admissions is made to any other person not in excess of $0.50; and a tax
of $0.10 whenever a charge for admission to such other persons is in excess
of $0.50, but not in excess of $1; and a tax of $0.15 whenever a charge for
admission to such other person is in excess of $1.
§ 101-6. Collection agent.
The taxes levied in this resolution shall be collected by the Comptroller of
Treasury of the State of Maryland.
§ 101-2 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 101-6
94A:301

ARTICLE III
Annexed Property
[Adopted 5-6-1985 by resolution; amended in its entirety 5-3-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-1]
§ 101-7. Taxation of annexed property.
Any property hereafter annexed into the Town of Mount Airy shall be taxed
at the full municipal real estate tax rate beginning with the next fiscal year
after the effective date of the annexation.
§ 101-7 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 101-7
94A:303

ARTICLE IV
Local Supplement to Homeowners Tax Credit
[Adopted 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-40]
§ 101-8. Local supplement established.
There is hereby established a local supplement to homeowners property tax
credit against the property tax imposed by the Town on real property.
§ 101-9. Amount, duration and eligibility.
The local supplement to homeowners tax credit shall be in the amounts
and duration and subject to all eligibility requirements as authorized by the
county in which the real property is located as its ”Local Supplement to
Homeowners Property Tax Credit" and as is authorized by, and subject to,
the provisions set forth in the Annotated Code of Maryland, Tax-Property
Article, §§ 9-215 and 9-104.
§ 101-10. Administration.
This local supplement to homeowners property tax credit is to be
administered by the Maryland Department of the Comptroller and State
Department of Assessments and Taxation provided by the Annotated Code
of Maryland, Tax-Property article.
§ 101-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who knowingly submits a false or fraudulent application, or
withholds information, to obtain a tax credit under this article shall repay
the Town for all amounts credited and all accrued interest and penalties
that would apply to those amounts as overdue taxes, and, in addition, be
subject to all fines and other penalties as may be provided by law. The Town
may enforce this section by appropriate legal action. A person who violates
this section is liable for all court costs and expenses of the Town in any civil
action brought by the Town against the violator.
§ 101-8 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 101-11
94A:305
Chapter 103
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 105.
§ 103-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVER — The person in control of and operating or driving a taxicab
within the limits of the Town of Mount Airy.[Added 8-3-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-6]
OWNER — The person in whose name a taxicab is permitted or licensed
by the Maryland Public Service Commission and/or is registered by the
Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration. [Added 8-3-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-6]
TAXICAB — A motor vehicle, marked with a top light, for hire that:
§ 103-2. Authority of Town to regulate.
The Council of the Town of Mount Airy is hereby authorized and empowered
to enact ordinances providing regulations for the operation of taxicabs in
the Town and for the registration and fixing requirements for the owners
and operators of the taxicabs so as to protect the safety, health and general
welfare of the Town and its residents, citizens and occupants; provided,
however, that such regulations are not in conflict with the laws of the state
and regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles or the
Public Service Commission.
§ 103-3. Aid from Public Service Commission.
The Council of the Town of Mount Airy shall be empowered to request
the aid of the Public Service Commission of the State of Maryland in the
determination of rates which may be established under this chapter. The
Public Service Commission shall be empowered to extend such aid as maybe
requested from time to time from the Council of the Town of Mount Airy in
the determination of rates, so far as such aid is consistent with the statutory
powers conferred upon such commission by the laws of the state.
Is designed to carry seven or fewer individuals, including the driver;
and
A.
Is used to accept or solicit passengers for transportation between
points along public streets, as the passengers request.
B.
§ 101-11 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 103-4
94A:306
§ 103-4. Violations and penalties.
The violation of any of the provisions of any ordinance enacted pursuant to
this chapter shall be considered a municipal infraction and is subject to a
fine not to exceed $100 for each violation. Each separate day that a violation
remains uncorrected is a separate violation subject to additional fines.
§ 103-5. Special taxicab license required. [Added 8-3-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-6]
No taxicab owner or driver shall operate or permit a taxicab to be
operated within the limits of the Town of Mount Airy without applying
for and securing a special taxicab license for each taxicab from the
Town Clerk.
A.
The owner of a taxicab must submit an application for taxicab license
to the Town Clerk to obtain a special taxicab license on a form, as
amended from time to time, prepared and made available by the Town
Clerk.
B.
There shall be an administrative fee of $25, to be paid to the Town of
Mount Airy with submission of the application.
C.
The application shall at a minimum require:
An agreement on the part of the owner to comply with all terms of
the Mount Airy Town Code and with applicable federal, state and
county law;
(1)
An agreement to maintain all taxicabs in a condition that meets
Maryland state requirements and as would pass a Maryland state
inspection;
(2)
Satisfactory proof that the taxicab has passed a Maryland state
inspection within 15 days of application;
(3)
An agreement to allow, upon request at any time, the Maryland
Resident Troopers of Mount Airy or their designees to perform
a visual inspection of all taxicabs operated by or on behalf of
the owner for compliance with safety requirements established by
applicable federal, state or county law for taxicabs;
(4)
A certificate of insurance, showing the Town as certificate holder
and requiring at least 20 days notice to the Town of any change to
coverage, as proof of liability coverage for each taxicab in at least
the minimum limits of coverage as required by applicable federal
and state law;
(5)
A copy of each driver's current and valid license to operate a
taxicab in the State of Maryland; and
(6)
Completion and signature of a hold-harmless agreement on a form,
as amended from time to time, prepared and made available by the
(7)
D.
§ 103-4 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 103-5
94A:307
§ 103-6. Insurance required. [Added 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-6]
The owner shall, for each taxicab operated within Town limits, carry and
maintain liability insurance covering claims for bodily injury or property
damage in at least the minimum limits of coverage required under
applicable federal and state law.
§ 103-7. Display required. [Added 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-6]
Each taxicab shall display in full view from inside the taxicab each of the
following:
Town Clerk in which the owner agrees to indemnify, hold harmless
and defend the Town of and from any and all claims for bodily
injury, property damage or other claims for damages arising out of
or connected in any way to the ownership, use or operation of the
owner's taxicab within the limits of the Town.
It shall be the duty of the owner to promptly provide to the Town Clerk
any material updates or changes to the information submitted with
the application for special license pursuant this section, to include the
information required under this section for any new driver; notification
of any voluntary or involuntary termination of employment of any
driver; liability insurance renewal, modification or termination; license
renewal, suspension or revocation for any driver; any updated
Maryland inspection results for the owner's taxicabs and/or the
suspension or revocation of any license, permit or registration of the
owner's taxicabs.
E.
The Town Clerk shall have the right to reject an application for special
license or revoke a special license for operation of a taxicab for good
cause to include a failure to provide or update information required by
this section and/or for failure to comply with applicable Federal, State
or County law or applicable provisions of the Town Code.
F.
A. Special taxicab license as required by § 103-5;
Rate schedule card not less than three inches in width and four inches
in length on which shall be printed, in letters as large as the space will
permit, a clear and understandable schedule of the rates established
for the use of such taxicab; and
B.
The driver's current and valid license to operate a taxicab in the State
of Maryland.
C.
§ 103-5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 103-7
94A:308
Chapter 105
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motorcycles, snowmobiles and similar
vehicles — See Ch. 74.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 96.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 107.
§ 103-7 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 103-7
94A:309

ARTICLE I
Trucks; Campers; Municipal Parking Lots
[Adopted 6-6-1983 by Ord. No. 132]
§ 105-1. Parking of commercial trucks, trailers and other defined
vehicles. [Amended 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-4; 4-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-4]
§ 105-2. Restricted parking and use of boat trailers, camping
trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, mobile homes, motor homes, trailers,
or travel trailers. [Amended 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-4]
No boat trailer, camping trailer, fifth-wheel trailer, mobile home, motor
home, trailers, or travel trailers shall be parked on any public street within
the Town for a period in excess of 72 hours, nor while so parked within the
Town shall any camper be used by any person as a dwelling house, place of
abode or sleeping place.
§ 105-3. Municipal lots. [Amended 1-9-1984 by Ord. No. 133]
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle of any nature to be
parked upon any municipal parking lot for a period in excess of 72 hours
consecutively; provided, however, that any resident of the Town whose
dwelling place does not contain off-street parking provisions may apply
Definitions. As used in this article:
The terms "boat trailer," "camping trailer," "fifth-wheel travel
trailer," "mobile home," "motor home," "park," "semitrailer,"
"trailer," "travel trailer," "truck," and "truck tractor" shall have the
meanings defined in the Transportation Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, as may be amended from time to time.
(1)
The term "emergency" shall mean any condition with respect to
roads, traffic, the condition of a vehicle or the condition of the
operator or passenger of a vehicle of such a nature as to make it
unsafe for the vehicle to proceed further.
(2)
A.
Parking of commercial trucks, truck trailers, semitrailers and truck
tractors prohibited. Except as provided in Subsection C, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any commercial truck, truck tractor,
semitractor, or truck trailer on any public street within the Town at any
time except in the event of an emergency.
B.
Exceptions.
No commercial truck, truck trailer, semitrailer or truck tractor
shall be parked or left standing longer than is reasonably necessary
for purposes of loading or unloading property or passengers or
for the purpose of performing maintenance, construction or repair
services to property in the immediate vicinity.
(1)
C.
§ 105-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 105-3
94A:311
to and receive from the Town Clerk a permit authorizing such person to
park any vehicle used for his or her personal transportation upon such lot
without restrictions as to time. Such permits shall be subject to revocation
by the Town Clerk if the application therefor is found to contain any untrue
statement. In the event of any dispute as to the issuance or revocation of
such a permit, the action of the Town Clerk shall be reviewed by the Mayor
whose decision shall be final. Such applications and permits shall be in the
form as prescribed by the Town Clerk and approved by the Mayor.
§ 105-4. Violations and penalties.51
Any violation of this article shall constitute a municipal infraction. Each
day that any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate infraction
punishable as such.
§ 105-5. (Reserved)
51.Editor's Note: Former § 105-4, Definitions, was repealed 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-4 and
former § 105-5 renumbered as § 105-4.
§ 105-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 105-5
94A:312
ARTICLE II
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 1-3-1983 by Ord. No. 128]
§ 105-6. Special registration plates required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in a space
designated for parking by the handicapped unless the vehicle bears a
special registration plate or permit issued by the Motor Vehicle
Administrator of Maryland under § 13-616 of the Transportation Article of
the Maryland Code or under a similar provision of any other state.
§ 105-7. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article shall be a municipal infraction.
§ 105-6 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 105-7
94A:313

ARTICLE III
Infraction Fine Assessment
[Adopted 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 125; amended in its entirety
9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-11]
§ 105-8. Infraction fine assessed. [Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
Any citation issued with respect to the violation of any provision of this
Chapter 105 shall state that the amount of the infraction fine assessed is as
follows:
A. Violation of § 105-6 (in Article II, Handicapped Parking): $75.
B. Violation of all other parking restrictions: $50.
C. All other violations: $25.
§ 105-8 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 105-8
94A:315

ARTICLE IV
Traffic and Parking
[Adopted 9-9-1985 by Ord. No. 142]
§ 105-9. Traffic and parking control signs.
Whenever, in the judgment of the Council, it is necessary for the safety
or control of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or for the regulation of the
use of parking areas, the Town may erect or cause to be erected "stop,"
"no-parking," "speed" "one-way" and other traffic control and parking
restriction signs designated to control, regulate, warn or guide traffic or
limit parking on public streets, highways or other areas in the Town. It shall
be the duty of all persons to observe such signs, and failure to obey any such
sign shall constitute a municipal infraction. Nothing herein contained shall
be deemed to constitute a repeal of the authority herebefore granted by
the Mayor and Council of Mount Airy for the erection of traffic control and
parking restriction signs, and a failure to observe any such signs herebefore
erected shall be subject to the same penalties as set forth hereafter.
§ 105-10. Parking, stopping or standing restricted.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a
police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
(1) On sidewalks.
In front of a public driveway or alley or in front of a private
driveway, except with the consent of the owner or occupant of the
premises.
(2)
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
On a crosswalk or within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection,
except for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers or
merchandise.
(5)
Within 25 feet of any beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal
located at the side of a roadway.
(6)
Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
except for the period necessary to take on or discharge passengers,
freight or merchandise.
(7)
Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire department
station or within 75 feet of said entrance when signposted.
(8)
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(9)
A.
§ 105-9 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 105-10
94A:317
§ 105-10.1. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain
locations. [Added 6-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-6]
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in front of the properties
on the westerly side of Park Ridge Drive known as "Nos. 1002 through
1108" or in front of the properties on the northerly side of Leafy Hollow
Circle known as "Nos. 1109 through 1117"; provided, however, that this
subsection shall not apply to stopping, standing or parking of vehicles along
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street, except for the purpose of receiving or
discharging passengers or merchandise.
(10)
At any place where an official sign or painted curb of the State
Highway Administration or the Town of Mount Airy prohibits
stopping, parking or standing, and wherever a curb is painted red
or yellow, there shall be no parking, standing or stopping parallel
to said painted curb.
(11)
On curves, at the brow of a hill, where the State Highway
Administration or the Town of Mount Airy has painted white lines
on the surface of the roads.
(12)
During the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, within five feet of any mailbox located at the side of the
roadway and intended for delivery of mail through the U.S. Postal
Service. Citations for violations of this subsection shall be issued
only after receipt of a complaint. [Added 9-3-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-17]
(13)
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle designed or used for
carrying freight or merchandise, in front of, alongside of or in the rear
of any private dwelling, except when actually unloading merchandise,
or when the operator or owner of such vehicle is actually engaged in
rendering a service at or to such premises.
B.
At any place on public or private property, including shopping centers,
wherever a curb is painted red or yellow, there shall be no parking,
standing or stopping parallel to said painted curb. Town officials or
staff, including enforcement officers who are otherwise authorized to
issue a citation, impound the vehicle, remove the vehicle, or take such
other action as may be permitted under this chapter or this Code to
enforce this provision. [Added 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-17]
C.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to remain parked in any block,
parking area or zone beyond the posted time limit of that block, area or
zone. The movement of any vehicle from one parking space to another
within the same time zone within the same block, after such time
has elapsed, does not extend the allowable time a vehicle may remain
parked in that same block. [Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
D.
§ 105-10 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 105-10.1
94A:318
those portions of Park Ridge Drive and Leafy Hollow Circle which are
opposite the addresses set forth above.
§ 105-11. Unlawful parking; impoundment of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any vehicle of any kind, whether
attended or not, or for the owner of any vehicle of any kind to allow, permit
or suffer the same to be parked, stored or left, whether attended or not,
upon any public or private property in the Town of Mount Airy, other than
public highways, without the consent of the owner of such public or private
property, and the Mayor and Council and its designated agent or agents
are authorized to remove and impound any vehicle parked, stored or left in
violation of this section and to keep the same impounded until the owner
thereof, or other duly authorized person, shall have paid to the Town of
Mount Airy an amount equal to the towage and any and all reasonable
storage charges incurred by the Town in impounding said vehicle. In any
prosecution under this article, proof that a vehicle was parked, stored or left
on public or private property shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
was so parked, stored or left without the consent of the owner of such public
or private property.
§ 105-12. Speed limits.
No motor vehicle, truck or tractor shall be operated upon any highway or
street in the Town at a greater speed than 25 miles per hour, except on such
streets and highways as may be covered by regulations and the placing of
signs indicating a different speed limit.
§ 105-13. Vehicles to keep right; obstructing traffic; boulevards.
§ 105-14. Double parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any individual or firm to park any automobile, truck,
motorcycle or any vehicle of any description on any street, avenue or alley
within the corporate limits of Mount Airy, Maryland, alongside of any other
All vehicles shall be driven and parked on the right-hand side of the
street, unless a street or avenue is designated by a sign to be for oneway
traffic. At any time it shall become necessary, the Council may mark
and designate areas which may become congested, banning parking
altogether if necessary. No automobile or other vehicle shall stop in any
street, avenue or highway in such manner as to hinder or delay traffic
or passage, and the Police Department is empowered to enforce this
provision by impounding said vehicle.
A.
The Council shall designate from time to time such streets as shall
contribute to the safe movement of traffic within the Town as
boulevards and may post intersecting streets with appropriate stop
signs so placed as to be readily visible to the motoring public, and all
traffic entering boulevards so designated shall come to a complete stop
before so doing.
B.
§ 105-10.1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 105-14
94A:319
truck or motorcycle, which is parked parallel along the curb, except only
long enough to take on or discharge passengers or freight.
§ 105-15. Installation of parking meters.
On streets so designated, the Council shall mark parking spaces, on the
curb or pavement, or by other appropriate means, and in each space so
marked, shall erect or cause to be erected a parking meter, upon which the
deposit of a coin or combination of coins of the United States indicated on
the parking meter which will entitle the party parking his car for a limited
time as is indicated on the parking meter, and the time when such period
has elapsed.
§ 105-16. Overtime parking.
If any vehicle shall remain parked in any metered parking space for such
length of time that the period has expired, such vehicle shall be considered
as parking overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a
violation of this article.
§ 105-17. Illegal parking in metered areas.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking
designating a parking space or to park said vehicle in any way that the same
shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by said lines or
markings.
§ 105-18. Use of slugs in meters prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter
a slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States.
§ 105-19. Tampering with parking meters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, tamper with, damage, open
or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter
installed under the terms of this article.
§ 105-20. Obstructions of vision of motorists.
Whenever a Town official, police officer or code enforcement officer
finds that there exists on any private property within the Town any
trees, bushes, vines, weeds, undergrowth, loose earth, parked vehicles,
motor coaches, boats, campers, trailers or other obstructions, except
buildings and similar structures, and if it further finds that the same
do obstruct the vision of operators of vehicles traveling upon any
public street, road or highway so as to constitute a traffic hazard, it
shall immediately, upon finding such condition, serve upon the owner,
agent, lessee or any other person having supervision over such property
a written notice describing the premises whereon such obstruction
exists, a statement of the particulars in which the vision of operators
A.
§ 105-14 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 105-20
94A:320
§ 105-20.1. Impoundment or immobilization; notice; fee. [Added
7-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-5]
of vehicles is obstructed, including the steps necessary to correct such
conditions, and an order directing that such corrective steps be taken
within a stated period of time. [Amended 1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-1]
Any person who considers himself aggrieved by any order issued
pursuant to the authority of this article may, within 10 days of the
receipt of such order, petition the Mayor in writing for a hearing
thereon. Within 30 days from the receipt of such petition, the Council
shall hold such a hearing after which it may either affirm, modify or
rescind the order. No official of the Town shall remove any obstruction
or enforce any order issued hereunder until after such hearing by the
Council has been held or until after the time to petition for such hearing
has expired, without such a petition having been filed.
B.
Upon the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of any
order issued hereunder, within the time specified therein, the Council
shall direct Town forces to enter upon the property whereon the
obstruction is located and remove all or such part of the obstruction as
may be necessary to eliminate the traffic hazard.
C.
All orders and notices issued by the Town or any Town official, pursuant
to the authority of this article, shall be served on the person to whom
they are directed either by certified mail or by personal delivery to such
person. If such person is not known to reside and cannot be found in
the Town, such service shall be made by publication of such order or
notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and by
posting the same on the premises in a conspicuous manner. Service
by publication and posting shall be deemed to be made on the day of
publication or posting.
D.
Whenever it is necessary for the Town to provide for the removal or
elimination of any type of obstruction referred to herein pursuant to
the procedures prescribed above, it shall file with the Town Treasurer
a certified statement of the cost to the Town of such removal or
elimination, together with proof of service of the notice above
described. The cost of such removal, together with the cost of
publication, shall therefrom and thereafter constitute a charge against
the owner of such property and may be recovered by the Town by
appropriate legal action.
E.
When any unattended motor vehicle is found parked at any time upon
any street of the Town of Mount Airy against which there are three
or more unsatisfied citations for parking violations and when a period
of 30 days or more has elapsed since issuance of the third unsatisfied
citation, the Town may cause such vehicle, either by towing or
otherwise, to be removed or conveyed to and impounded in any place
designated by the Mayor or immobilized in such a manner as to prevent
A.
§ 105-20 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 105-20.1
94A:321
§ 105-20.2. Interference with immobilization. [Added 7-3-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-5]
§ 105-20.3. Hearing. [Added 7-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-5]
its operation, except that no such vehicle shall be immobilized by any
means other than by the use of a device or other mechanism which will
cause no damage to such vehicle unless said vehicle is moved while
such device or mechanism is in place.
In any case involving immobilization pursuant to this section, the Town
shall cause to be placed on such vehicle in a conspicuous manner notice
sufficient to warn any individual to the effect that such vehicle has been
immobilized and that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in
damage to such vehicle. Said notice shall further advise the owner or
operator that the vehicle has been immobilized by the Town for failure
to satisfy citations for parking violations; that the owner has the right to
contest the immobilization by submitting a written request to the Mayor
within 10 days from the date of the immobilization or said right shall
be deemed to have been waived; and that release of the vehicle may be
obtained upon payment of the booting fee and other amounts specified
in this section.
B.
The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall be permitted to secure
release of the vehicle upon payment of a booting fee of $50 and all
charges which have accrued thereon by virtue of its immobilization,
together with any unpaid fines and administrative expenses.
C.
The owner of an impounded vehicle shall be permitted to secure release
of the vehicle upon payment of the costs of the removal, towing,
impoundment and storage of said vehicle, together with any unpaid
fines and administrative expenses, prior to the release of the vehicle.
D.
The procedures set forth in § 105-20.3 shall also be utilized for any
impoundment or immobilization under this section.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or remove the
immobilization device without authorization from the Mayor or a police
officer.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner or operator
or a person authorized by either of them to remove the warning notice
regarding immobilization.
B.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each
offense.
C.
Unless the owner of a vehicle impounded or immobilized under the
provisions of § 105-20.1 appears to secure a release of the vehicle
within 24 hours after the vehicle has been immobilized, said owner
shall be given written notice by certified mail within 48 hours after
A.
§ 105-20.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 105-20.3
94A:322
§ 105-21. Violations and penalties; citations.
the vehicle has been impounded or immobilized by the Town that
said owner has the right to contest the validity of the impoundment
or immobilization at a hearing, which will be held within 72 hours,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from the submission of
a written request for a hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the
owner's address as it is on file with the Motor Vehicle Administration.
The notice shall further advise that said owner's right to a hearing shall
be deemed to have been waived if said owner fails to make a written
request for a hearing within 10 days from the receipt of the certified
mail notice sent to said owner or if said owner executes a written
waiver when releasing the impounded or immobilized vehicle.
B.
Requests for a hearing contesting the validity of an impoundment or
immobilization shall be referred to a hearing officer appointed by the
Mayor. Said hearing officer shall conduct the hearing pursuant to
procedures to be established by regulations promulgated by the Mayor.
The hearing officer shall consider such facts and circumstances as the
officer deems necessary in making a determination as to the validity of
the impoundment or immobilization. The determination of the hearing
officer shall be final. It shall have no bearing on the fine, penalty or
charges which might be imposed by the District Court of Maryland for
municipal infractions.
C.
If the hearing officer determines that a vehicle should not have been
impounded, the owner shall not be required to pay the impoundment
costs imposed therefor, or, if they have been paid, a refund shall be
made to the owner who made said payment. The hearing officer shall
have no authority to modify any fines or administrative charges.
D.
If the hearing officer determines that a vehicle should not have been
immobilized, the owner shall not be required to pay the booting fee and
all charges which have accrued by virtue of the vehicle immobilization,
or, if said fees have been paid, a refund shall be made to the owner
who made said payment. The hearing officer shall have no authority to
modify any fines or administrative charges.
E.
If, following trial in the District Court of Maryland or other tribunal,
a decision is entered in favor of the owner upon all of the parking
violations charged against the vehicle immobilized or impounded,
notwithstanding the ruling of the hearing officer with respect to the
immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle, all charges advanced
or having accrued upon the vehicle by virtue of its immobilization or
impoundment shall be returned to the person who advanced such sums
upon presentation of the official receipt issued at the time said vehicle
was released.
F.
Any authorized Town official, police officer or code enforcement officer
shall deliver a municipal infraction citation to any person adjudged
A.
§ 105-20.3 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 105-21
94A:323
to have violated any of the above provisions. Citation forms shall be
furnished by the Town, and the matter shall proceed as provided for
in Article 23A, Section 3, of the Annotated Code of Maryland as now
in force or hereafter amended. [Amended 1-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-1]
If a vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions herein contained
and the vehicle is unattended, the officer may attach the citation to
the vehicle in a conspicuous place. In the absence of the driver, the
registered owner(s) of the vehicle shall be presumed to be the person(s)
receiving the citation.52
B.
52.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which provided the amount of the fine assessed and
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-11.
§ 105-21 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 105-21
94A:324
ARTICLE V
Privately Owned Off-Street Parking Areas
[Adopted 3-2-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-4]
§ 105-22. Regulation of parking by Town.
Whenever the owner of any property has made provisions for off-street
parking by providing spaces of at least the minimum size required by
§ 112-7 of the Zoning Regulations, has permanently striped the same and
has requested the Town to regulate parking thereon, the Town will post
one or more signs warning the public that parking is allowed only within
designated spaces, and thereafter it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
across any line or marking designating a parking space or to park a vehicle
so that the same shall not be wholly within a space as designated by such
lines or markings. Upon written request of the owner of such property, the
Town will remove any such sign or signs, and the provisions of this section
shall not apply to such property thereafter.
§ 105-22 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 105-22
94A:325

ARTICLE VI
Snow Emergencies
[Adopted 3-4-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-2]
§ 105-23. Declaration; notice; parking restrictions; violations and
penalties.
In the event that the State Highway Administration or the appropriate
authorities of Carroll County or of Frederick County declare a snow
emergency with respect to any roads or highways which traverse
through the Town of Mount Airy or are located within 1/2 mile of
the Town boundaries, then the Mayor of the Town of Mount Airy will
automatically do the same and declare a snow emergency within the
Town of Mount Airy. No additional notice to residents will be given.
[Amended 1-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
A.
Upon such a declaration by the Mayor, the Mayor shall cause notice
of the same to be given to all local radio stations, cable franchisees
and the printed media. Notice of such declaration of snow emergencies
shall also be posted in a conspicuous place at the Town Hall and at such
other locations and shall be given by such other means as the Mayor
may determine.
B.
During the period of a snow emergency, any vehicle previously parked
on a Town street shall be moved as promptly as possible to any available
off-street parking available for the owner of the vehicle (driveways,
parking pads and the like) and if none is available shall be moved to
any public off-street parking area located within a reasonable distance.
In the absence of both private and reasonably available public off-street
parking, the owners shall park on nearby grass areas or sidewalks (but
need not climb curbs to do so), and, if that is not feasible, then the
vehicle must be parked so that the inner wheels are within six inches of
the curb or edge of paving, as the case may be.
C.
During the period of snow emergency, no vehicle shall be newly parked
on any Town street except in conformity with the provisions of
Subsection C.
D.
Violation of this article shall be a municipal infraction, and the amount
of the infraction fine assessed is $100. Evidence satisfactory to the trier
of fact that any defendant proceeded against with respect to a violation
of the parking provisions of this article either did not know or should
not have known of the declaration of the snow emergency shall be a
defense to any municipal infraction citation.
E.
The Mayor is further authorized to exempt from the provisions of
this article certain classes of vehicles such as emergency vehicles,
vehicles with handicapped license tags and such other vehicles as in his
discretion would render the application of this article unreasonable.
F.
§ 105-23 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 105-23
94A:327
Chapter 107
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motorcycles, snowmobiles and similar
vehicles — See Ch. 74.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 96.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 105
§ 107-1. Unlawful parking; enforcement. [Amended 6-5-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park an unlicensed motor vehicle,
trailer or travel trailer or a motor vehicle, trailer or travel trailer with an
expired license or to abandon the same for a period longer than seven days
on any public road, highway, street, avenue or alley in the Town of Mount
Airy. The Town of Mount Airy is hereby authorized to take possession of
and remove any such motor vehicle or trailer or travel trailer so parked or
abandoned in violation of this section by means of Town equipment or by
contract and may cause the same to be stored either upon Town property or
upon private property by suitable contract. The cost of removing or towing
the same and of storing the same must be paid by the owner before the
same may be repossessed and such charge will be in addition to any fine
or other penalty imposed for the violation of this section. If the owner fails
to repossess the same within 30 days after it is impounded, the same may
be sold by the Town at public auction and the proceeds of such sale, after
payment of the cost thereof, shall be applied first to reimbursing the Town
for the cost of removing or towing the vehicle, trailer or travel trailer and
of storing the same; second, to the payment of all liens on the same and the
balance to be paid to the owner if claimed within six months from the date
of sale. If the owner fails to claim such balance within such period of time,
it shall be deemed to be forfeited and become part of the general funds of
the Town.
§ 107-2. Unlicensed vehicles to be enclosed; exceptions. [Amended
6-5-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2; 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3]
Unless the same is enclosed in a garage or other building, it shall be
unlawful for the owner of any property within a residential zone to have
or permit anyone to have on such property any unregistered motor vehicle,
trailer or travel trailer or a motor vehicle, trailer or travel trailer, with
an expired registration in excess of 60 days; provided, however, that this
provision shall not apply to not more than one such vehicle on such property
that is actually being restored, repaired or maintained in such operating
condition as would permit it to be lawfully operated upon the public
roadways if currently registered.
§ 105-23 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 107-3
107:328
§ 107-3. Nonresidential zones. [Added 7-7-1986 by Ord. No. 149]
Unless the same is enclosed in a garage or other building, it shall be
unlawful for the owner of any property outside of a residential zone to
have or permit anyone to have on such property any unregistered motor
vehicle or motor vehicle with an expired registration in excess of seven
days; provided, however, that the provision shall not apply to any vehicle
being offered for sale by any licensed automobile dealer or used car lot.
§ 107-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-7-1986 by Ord. No. 149]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 107-2 or 107-3
shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be subject to a fine of $25
for the first offense and $50 for each subsequent offense, and each day upon
which a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 109
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and sewers — See Charter, Art. IX.
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Plumbing — See Ch. 83.
Sewers — See Ch. 91.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 94.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 96.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 98.
Zoning— See Ch. 112.
§ 107-3 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 107-4
107:329

ARTICLE I
Water Service
[Adopted 1-13-196353]
§ 109-1. Use of service; imposition of restrictions. [Amended
8-5-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-12]
§ 109-2. Plumbing requirements; inspections.54
Water from the system of the Town of Mount Airy may be used for all
residential, business, industrial, agricultural and public purposes.
A.
The Town's water system is intended to serve locations within the
corporate limits of the Town of Mount Airy. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as to require the Town of Mount Airy to provide water
service to a location outside of the corporate limits of the Town. The
Town accordingly reserves the right to refuse any connection to serve
any location outside of the corporate limits of the Town of Mount Airy,
subject to the provisions of state or federal law.
B.
The Town may not approve any application for service to a property
outside the corporate limits of the Town unless connection is required
by state or federal law, the property to be served has been approved
for annexation into the Town limits, or the property's existing well has
failed and the water and sewer lines are proximate to the property lines
of the property to be served. No connection shall be provided unless all
required connection and other fees are paid in full, and capacity exists
within the system to accommodate the proposed connection.
C.
The Town reserves the right to impose at any time such restrictions on
the use of water as, in its judgment, may appear necessary.
D.
All buildings in which people live or congregate, and in such other
buildings as the Building Inspector shall deem necessary, which are
on properties located within the corporate limits of the Town, shall be
provided with adequate water supply and plumbing fixtures and piping;
where the same do not exist, or are not of proper character or are in
a state of disrepair, they shall be provided, altered or repaired, as the
case may be in such manner as shall be required, and within the time
named, by notice served by the Building Inspector upon the property
owner or occupant. No such building shall be hereafter erected without
being provided with adequate water supply and plumbing
arrangements.
A.
The Building Inspector may at any time inspect or cause to be inspected
existing plumbing systems and require such modifications as may be
B.
53.Editor's Note: The provisions of this article are derived from Art. 5 of the former
codification, adopted 1-13-1963.
54.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 47, Building Construction.
§ 109-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-2
107:331
§ 109-3. Adequate water required.
necessary to put said plumbing in a sanitary condition in accordance
with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town.
Whenever the Town shall have extended its water mains so as to
be accessible to any property, the property owner shall apply for a
water and/or sewer allocation permit pursuant to the Town Code, §
109-19.5, and shall, assuming a water and/or sewer allocation permit is
granted, make connection with the Town’s water and/or sewer system
in accordance with these regulations, within three years of such
extension unless said period is extended by the Town Council. A
property owner may apply for and receive an extension of the threeyear
period by which the property owner is to make connection to the
water main for good cause shown, including that the Town’s water
supply and/or sewer capacity is limited, the property owner has not
been granted a water and/or sewer allocation permit, the property is
being serviced by an available, adequate and working water supply well
and/or that the connection fees for hook up to the Town’s water supply
system would be an undue financial hardship. [Amended 1-6-2014 by
Ord. No. 2013-19]
A.
All water mains and all water building connections (from the main to
the property line) in public ways will be maintained by the Town so as
to give adequate and proper service.
B.
If, due to a change in the use or due to the installation of additional
fixtures, the owner requests a larger water building connection, the
existing connection shall be disconnected and abandoned at the
expense of the owner. The size requested will be checked as to
adequacy by the Building Inspector and the owner will be required
to install the size connection determined by the Town to be adequate
for the changed conditions. Installation and construction of the larger
connection shall be at the expense of the property owner and subject to
the inspection and approval of the work by the Building Inspector or his
authorized representative.
C.
If the Building Inspector finds that an existing water connection is too
small to serve the number of fixtures connected to it, to such an extent
that the existing water meter is being run constantly in excess of its
safe rated capacity, the owner shall be notified of the situation and will
be required to arrange for the installation of a larger water connection
and larger meter adequate for the service needed. If the owner refuses
to correct the situation after due notice, the Building Inspector shall
arrange for the disconnection and abandonment of the existing water
connection and the installation of a water service and water meter
of such suitable size as he shall determine is necessary; the cost of
such disconnection, abandonment and installation shall be billed to the
owner of the premises involved.
D.
§ 109-2 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-4
107:332
§ 109-4. Wells.
§ 109-5. Water building connections.
§ 109-6. Temporary water service.
Temporary water service for building or other construction work may be
furnished as follows: Upon the filing of proper applications and the payment
of suitable deposit, a temporary water connection may be constructed by
the consumer from the main to his service facilities with an outside meter
setting installed at the property line. When the consumer has finished the
connection, the Town will cause the meter to be read and remove the entire
connection to the property line. The cost of the removal of the connection,
plus the meter service charge, plus the charge for the water used, computed
at the regular consumption rates, will be deducted from the deposit, and the
remainder, if any, returned to the consumer. If the total charges exceed the
deposit, the consumer will be billed for the excess.
§ 109-7. Separate connections.
Whenever water connection is provided for a property previously
served by a well, the well shall be examined to determine whether it is
polluted or will be a menace to health. Should such well be found to be
polluted or a menace to health, it shall be abandoned and closed in a
manner satisfactory to the Building Inspector.
A.
No well for household use shall be constructed on a property accessible
to a public water main.
B.
Separate water building connections for each separate lot or parcel of
land, abutting upon a street, alley or right-of-way in which there is a
water main belonging to the Town shall be constructed by the owner of
said lot or parcel of land from such water main to the building.
A.
Whenever it shall be determined that a water building connection was
constructed in violation of the terms and conditions upon which a
permit therefor was issued, the water connection thereto may be cut off
at the main until the connections have been made to comply with all of
the conditions of said permit or, in the alternative, the Town may, after
notice to the property owner, cause the defect to be corrected and to
charge the expense thereof to said property owner.
B.
Water connections for properties not abutting directly on a water main
or sewer may be allowed under such conditions and at such charges as
the Town may require.
C.
Each building on one lot or parcel of land shall be served by a separate
water connection, a building for this purpose being any structure or
part thereof intended for a single occupancy on the street floor.
A.
In case it is found that more than one building is being served by the
same water building connection in violation of the above regulation, the
B.
§ 109-4 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-7
107:333
§ 109-8. Special connections.
§ 109-9. Meters and meter settings.
Building Inspector shall take action to correct such violation under the
following procedure:
The owner of the property involved shall be notified by registered
United States Mail that the violation exists and that the situation
must be corrected by a given date.
(1)
If the owner does not comply with the above notice, the Town
shall shut off the water and remove the water meter serving such
property until the situation is corrected to his satisfaction, at which
time water service will be resumed after payment of all costs to
which the Town may be subjected in the above matter.
(2)
If the property owner refuses to comply with the above order, the
Town shall take such further legal action as is provided by law.
(3)
The water pipes for any building, lot, premises or establishment shall
not be laid over or through any other building, lot, premises or
establishment, except in an approved right-of-way or easement, and
no person shall connect or cause to be connected any building, lot,
premises or establishment with the water pipe belonging to or
supplying any other building, lot, premises or establishment. However,
this regulation shall not prevent a dwelling with a private garage upon
the rear of the same lot or parcel of land from being supplied by the
same service pipe; but if the garage is converted wholly or partially into
a dwelling or place of business, a separate connection shall be installed
under such conditions as the Building Inspector may require.
C.
A structure under single ownership but so divided as to provide for
more than a single occupancy on the street floor may be permitted
a single connection by special permit under such conditions as the
Building Inspector may require.
A.
A group of public, ecclesiastical, educational, charitable, club, farm
or industrial buildings, under one ownership and on a single tract of
ground which may consist of a group of lots or a single parcel, may
be served by one connection under such conditions as the Building
Inspector shall determine. Shopping centers, apartment developments,
tourist camps, motels and similar groups, under one ownership, located
on a single tract of ground as above, may be served by a single
connection.
B.
The Town shall furnish with each permit for each water connection,
upon the payment of the fee hereinafter prescribed, a water meter of
a size and type deemed by the Building Inspector to be suitable for
the installation contemplated. The water meter shall remain under the
ownership of and will be maintained by the Town. To defray the cost of
A.
§ 109-7 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-9
107:334
such meter, the supervision of installation and the maintenance thereof,
there shall be charged a fee in such amount as the Mayor and Council
shall by resolution provide.
The Building Inspector shall determine the size and type of any water
meter and the type and location of the settings. Outside meter setting
will be used, except where obstructions or other considerations require
that they be placed inside the building, in which case they shall be
set as the Building Inspector shall require. When the water meter is
set inside the cellar of the building, the property owner will be held
responsible for the protection of the meter from injury due to freezing.
Repairs and replacements of meter so damaged shall be at the expense
of the property owner.
B.
The outside meter housing or the curb box must be installed so that
the top is on the ground surface of the permanent grade and within the
public right-of-way whenever possible. In order to accomplish this, one
of the following methods will be followed:
Where the curb and sidewalk do not exist, the property owner shall
indicate the final grade of the ground surface at which an outside
meter setting or a curb box is to be placed and the structure
will be set at the grade given when it is installed. The water
house connection shall not be installed until such grade is given.
If the grade or location of the meter setting or the curb box is
changed due to a change in elevation of the ground from that
originally indicated, the property owner shall bear the expense of
such change in grade or location.
(1)
Where the curbs and sidewalks exist, the top of the center of the
meter housing shall be placed at the straight line grade between
the back of the curb and the street edge of the sidewalk.
(2)
C.
It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by the
Town, to interfere with, remove, replace or tamper with a meter or a
meter seal.
D.
No connection shall be made to any water service pipe between the
water main and the meter, except such bypass as the Town may install.
If such unlawful connection is found, the water house connection will
be cut off at the main until such unlawful connection is disconnected
and abandoned. Any expense to which the Town shall be subjected, due
to the above work, shall be paid for before service is restored.
E.
If it is found that such unlawful connection has been made to bypass
a detector check in order to illegally obtain unmetered water, the
detector check will be removed and replaced by a suitable meter. Such
removal and replacement shall be paid for before service is restored.
F.
Violation of Subsection D, E or F shall be a municipal infraction and
subject to a fine of $500 for each violation. [Added 1-9-2017 by Ord.
No. 2016-26]
G.
§ 109-9 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-10
107:335
§ 109-10. Maintenance of water connections.
§ 109-11. Repair and renewal of connections.
Where necessary, the Town will repair or renew from the main to the
property line any water connection at no cost to the property owner.
§ 109-12. Use of fire hydrants.
§ 109-13. Interference with or injury to property. [Amended
1-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use, handle,
tamper with, obstruct, interfere with, deface or destroy any of the property
of the Town, including pipes, fittings, fireplugs, pumps, engines, appliances,
wires or other fixtures or equipment owned or used by the Town in the
construction and operation of its water system except under such rules
and regulations as the Town may adopt. Violation of this section shall be a
municipal infraction and subject to a fine of $500 for each violation.
The Town will maintain all water connections from the street main to
the property line.
A.
All pipes and appurtenances on private property shall be maintained
by and at the expense of the property owner. The Town may do
maintenance or repair work on private property, in which case the
cost, including overhead expense, shall be paid by the property owner.
Likewise, the cost of any work outside of the property line made
necessary by the neglect or through the action of a property owner or
tenant shall be charged to the property owner.
B.
In the event of a complaint regarding a leak on a water building
connection, the Town will at once determine if the leak is in the public
way or at a meter set by the Town inside a building, in which case
the leak will then be repaired. If it is found that the leak is not the
Town's responsibility, the owner will be so notified and it shall be his
responsibility to have the leak repaired at once by a plumber at the
owner's expense.
C.
No person, other than an authorized employee of the Town, or a
member of a fire department acting under orders of his proper superior
in the performance of his duties, may operate a fire hydrant unless in
possession of a permit from the Town to do so.
A.
Fire hydrants may not be used for flushing or for any other purpose
except by special written permission of the Mayor for the time and at
the location specified. If such permission is granted, the water used
shall be charged for at the prevailing water rates.
B.
§ 109-10 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-14
107:336
§ 109-14. Entry on private property.
Any employee or agent of the Town shall have the right of entry, at all
reasonable hours, upon any private premises and into any building within
the corporate limits of the Town while in the pursuit of his official duties,
and any restraint or hindrance offered to such entry by any owner or tenant
or agent of said owner or tenant shall be a misdemeanor punishable as
hereinafter prescribed.
§ 109-15. Water charges.
The Mayor and Council shall, from time to time, establish by resolution
a water consumption charge and impose such penalties for delinquent
payment of charges as it deems proper.
§ 109-16. Disconnection for failure to pay bill. [Amended 3-5-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-2; 5-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-6]
§ 109-17. Connection charges.
The charge to connect with the water main and bring water to the property
line shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 109-18. Disconnection charges.
Those who have connected with the Town mains and wish to disconnect
for any valid reason, such as the property becoming vacant, must notify
the Mayor of their intention of so doing and pay to the Town $2 for
disconnecting and another $2 when they wish to reconnect and also the
water rent for the entire month in which they disconnect and the entire
month in which they reconnect.
§ 109-19. Regulation of use of water. [Amended 7-7-1986 by Ord.
No. 150]
Any consumer of water who shall fail to pay his water bill within 30 days
from date of bill shall be disconnected from the Town water system.
A.
Whenever an authorized Town employee is on a premises for the
purpose of disconnecting service as provided in Subsection A hereof,
the service shall be disconnected at that time unless the consumer
then pays to such employee the amount of all past due water bills, the
interest thereon and a service charge of $40. Such payment must be
made in cash or by a certified or bank cashier's check.
B.
Upon recommendation of the Council member or members charged
with oversight of the operation of the Town's water system, it shall
be lawful for the Mayor to order a moratorium upon the use of water.
In passing such an order, the Mayor shall give due consideration to
such recommendation and shall consider existing and projected usages
A.
§ 109-14 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-19
107:337
§ 109-19.1. Definitions. [Added 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-2;
amended 5-1-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-6; 12-3-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-12; 5-4-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-2; 10-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-5]
The following terms shall have the meanings set forth below for the
purposes of §§ 109-19.2 through 109-19.6 below:
ALLOCATION — A reservation for a particular property to draw a
prescribed amount of water or sewer from the Town's water and/or sewer
system.
ALLOCATION CATEGORIES — Categories of new demand among which
allocation of the available capacity yield are to be divided pursuant to
§ 109-19.4C.
of water, storage capacity of the Town's water system, groundwater
conditions, conditions of drought or other conditions which may affect
the adequacy of existing and anticipated storage of water and any other
matters bearing upon the Town's supply of water.
Such order shall be in writing, signed by the Mayor and filed with the
Town Clerk. Such order may restrict hours of water usage, types of
water usage, residential usage, commercial usage or any combination
of such factors and shall remain in effect until modified or terminated
by the Mayor in writing filed with the Town Clerk.
B.
Upon the filing of such an order, the Town Clerk shall give notice of
such fact by posting a copy thereof in a prominent place in the Town
Hall and shall give further notice as may seem expedient to the Town
Clerk, such as the use of flyers, newspaper and radio announcements.
C.
The Town Council may, at any time, adopt by resolution rules and
regulations with respect to water usage in order to ensure, as far as
possible, an adequate supply of water for residential purposes without
undue interruption or hardship. Such rules and regulations may include
criteria for the imposition of future moratoriums and the termination
thereof, provisions for exemptions from moratorium orders in cases
of hardship or health-related concerns and such other matters as the
Council finds appropriate in allocating a fair distribution of the water
supply in times of drought or emergency.
D.
No order of the Mayor shall conflict with any rules and regulations as
adopted by the Council.
E.
Any person, firm or corporation who knowingly violates any order of
the Mayor issued pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction and shall be subject to a fine of $50 for the first offense and
$100 for each subsequent offense, and each day upon which a violation
occurs shall be considered a separate offense. [Amended 8-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-12]
F.
§ 109-19 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-19.1
107:338
ALLOCATION YEAR — A year in which the Town Engineer makes
recommendations to the Town Council as to the available capacity yield
to the Town Council and the division of such among allocation categories
to the Planning Commission, in which the Town Council determines the
available capacity yield and in which the Planning Commission allocates
the available capacity yield among allocation categories as set forth in
§§ 109-19.2 and 109-19.3 below.
AVAILABLE CAPACITY YIELD — The total water and sewer capacity of the
Town available for allocation to new demand pursuant to § 109-19.2 below.
AVAILABLE SEWER CAPACITY YIELD — The total sewer capacity of the
Town available for allocation to new demand pursuant to § 109.19.2 below.
AVAILABLE WATER CAPACITY YIELD — The total water capacity of the
Town available for allocation to new demand pursuant to § 109.19.2 below.
COMMERCIAL or COMMERCIAL USES or COMMERCIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS — Business uses that do not include industrial uses but
include, by way of example, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants,
shopping centers and theaters except commercial establishments located
within the Office Park Employment District.[Amended 2-1-2016 by Ord.
No. 2015-22]
EMERGENCY CLAIMS — Applications for Town water and/or sewer service
to replace a failed well or septic system within Town limits for residential
existing lots of record and shall include allocations for extension of water
or sewer service ordered by the Maryland Department of the Environment
pursuant to the Maryland Code, Environment Article, § 9-222.
ENTITLEMENT CLAIMS — Claims of right to water and/or sewer allocation
based upon some legally binding agreement or contract with the Town and/
or based upon a due process or property right.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USE —
Increased demand for water and sewer capacity that is anticipated due
to existing industrial or commercial business or Office Park Employment
District growth without redevelopment or revitalization.[Amended
2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
INDUSTRIAL or INDUSTRIAL USES or INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
— Business uses that involve uses of property as set forth in § 112-45B of
the Town Code except such uses located within the Office Park Employment
District.[Amended 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
INDUSTRIAL NEW DEMAND OUTSIDE OF A PRIORITY AREA — New
demand proposed for an industrial use not included in a priority area.
MIXED USE — Buildings or groups of buildings on the same property used
for both residential and commercial purposes.
MIXED USE NEW DEMAND OUTSIDE OF A PRIORITY AREA — New
demand proposed for a mixed commercial and residential use not included
in a priority area.
§ 109-19.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-19.1
107:339
NEW DEMAND —
NON-MIXED USE COMMERCIAL NEW DEMAND OUTSIDE OF A
PRIORITY AREA — New demand proposed for a commercial use that is not
mixed use and is not included in a priority area.
NON-MIXED USE RESIDENTIAL NEW DEMAND OUTSIDE OF A PRIORITY
AREA — New demand proposed for a residential use that is not mixed use
and is not included in a priority area.
OFFICE PARK EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT — Business uses that involve uses
of property as set forth in § 112-50.1 of the Town Code and which are
zoned within the Town as the Office Park and Employment District.[Added
2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
OFFICE PARK EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT OUTSIDE OF A PRIORITY AREA
— New demand proposed for a business use within the Office Park
Employment District not included in a priority area.[Added 2-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 2015-22]
PIPELINE DEVELOPMENT — Developments that are not vet serviced by
Town water or sewer but for which concept or final site plan approval has
been given, infill development and lots of record.
PRIORITY AREAS — Those areas within the Town limits designated by the
Planning Commission pursuant to § 109-19.4B below to which the Town
desires the direct future development.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — Government projects including schools, parks,
recreational facilities, public institutional projects, and public buildings and
structures.
REDEVELOPMENT AND REVITALIZATION — Projects within the Town that
seek to renovate, restore, rebuild, or revive an existing building or structure
to include substitution and/or revival of nonconforming uses.
RESERVE — An amount of available capacity yield separately set aside for
the purpose of providing flexibility to the Planning Commission in approving
issuance of water and/or sewer allocation permits. Allocation from this
allocation category may be made to any project or property as the Town
Planning Commission deems necessary or appropriate.
Any proposed new commercial, industrial or residential development
within the Town;
A.
Existing or newly annexed property into the Town with existing
buildings or structures not currently serviced by Town water or sewer;
B.
C. Redevelopment or revitalization; or
Expansion of existing commercial or industrial use;
and for which, in the case of Subsection A through C above, application
has been made for water and/or sewer permit(s).
D.
§ 109-19.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-19.1
107:340
RESIDENTIAL or RESIDENTIAL USES or RESIDENTIAL UNITS — Property
and/or buildings used primarily for dwelling and include single-family
detached, single-family semidetached, and single-family attached
residential housing units, townhomes, condominiums and apartments.
SPECIAL PROJECTS — Projects that are identified in a Town survey and/or
community needs assessment, hospitals, projects that will serve the public
health or provide a public service.
UNDERUTILIZED ALLOCATION CATEGORY — An allocation category from
which no more than 10% of the available capacity yield has been allocated
within the previous 12 months.
§ 109-19.2. Calculation of Town's available capacity yield. [Added
4-6-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-3; amended 10-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-5]
The method of calculating the Town's available water capacity yield and
available sewer capacity yield shall be established from time to time
by resolution of the Town Council upon recommendation of the Town
Engineer and the Town's Water and Sewer Commission. This method
shall be published on the Town's web page and shall be otherwise
available upon request to Town staff. The method of calculating the
Town's available capacity yield shall take into consideration and set
aside capacity for existing development to which Town water and sewer
service is already supplied, pipeline development, water and sewer
system capacity including treatment capacity, pumping capacity,
storage, distribution system requirements, power supply, maintenance
and operations, system losses, limitations placed on the use of new
water resources in source agreements, other obligations of or
limitations on the Town to supply water and/or sewer capacity by means
of annexation agreement or other contract and a safety factor of 12%
required by the Town's Adequate Public Facilities Ordinance ("APFO").
§ 25-6A.
A.
Beginning on January 15, 2014, and every two years thereafter, the
Town Engineer shall, with the approval of the Mayor, issue a report to
the Town Council making recommendation as to the Town's available
water capacity yield and available sewer capacity yield, expressed in
gallons per day (gpd), and setting forth the manner by which the
available capacity yield was derived consistent with the method set
forth by resolution of the Town Council pursuant to Subsection A above
and shall take account of any new water sources or sewer capacity
acquired or made available to the Town. Beginning in 2014 and every
two years thereafter, the Town Council shall at its regular meeting
in February, with due consideration of the Town Engineer's
recommendation, determine the available capacity yield by approving
or modifying, as the Town Council deems necessary or appropriate, the
Town Engineer's recommendation. Upon determination of the available
capacity yield by the Town Council, beginning in 2014, and every
two years thereafter, on or before the Planning Commission's regular
B.
§ 109-19.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-19.2
107:341
§ 109-19.3. Agreements regarding well exploration and
development. [Added 6-5-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-14; amended
10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-5]
meeting in February, the Town Engineer shall prepare a report making
recommendations as to a division of the available capacity yield among
the allocation categories set forth in § 109-19.4C below. The Town
Council's resolution setting forth the available capacity yield and the
Town Engineer's recommendations as to the division among allocation
categories shall be transmitted to the Town's Planning Commission on
or before its regular meeting in February.
Authorization; form of agreement.
In consideration of the prepayment of the well exploration and
development fee provided for in § 109-25.1, the Mayor is
authorized to enter into a written agreement with the developer
prepaying the same. Such agreement shall identify:
(a) The developer.
The location, size and (if known) the name of the proposed
development.
(b)
The number of equivalent dwelling units proposed for the
development and anticipated water demand.
(c)
Provision for credit under § 109-25.1 of the amount prepaid as
and when the development applies for water connections.
(d)
Projects for which the Town proposes to expend the prepaid
fees.
(e)
An allocation or method of sources or increases in the yield
of existing water sources as a result of the utilization of such
prepaid fees.
(f)
A method of refunding amounts of such fees remaining
unexpended or unencumbered after such period of time as the
Mayor determines reasonable.
(g)
Such other items as the Mayor determines to be in the best
interests of the Town.
(h)
(1)
Any allocation or method of allocation of water and/or sewer
allocation permits and/or building permits to such a developer shall
take into consideration a safety factor, as determined by the Mayor,
to ensure adequate reserves from new water sources or increased
yields from existing sources to compensate for periods of drought
and margins of error in calculating demands and yields. All such
agreements shall be approved by the Council before becoming
effective.
(2)
A.
§ 109-19.2 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-19.3
107:342
§ 109-19.4. Water and sewer allocation. [Added 8-7-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-16; amended 12-3-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-12; 10-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-5]
The Town is authorized but not required to enter into such agreements,
and whether or not to do so shall be in the sole discretion of the Mayor
and the Council.
B.
Beginning in 2014 and every two years thereafter, at its regularly
scheduled meeting in March, with due notice and after a public hearing,
and with due consideration of the Town Engineer's recommendations
as set forth in § 109-19.2B above, the Town Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation to the Town Council as to allocation of the
Town's available water capacity yield and available sewer capacity
yield among allocation categories in accordance with this section. The
Planning Commission's recommendation shall thereupon be
transmitted to the Town Council for consideration at the Town Council's
regularly scheduled meeting in April. The Town Council may either
approve, disapprove or modify the Planning Commission's
recommendation. If the Town Council elects to disapprove the Planning
Commission's recommendation without modifying it, the Town Council
may provide to the Planning Commission a written statement of reasons
for disapproval and request that the Planning Commission reconsider
its allocation recommendation.
A.
Beginning in 2014 and every two years thereafter, at its regularly
scheduled meeting in January, with due notice and after a public
hearing, the Planning Commission shall by resolution designate priority
areas within the limits of the Town to which the Town desires to direct
future development.
B.
Allocation of available yield to new demand shall be divided among all
or some of the following allocation categories as recommended by the
Planning Commission and deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Town Council pursuant to Subsection A above:
(1) Priority areas.
(2) Special projects.
(3) Public facilities.
(4) Emergency claims.
(5) Entitlement claims.
(6) Non-mixed use residential new demand outside of a priority area.
(7) Non-mixed use commercial new demand outside of a priority area.
(8) Mixed use new demand outside of a priority area.
(9) Industrial new demand outside of a priority area.
C.
§ 109-19.3 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-19.4
107:343
§ 109-19.5. Water and sewer allocation permits. [Added 10-7-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-5]
(10)Redevelopment and revitalization.
(11)Reserve.
(12)Expansion of existing commercial or industrial use.
Office Park Employment District outside of a priority area. [Added
2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
(13)
Adjustments to allocations among allocation categories between
allocation years. The Town Council, after obtaining the
recommendations of the Planning Commission, Town Engineer and the
Town’s Water and Sewer Commission, may by resolution redistribute
unallocated available capacity yield from an underutilized allocation
category as the Town Council deems necessary or appropriate in order
to reflect significant changes in market demand, development activity
or inactivity and/or the needs of the community and Town, but subject
to the following restrictions: [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-6]
The Town Council may remove only up to 50% of the capacity
from an underutilized allocation category and may distribute it
equally to those categories that have been completely depleted or
for which there is a demonstrated demand for additional capacity;
and
(1)
The Town Council may redistribute capacity only once in between
allocation years.
(2)
D.
Applicability. The provisions of this section are effective to property
that as of January 1, 2014, has not received concept plan approval
pursuant to Chapter 98 and/or has not received approval of water and
sewer allocation permits. Water and sewer allocation permits shall be
required for new demand except for expansion of existing commercial
or industrial use. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
A.
Water and sewer allocation application. In the case of new demand that
proposes new commercial, industrial or residential development within
the Town or redevelopment and revitalization, application for water
and sewer allocation shall be made at the time of concept site plan,
concept subdivision plan, or concept minor subdivision plan submission
pursuant to Chapter 98. In the case of new demand that consists of
existing or annexed property into the Town with existing buildings or
structures not currently serviced by Town water or sewer, application
for water and/or sewer allocation may be made at any time.
Applications shall be on a form provided, and updated from time to
time, by the Town and made available at Town Hall and shall be
submitted along with a water allocation permit processing fee of $25.
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
B.
§ 109-19.4 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-19.5
107:344
The Planning Staff of the Town shall keep a chronological master
list of applications for water and/or sewer allocation by date of
submission of application. Where a project is after initial
application phased, the date of the application for water and/or
sewer allocation shall remain the original date of application for
the first phase only, and shall be the date of submission of a phased
concept plan and water and/or sewer allocation application for the
remaining phases.
(1)
Planning Commission to approve issuance of permits. The Planning
Commission shall be responsible for approving issuance of water and
sewer allocation permits. The Town's planning staff shall be responsible
for issuing permits upon approval of and under the terms set forth
by the Planning Commission and in accordance with this chapter.
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
C.
Review and approval of water and sewer allocation permits. The
Planning Commission shall review applications for water and sewer
allocation to new demand at the concept site plan, concept subdivision
plan or, in the case of a minor subdivision, concept plan submission
stage as set forth in Chapter 98 or, in the case of existing or annexed
property into the Town with existing buildings or structures not
currently serviced by Town water or sewer, at the regularly scheduled
or special meeting set by the Planning Commission to take up
consideration of the application. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-12]
D.
Review priority. The Planning Commission shall take up and consider
applications for water and sewer allocation permits within each
allocation category sequentially to each eligible new demand based
upon the date of filing of application for a water and sewer allocation
permit. Where a project is after initial application phased, the date
of the application for water and/or sewer allocation shall remain the
original date of application for the first phase only, and shall be the
date of submission of a phased concept plan and water and/or sewer
allocation application for the remaining phases. [Amended 11-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-12]
E.
Standards for approval of water and sewer allocation permits. In order
to achieve approval and issuance of a water and/or sewer allocation
permit, the owner or developer of the new demand must establish that
water and/or sewer capacity is available and that extension of the water
and/or sewer capacity is feasible and consistent with the Town's Water
and Sewer Master Plan by proving by a preponderance of the evidence:
That the owner is unable to establish a new water source within the
boundaries of the new development at a location acceptable to the
Town Engineer with a projected yield sufficient for the demands of
the new development plus a safety factor determined by the Town
Engineer;
(1)
F.
§ 109-19.5 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-19.5
107:345
That the allocation of water and/or sewer to the new demand is less
than or equal to the net available capacity yield applicable to the
allocation category from which the allocation is to be made taking
into consideration the applications that have received conditional
approval and are on the waiting list for the same allocation
category as set forth in Subsection I below;
(2)
That the available capacity yield requested in the application will
be sufficient for the proposed use or, in the case of a phased
project, the phase for which application is made;
(3)
That allocation of water and/or sewer is consistent with the
allocation methods set forth § 109-19.4 above and pursuant to the
then-applicable Planning Commission resolution pursuant thereto;
(4)
That allocation of water and/or sewer capacity will not place any
undue burden upon the Town's water or sewer capacity;
(5)
That the extension of water and/or sewer capacity to the property
is consistent with the Town's Water and Sewer Master Plan; and
(6)
That none of the circumstances set forth in Subsection N below
exist.
(7)
Water and sewer allocation permit approval and issuance. If the
Planning Commission approves issuance of a water and sewer
allocation permit, the applicant shall be offered the allocation
approved. Upon acceptance of the allocation approved by the Planning
Commission the Town planning staff shall issue the water and sewer
allocation permit on a form used by the Town which shall be updated
from time to time, subject to the conditions therein and set forth in
Subsection N below. In the event that an applicant fails to accept in
writing the allocation approved within 31 days of approval, the approval
of its issuance shall lapse absent a reasonable extension approved by
the Planning Commission. If an approval lapses, and no extension is
granted the allocation shall be revoked, recaptured and returned to the
allocation category from which it was allocated.
G.
Application denial. Except as set forth in Subsection I below, in the
event that an application for water and sewer allocation is not granted
by the Planning Commission the applicant will be required to submit a
new application and go through the application process outlined herein.
H.
Waiting list. If an application for a water and sewer allocation permit
cannot be approved by the Planning Commission for immediate
allocation to the new demand solely because the applicant is unable
to demonstrate that the proposed allocation of water and/or sewer to
the new demand is less than or equal to the net available capacity
yield applicable to the allocation category from which the allocation is
to be made pursuant to Subsection F(2) above, the application shall
be conditionally approved by the Planning Commission pending future
allocation of sufficient available capacity yield to support the project
I.
§ 109-19.5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-19.5
107:346
and shall be immediately placed on a waiting list to be kept by the
Town's planning staff for the allocation category for which application
for allocation was made. As additional available capacity yield within
an allocation category is made available sufficient to support each
new demand on the waiting list, such shall be offered first to each
new demand on the waiting list for the allocation category for which
additional available capacity yield has been allocated in the order in
which each such new demand receives approval pending water and
sewer capacity availability and is placed on the waiting list, at which
time the applicant first in line on the waiting list for the applicable
allocation category shall be offered the allocation without requiring the
applicant to submit a new application and go through the application
process again. A project on the waiting list that is offered available
capacity yield to move forward shall return to the Planning Commission
for an adequate public facilities certification review relative to water
and sewer capacity only and for issuance of a water and sewer
allocation permit. Upon acceptance of the allocation, the Town planning
staff shall issue the water and sewer allocation permit on a form used
by the Town, which shall be updated from time to time, subject to
the conditions therein and set forth in Subsection N below. In the
event that an applicant fails to accept in writing the allocation offered
within 31 days of the offer, the offer of its issuance shall lapse absent
a reasonable extension approved by the Planning Commission. If an
approval lapses, and no extension is granted, the allocation shall be
revoked and recaptured, and if sufficient to support the next project in
line on the waiting list, shall be offered to the next application in line on
the waiting list. Applications for allocation shall be entitled to remain
on the waiting list for three years, at which time if an allocation has not
been made to the new demand, it shall be deleted from the waiting list
and must go through the application process to qualify for allocation.
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
Water and sewer allocation permit expiration. In the case of new
proposed commercial, industrial or residential development or
redevelopment and revitalization approved under a site plan, water
and/or sewer allocation permits shall expire if the developer/owner
does not apply for and obtain a building permit within 24 months of
issuance. In the case of existing or annexed property into the Town with
existing buildings or structures not currently serviced by Town water
or sewer, water and/or sewer allocation permits shall expire within 24
months of issuance. In the case of a new proposed subdivision approved
under a preliminary plan or a new proposed minor subdivision
approved under a final plan, water and/or sewer allocation permits shall
expire if the developer/owner does not apply for and obtain a building
permit within four years of issuance. The period after which a water
and/or sewer allocation permit expires may, however, be extended by an
affirmative vote of a majority of the Planning Commission upon showing
good cause by a preponderance of the evidence. If an extension is
granted by the Planning Commission water and sewer allocation
permits shall automatically expire after six months if a building permit
J.
§ 109-19.5 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-19.5
107:347
has not been issued, or after the owner or developer obtains building
permits if the building permits expire or upon the expiration of the
site plan, if applicable. Upon expiration of a water and sewer allocation
permit, the developer or owner must reapply for such and obtain
reapproval by the Planning Commission as per the process set forth
herein. Allocations that have expired shall be returned to the allocation
category from which the allocations were made.
Revocation of water and sewer allocation permits. The Town, upon
the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Planning
Commission, may revoke a water and/or sewer allocation permit, unless
the owner or developer can demonstrate good cause by a
preponderance of the evidence, if conditions of the water and sewer
allocation permit set forth in Subsection N below are not met, or after
issuance of a building permit if conditions or milestones contained
in the building permit are not met. Upon revocation of a water and
sewer permit, the developer or owner must reapply for such and obtain
reapproval by the Planning Commission as per the process set forth
herein. Allocations that have been revoked shall be returned to the
allocation category from which the allocations were made.
K.
Registry. The Town's Planning Department shall keep an up-to-date
registry of water and sewer allocation permits by the date of issuance,
applicant and amount of allocation of water and/or sewer capacity.
L.
Nontransferability. Water and sewer allocation permits are
nontransferable before connection is made to Town water and/or sewer
service unless approved by the Town's Planning Commission and in no
case may they be transferred between properties.
M.
Conditions. Water and sewer allocation permits, and thus the right to
connection to Town water and sewer service, shall be conditioned upon:
There being no reduction in the Town's water use appropriates by
the Maryland Department of the Environment;
(1)
(2) There being no moratorium being imposed pursuant to § 109-19.
There being no failure in one or more of the Town's water supply
wells.
(3)
The payment of all fees and charges as set forth in this chapter,
including those specified in §§ 1-25, 109.19-6 and 109.25.1 of the
Town Code.
(4)
N.
Effect of zoning action. Neither the zoning classification of a property,
the reclassification of zoning designation, the grant of a special
exception nor other zoning action shall be construed to entitle the
owner or developer of property to an allocation of Town water or sewer
service.
O.
§ 109-19.5 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-19.6
107:348
§ 109-19.6. Water Expansion Fund. [Added 10-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-5]
Owners and/or developers of commercial projects, industrial projects or
residential subdivisions of six or more lots for which the Town Council
approves a public works agreement shall pay to the Town the sum of $1,250
per acre of land, or any fraction thereof, for the project to be placed in the
Town's Water Expansion Fund to be appropriated by the Town Council from
time to time for expansion, maintenance and/or repairs to the Town's water
system.
§ 109-19.6 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-19.6
107:349

ARTICLE II
Water and Sewer Rates
[Adopted 7-2-1973]
§ 109-20. Water connection charges; metering.
Connection charge. All persons who connect to water mains shall pay
a connection charge. [Amended 12-1-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-5;
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-20]
A.
Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated. [Amended 12-1-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-5; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-20]
COMMERCIAL UNIT — Based on 350 gallons per day per capita
employed over a period of not more than eight hours. Day workers
rated in commercial units at a sewer flow per person over an eighthour
period of 35 gallons. For each 10 employees an equivalent unit
is generated. Minimum unit is one unit connection. All commercial
uses are based on the hydraulics information sheets used for a guide
for estimating sewerage flows and equivalents furnished by agencies
associated with the service controls of the sewerage system. Services to
other than day workers in a commercial unit will follow the information
sheets. A hydraulics information sheet is attached.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT — Based on a complete family dwelling
unit consisting of one bath, one kitchen and normal living quarters.
Apartments consisting of more than one unit per building consist of
one equivalent unit per apartment therein, regardless of method of
construction of water entrance to the building, single or multiple
meters. Single-family dwelling based on 250 gallons per day;
townhouse unit based on 225 gallons per day; senior housing unit based
on 125 gallons per day.
IMPROVED AREA — An area in which it is necessary to cross an
improved street in order to install the requested service.
UNIMPROVED AREA — An area where it is not necessary to cross an
improved street in order to install the requested service.
B.
Commercial or apartment metering. Water permit provides for single
five-eighths-inch water meter placed in the service line, Town to
provide service to the property line with a service valve known as "curb
stop." All meters will be placed within the building itself on the building
supply line with a valve before meter setting.
C.
Additional meter service. Any commercial or other service requiring
additional water flows than that provided by the normal meter shall be
noted on the application for the water permit. Charges for meter sizes
shall be as follows: [Amended 12-1-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-5]
(1) Three-fourths-inch: included in § 109-20A connection charges.
D.
§ 109-20 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-20
107:351
§ 109-20.1. Water charges for miscellaneous services. [Added
6-5-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-13; amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-2]
The following charges are hereby imposed for services as indicated:
§ 109-21. (Reserved)55
§ 109-22. Water rate schedule; metered service. [Amended 8-1-1988
by Ord. No. 1988-3; 12-5-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-6; 4-5-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-4; 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-26; 4-3-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-1; 7-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-3; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-10; 5-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5; 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-7]
(2) One-inch: $550, in unimproved area, $750, in improved area.
One-and one-half-inch: $700, in unimproved area, $900, in
improved area.
(3)
(4) Two-inch: $825, in unimproved area, $1,050 in improved area.
(5) Three-inch: $950, in unimproved area, $1,200, in improved area.
Four-, six- and eight-inch: $1,000, in unimproved area, $1,500, in
improved area, plus cost of material and labor in each instance.
(6)
Water charges. For each unit within the building a base or flat rate is
charged. Each unit flat fee includes 6,000 gallons per quarter. Overages
shall be charged at normal gallon rates (10 units, 60,000 gallons).
[Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-20]
E.
A. Additional outside meter vault: $100.
B. Meter replacement at owner's request: $90.
C. Meter replacement due to failure: no charge.
D. Water turnoff at request of owner (including turn-on): $30.
E. Meter check at request of owner: $30.
F. Location of curb stop for owner: $30.
G. Check for leak at owner's request: $35.
H. Meter reading and transfer of ownership: $35.
I. Callback or second reading: $30.
J. Turn-on (failure of bill payment): $30.
55.Editor's Note: Former § 109-21, Sewer connection charges, as amended, was repealed
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-21.
§ 109-20 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-22
107:352
§ 109-22.1. System benefit charge. [Added 8-3-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-4; amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-09; 6-6-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-3]
The following rates shall be applied to all water consumed on a
quarterly basis effective July 1, 2012:
A flat service fee of $21 will be charged to each consumer
connected to the system.
(1)
On the first 6,000 gallons consumed, the rate charge will be $2 for
each 1,000 gallons.
(2)
On the next 6,000 gallons consumed (to a total of 12,000 gallons),
the rate charge will be $4.57 for each 1,000 gallons.
(3)
On the next 8,000 gallons consumed (to a total of 20,000 gallons),
the rate charge will be $5.09 for each 1,000 gallons.
(4)
On the next 20,000 gallons consumed (to a total of 40,000 gallons),
the rate charge will be $6.16 for each 1,000 gallons.
(5)
On the next 20,000 gallons consumed (to a total of 60,000 gallons),
the rate charge will be $7.24 for each 1,000 gallons.
(6)
For all gallonage in excess of 60,000 consumed, up to 80,000 the
rate charge shall be $8.32 for each 1,000 gallons.
(7)
For all gallonage in excess of 80,000 consumed, the rate charge
shall be $9.38 for each 1,000 gallons.
(8)
A.
The above water rates shall be billed on a quarterly basis to the owner
or owners of each property to which water is furnished, without regard
to whether the property is owner-occupied or otherwise. The charges
shall constitute a lien and bear interest as provided in § 109-24.
B.
In addition to the water rate charges set forth in § 109-22 of this
chapter, there shall also be a system benefit charge which shall be
applied to all water consumed on a quarterly basis:
A flat rate of $15 will be charged for all water consumed up to
40,000 gallons.
(1)
On each additional 23,000 gallons consumed per quarter above
40,000 gallons, an additional $15 will be charged.
(2)
A.
The above system benefit charge shall be billed on a quarterly basis
to the owner or owners of each property to which water is furnished,
without regard to whether the property is owner-occupied or otherwise.
The charges shall constitute a lien and bear interest as provided in
§ 109-24.
B.
§ 109-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-23
107:353
§ 109-23. Sewer rate schedule. [Amended 8-1-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-3; 4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-3; 4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1;
7-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-3; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-12;
5-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5; 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-7]
§ 109-24. Lien and penalty.
§ 109-25. Billing.
The sewer rates as contained herein shall be billed to all property owners
required to connect to said system from the date the municipal sewerage
system is placed in operation or the date of connection of said property
to said system, whichever is later, but in no event later than the quarter
beginning June 1, 1974.
§ 109-25.1. Well exploration and development fee. [Added 5-1-1989
by Ord. No. 1989-5; amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-22]
A well exploration and development fee is hereby imposed by the Town of
Mount Airy in addition to all other charges provided for in this chapter
and to be dedicated to the exploration for and development of new well
water sources for the Town of Mount Airy, said charge being imposed upon
residential, commercial and industrial applicants and to be payable at the
time application is made for water connections.
These rates shall be a quarterly charge for sewer use effective July 1,
2012:
A flat service fee of $21 will be charged to each customer
connected to the system.
(1)
For each 1,000 gallons of water consumed, the rate chargeable
shall be $3.70.
(2)
A.
The above sewer rates shall be billed on a quarterly basis to the
owner or owners of each property to which water and sewer service is
furnished, without regard to whether the property is owner-occupied
or otherwise. The charges shall constitute a lien and bear interest as
provided in § 109-24.
B.
The above water and sewer rate charges shall be a lien on the real
estate served.
A.
A penalty of 10% shall be imposed for any water and sewer bill if
payment is not received by the Town on or before 30 days after the
date the property owner is billed. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-1]
B.
§ 109-23 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-25.1
107:354
ARTICLE III
Special Water Benefit Charge
[Adopted 8-8-1975 by Ord. No. 101]
§ 109-26. Water benefit charge imposed. [Amended 11-4-1985 by
Ord. No. 143; 1-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1; 8-5-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-10; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-23]
§ 109-26.1. Additional charge for improvements, repairs and
acquisitions. [Added 8-5-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-11; amended
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24]
In addition to all other charges, there is hereby imposed a fee payable at
the time application is made for each water connection, the funds derived
therefrom to be used for construction, reconstruction, improvements and
repairs of streets and roads within the Town limits, including acquisition of
any necessary rights-of-way.
§ 109-26.2. Additional charge for capital projects. [Added 8-5-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-15; amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-25]
In addition to all other charges, there is hereby imposed a fee payable at
the time application is made for each water connection, the funds derived
therefrom to be used for construction, reconstruction, improvements and
repairs of capital projects within the Town limits, including public buildings
and community centers and the acquisition of any necessary lands or rightsof-
way in connection with the same.
§ 109-26.3. Additional charge for park improvements. [Added
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
In addition to all other charges, there is hereby imposed a fee payable at
the time application is made for each water connection, the funds derived
therefrom to be used for construction, reconstruction, improvements and
repairs of parks, recreational equipment and recreational projects and the
A water benefit charge is hereby imposed by the Town of Mount Airy,
such charge to be in addition to the water connection charges provided
by Article II and to be dedicated to the development, maintenance,
storage capacity, replacement and expansion of the public water system
of the Town of Mount Airy, such charge to be payable at the time
application is made for said water connection.
A.
An additional water charge is hereby imposed and the charges therefor
shall be disbursed to the Mount Airy Volunteer Fire Company on a
quarterly basis or such other interval as may be determined by the
Mayor of the Town of Mount Airy in order to compensate the Mount
Airy Volunteer Fire Company for increased service demands imposed
upon it by virtue of continued growth within the Town of Mount Airy.
B.
§ 109-26 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-26.3
107:355
acquisition of any necessary lands or rights-of-way in connection with the
same.
§ 109-27. Reimbursement.
When a developer provides the Town of Mount Airy with a producing well of
water drilled in accordance with specifications provided by said Town and
accepted by said Town for incorporation into the public water system, said
developer will be reimbursed by the Town of Mount Airy from the herein
enacted water benefit charge in the amount of $100 per connection to the
extent of the developer's dollar investment in the accepted producing well.
§ 109-26.3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-27
107:356
ARTICLE IV
Fluoridation
[Adopted 8-2-1976 by Ord. No. 102]
§ 109-28. Authority to fluoridate.
The Town of Mount Airy is hereby authorized to fluoridate its water supply
within the limits recommended by the Maryland State Department of
Health.
§ 109-28 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-28
107:357

ARTICLE V
Wellhead Protection
[Adopted 2-2-1998 by Ord. No. 1997-6]
§ 109-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AQUIFER — Any formation of soil, sand, rock, gravel, limestone, sandstone
or other material or any crevice from which underground water is or may
be produced.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP's) — A conservation or pollution
control practice that manages wastes, agricultural chemicals or hazardous
materials so as to minimize movement into surface or groundwaters of the
state.
CONTAINMENT DEVICE — A device that is designed to contain an
unauthorized release, retain it for cleanup, and prevent released materials
from penetrating into the ground.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EPA STORMWATER NPDES PERMIT — A permit meeting the requirements
of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Application
Regulations for Storm Water Discharges issued by EPA on November 16,
1990.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any substance that conveys toxic, lethal or
other injurious effects or which causes sublethal alterations to plant, animal
or aquatic life; or may be injurious to human beings. Hazardous materials
include any matter identified as a "hazardous waste" by the Environmental
Protection Agency or a "controlled hazardous substance" by the Maryland
Department of the Environment.
MDE — The Maryland Department of the Environment.
NUTRIENT/MANURE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan prepared by a
certified nutrient management consultant to manage the amount,
placement, timing and application of animal waste, fertilizer, sewage sludge
and other plant nutrients in order to prevent pollution and to maintain
productivity of the soil.
ON-SITE FLOOR DRAINS — Drains which are not connected to municipal
sewer or stormwater systems and which discharge directly to the ground or
septic system.
OWNER — A property owner or his duly authorized agent or attorney,
a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary and any other person having vested or
contingent interest in the property in question.
PERSON — Any natural person, individual, public or private corporation,
firm, association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, government
§ 109-29 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-29
107:359
agency, political subdivision, public officer, owner, lessee, tenant or any
other entity whatsoever or any combination of such, jointly or severally.
PESTICIDE/HERBICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances
intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest; use as
a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant; or use as a spray adjuvant such as
a wetting agent or adhesive.
RULES AND REGULATIONS OF MDE — Official publications of MDE with
standards and requirements for protection of groundwater resources.
TOWN — The Town of Mount Airy, a municipal corporation of the State of
Maryland.
UNDERGROUND INJECTION WELL — A bored, drilled, driven well or dug
well where the depth of the dug well is greater than the largest surface
dimension, through which fluids enter into the subsurface.
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK — An underground storage tank,
connected piping, underground ancillary equipment and containment
system, if any.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION DISTRICT — That land area overlying the
aquifer which contributes water to a public water supply well under the
permitted withdrawal rate (average annual) and average annual recharge
conditions that can be anticipated based on historical data. It is bounded
and may be influenced by the groundwater divides which result from
pumping the well and by the contact of the aquifer with less permeable
geologic boundaries. In all cases, the Wellhead Protection District shall
extend upgradient to its point of intersection with prevailing hydrogeologic
boundaries (a groundwater flow divide, a contact with geologic formations
or a recharge boundary) or be limited by time-of-travel.
YARDING AREAS — A pen or other outdoor area used for the feeding and
care of livestock or poultry.
§ 109-30. Applicability.
§ 109-31. Extent and designation.
The Wellhead Protection Area (WHPA) delineated represents the recharge
area for the Town's water supply. The boundaries of the WHPA are based
This article applies to all land uses and activities located or proposed
within the area delineated as the Town Wellhead Protection District
on a map available for inspection at the Town Hall and as defined in
the definitions section of this article.56 The Wellhead Protection District
consists of one zone described in § 109-31 below.
A.
This article is supplementary to other laws and regulations. Where
this article or any portion thereof imposes a greater restriction than is
imposed by other regulations, the provisions of this article shall control.
B.
56.Editor's Note: See § 109-29.
§ 109-29 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-31
107:360
on groundwater flow direction and groundwater divides inferred from
topography and groundwater discharge areas, changes in formation type,
permitted withdrawal rates, linear features (fracture traces) and a
calculated down-gradient zone of contribution using the average annual
withdrawal rate The boundary of the Wellhead Protection District may
be modified should additional information or analysis be provided that
shows that the current boundary lines no longer appropriately reflect the
criterion which they purport to represent. Procedures for modification of
such boundaries shall be as follows:
§ 109-32. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted:
The applicant wishing a change in boundary shall petition the Mayor
and Council for a special hearing and be required to present detailed
hydrogeologic and hydrologic information to the Mayor and Council
indicating where in fact the new boundary line should be drawn. The
applicant shall provide the Mayor and Council with copies of all reports
and maps for a technical review in advance of any hearing. Public
notice of the time and place of any such hearing shall be published in at
least one newspaper having a general circulation within the Town once
a week for two successive weeks with the first publication appearing
at least 14 days before the hearing. Such a change in boundary shall
only be accomplished by the passage of an ordinance following such
hearing which shall be accompanied by a map sufficient to detail the
new boundary or boundaries.
A.
All areas annexed into the Town after the effective date of this article
shall automatically be within the Wellhead Protection District unless
specifically exempted therefrom in the Annexation Ordinance.57
B.
A. Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife.
Outdoor recreation, nature study, boating, fishing, and hunting where
otherwise legally permitted.
B.
C. Foot, bicycle and/or horse paths and bridges.
Normal operation and maintenance of existing water bodies and dams,
splash boards and other water control, supply and conservation
devices.
D.
Maintenance, repair and enlargement of any existing structure, subject
to § 109-33, Prohibited uses.
E.
F. Residential development, subject to § 109-33, Prohibited uses.
Farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry, harvesting and
grazing, subject to § 109-33, Prohibited uses.
G.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Annexations.
§ 109-31 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-32
107:361
§ 109-33. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited unless allowed as conditional uses under
§ 109-34.
§ 109-34. Conditional uses.
Construction, maintenance, repair and enlargement of drinking-watersupply-
related facilities such as, but not limited to, wells, pipelines,
aqueducts and tunnels. Private underground storage tanks related to
these activities are not categorically permitted.
H.
I. Electric and natural gas distribution systems and electric substations.
Bulk storage of hazardous materials, except the following:
Materials needed for normal household use, outdoor maintenance
and heating of a structure;
(1)
(2) Waste oil retention facilities required by statute, rule or regulation;
(3) Materials needed for emergency generators; or
(4) Materials used in water treatment plants.
A.
B. Junkyards.
C. Metal plating establishments.
D. Open burning sites and dumps.
E. Quarries and mining operations.
F. Sanitary landfills and rubble fills.
Uses which involve, as a principal activity, the manufacture, storage,
use, transport or disposal of hazardous materials.
G.
Uses which involve hazardous materials in quantities greater than
those associated with normal household use.
H.
Underground pipelines carrying hazardous materials other than as
permitted by the State of Maryland or in interstate commerce.
I.
The following may be allowed as conditional uses:
(1) Dry-cleaning establishments, coin or commercial laundries.
(2) Garage, service station.
(3) Heavy manufacturing uses.
Manure piles, animal waste pits, lagoons and private sewage
sludge storage facilities.
(4)
(5) On-site wastewater disposal.
A.
§ 109-32 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-34
107:362
(6) Storage of deicing chemicals.
(7) Disposal of fuels or hazardous materials.
(8) Bulk storage and mixing of pesticides and fertilizers.
(9) Underground injection wells.
(10)Underground storage tanks.
Activities that are defined as conditional uses will not be allowed within
the Wellhead Protection District unless the property owner or applicant
can show the use will not harm the groundwater and is able to meet the
conditions described in §§ 109-34B(2) and 109-38 of this article.
The landowner or representative shall submit to the Board of
Zoning Appeals an application for a conditional use. The
application shall include:
A list of all hazardous materials which are to be stored,
handled, used or produced in the activity being proposed.
(a)
A description of the quantities and containers for the storage,
handling, use or production of hazardous materials by the
proposed activity.
(b)
A site plan illustrating the location of all operations involving
hazardous materials, spill containment structures and showing
all points of potential discharge to groundwater, including dry
wells, infiltration ponds, septic tanks and drainfields.
(c)
Documentation of approval by MDE of any industrial waste
treatment or disposal system or any wastewater treatment
system of a capacity of over 5,000 gallons per day (gpd).
(d)
Documentation of MDE permit or approval for any discharge
via an underground injection well.
(e)
A description and estimate of the average and maximum
number of poultry livestock animals that will be yarded within
the Wellhead Protection District; evidence that a nutrient
management plan for nitrogen has been completed for all
livestock or poultry wastes to be generated by the activity.
This plan must incorporate adequate waste-holding facilities
and show any application sites within the Wellhead Protection
District.
(f)
Plans showing secondary containment, for all underground and
aboveground tanks and lines containing hazardous material.
(g)
A description of the best management practices which will be
followed during the construction of the facility to ensure that
hazardous materials are not released to the groundwater.
(h)
(1)
B.
§ 109-34 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-34
107:363
§ 109-35. Nonconforming uses.
Nonconforming uses lawfully in existence within the Wellhead Protection
District may continue to exist in the form in which they existed at the time
this article is adopted. Changes in title or right to possession shall not affect
continuation of an existing use. In the event that a nonconforming use poses
a direct hazard to the public water supply, the Town may take any action
permitted by law to abate the hazard.
§ 109-36. Variances.
Variances to the provisions of this article may be granted by the Board
of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing, provided that a strict
interpretation of this article deprives such property of privileges or safety
enjoyed by other similarly situated property within the Wellhead Protection
District. Provisions with respect to fees, advertising, hearings and decisions
on such requests shall be governed by the variance provisions in the Town
Zoning Ordinance relating generally to variances provided for therein.
An emergency plan indicating the procedures which will be
followed in the event of a spill of a hazardous material to
control and collect the spilled material to prevent the
substance from reaching the groundwater.
(i)
An hydrologic assessment for properties with greater than 50%
planned impervious surfaces (building footprints, sidewalks
and transportation surfaces) to determine the groundwater
recharge rate after site development is completed. The
assessment will also estimate the groundwater recharge rate
prior to development.
(j)
In order for the area to be approved, it must be shown that the use:
Will protect the water supply from contaminants used on the
property which pose an adverse effect on the health or comfort
of persons;
(a)
Will not cause the average groundwater quality on the
property to violate drinking water standards promulgated by
MDE and the EPA; or
(b)
Will maintain recharge of water to the water supply aquifer
consistent with rates prior to development.
(c)
(2)
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall deny the conditional use if
it is determined that the conditional use would not meet the
requirements outlined above. Provisions as to fees, advertising
and hearing and decisions on such requests shall be governed by
the conditional use provisions and procedures provided for other
conditional uses in the Town Zoning Ordinance.58
(3)
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Zoning.
§ 109-34 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-37
107:364
§ 109-37. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from regulation under this article:
§ 109-38. Performance plan standards.
All activities that are designated conditional uses shall meet the following
design and operation guidelines:
Transportation of hazardous material. The transportation of any
hazardous material through the Wellhead Protection District shall be
exempt from the provisions of this article.
A.
Application of pesticides. The application of pesticides/herbicides in
recreation, agriculture, pest control, public utility rights-of-way and
aquatic weed control activities shall be exempt from the provisions of
this article provided that:
The application is in strict conformity with the use requirement as
set forth in the substance's EPA registry. A pesticide can only be
used according to its labeling and according to pertinent federal
and state laws.
(1)
The application of pesticides shall be noted in the records of an
applicator certified by the Maryland Department of Agriculture.
Records shall be kept of the date and amount of these substances
applied at each location, and said records shall be available for
inspection.
(2)
B.
Underground storage of oil(s). The underground storage of oil(s) used
for heating fuel shall be exempt from the provisions of this article
if the tank used for storage is located within an enclosed structure
(i.e., secondary containment or any currently approvable containment
technology) sufficient to contain leakage of oil and to provide routine
access for visual inspection (e.g., cement-floored basement) and
sheltered to prevent the intrusion of precipitation. Any tank used for the
underground storage of oil that is out of service for more than one year
shall be removed. Liquid residue shall be removed and all connecting
piping securely capped or plugged.
C.
Aboveground storage of oil(s). The aboveground storage of oil(s) used
for heating fuel shall be exempt from the provisions of this article,
provided that the tank used for storage is located on an impervious
pad or container of sufficient volume to capture and contain spills and
leakage of oil from entering the environment, sheltered to prevent
the intrusion of precipitation and located in a manner that allows for
routine visual inspection. Aboveground storage of oil shall be located as
far away from the public water supply wells as possible.
D.
Containment of hazardous materials. Leak-proof trays under
containers, floor curbing or other containment systems to provide
secondary liquid containment shall be installed. The containment shall
A.
§ 109-37 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-38
107:365
be of adequate size to handle all spills, leaks, overflows and
precipitation until appropriate action can be taken. The specific design
and selection of materials shall be sufficient to contain any hazardous
material at the location and prevent escape to the environment. These
requirements shall apply to all areas of use, production and handling, to
all storage areas, to loading and off-loading areas and to aboveground
and underground storage areas. Because state and federal
governments already regulate hazardous materials, nothing in this
article shall be applied in a way to prevent a person from complying
with state and federal requirements.
All underground tanks(s) and piping systems shall meet the
requirements of COMAR 26.1O.05.03.C 1-4 for secondary containment,
double wall tanks, liners, vaults and underground piping.
B.
Dry-cleaning establishments shall not discharge to the ground or
subsurface any wastewater that was in contact with the organic
solvents used in dry-cleaning process. As specified in Subsection A
above, secondary containment is required for areas when dry-cleaning
solvent is stored, used and transferred.
C.
Infiltration of stormwater runoff that has come in contact with the
pavement surfaces shall not be permitted at gasoline service stations.
Waste from service stations' work areas is not permitted to be
discharged to the ground or subsurface.
D.
All sewage sludge and animal waste holding facilities shall be
constructed so as not to allow the waste material to leach into the
groundwater. All inground facilities shall use low-permeability liners
constructed to meet one of the standards specified below:
(1) One foot of clay with a permeability less than 10-7 cm/sec; or
(2) Two feet of clay with a permeability less than 10-6 cm/sec; or
Two feet of compacted soil with a permeability less than 10-5 cm/
sec and a man-made liner, 30 mil thick, and permeability less than
10-7 cm/sec.
(3)
E.
Agricultural operations with yarding areas shall follow nutrient
management plans for nitrogen. Waste application rates for all sites
within the Wellhead Protection District are to be designed to not exceed
crop requirements and therefore minimize nitrate management plans.
F.
All facilities with wastewater disposal greater than 5,000 gpd shall have
a state discharge permit. All developments with on-site disposal shall
be designed so that the average NO3-N concentration of the water
recharging the surficial groundwater aquifer under the property shall
not exceed 10 milligrams per liter.
G.
§ 109-38 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-38
107:366
All deicing chemicals (salt piles and sand/salt mixes) must be stored
under roof and protected from precipitation by a permanent cover.
Runoff from mixing and loading areas may not be discharged to the
subsurface.
H.
All facilities with bulk storage of pesticides must show evidence of
compliance with Maryland Department of Agriculture requirements.
I.
All tanks of liquid fertilizers must hive secondary containment of at
least 110% of the largest tank within the contained area. All dry
fertilizer storage must be under a permanent cover and protected from
rainfall.
J.
All facilities with underground injection wells must show evidence of
compliance with all applicable MDE permits, consent orders or other
state actions regarding the underground disposal of wastes.
K.
All underground pipelines carrying hazardous materials shall be
equipped with operable secondary release detection equipment and be
protected against corrosion.
L.
All excess hazardous materials from the construction of any facility
shall not be released to the environment and shall be removed from
the property, unless such materials are incorporated into a contained
hazardous materials storage area.
M.
At all facilities practicing stormwater infiltration, the following design
standards shall apply:
Stormwater management facilities, including drainage swales,
detention ponds and retention ponds, shall be designed in a
manner to provide optimal protection of the groundwater
resources. Use of grass swales, open shoulder roads and grass
filter strips shall be considered as first options in plan development.
(1)
At least four feet of soil material is required between the top of
bedrock surface or high water table (whichever is higher) and the
bottom of any stormwater infiltration pond or system.
(2)
Stormwater infiltration shall be prohibited in areas receiving runoff
from handling and mixing areas of hazardous materials.
(3)
At least 80% of the predevelopment recharge rate shall be
preserved following development. The design shall be made to
ensure that this rate can be maintained over the life of the facility.
(4)
N.
Reporting of spills. Any spill of a hazardous material shall be reported
by the facility owner by telephone to the Town Hall, the Mayor or
President of the Council within two hours of discovery of the spill.
Clean-up shall commence immediately upon discovery of the spill. A
written report detailing the steps taken to contain and clean up the spill
and preventing a recurrence shall be submitted to the Town within five
working days of the spill.
O.
§ 109-38 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-38
107:367
§ 109-39. Administration; violations and penalties.
Monitoring for hazardous materials in groundwater. If required by the
Town, groundwater monitoring well(s) shall be installed at the expense
of the facility owner or operator in accordance with an approved
groundwater monitoring plan. The permittee shall be responsible for
developing an approved groundwater monitoring system. Samples shall
be analyzed by a state-certified laboratory and the results reported to
Town.
P.
Alterations and expansion. The Town shall be notified, in writing, prior
to the expansion, alteration or modification of any activity that is
subject to a conditional use. Approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals is
required before any alteration or expansion of the conditional use can
be in. The landowner or representative shall submit an explanation of
the change in activity and the information as required by this article
above. The Board may approve the alteration or expansion with or
without a public hearing, but in either instance shall file a written
statement of its findings of fact and reasons for its conclusion, which
statement shall be kept among the permanent records of the Town.
Q.
Plans review. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development plans within the Wellhead Protection District shall be
reviewed by the Town Engineer for compliance with the provisions
of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the Town Engineer to
recommend approval, disapproval or approval with modifications of the
proposed subdivision or development plan.
A.
Violation notices. Whenever it is determined that there is a violation of
this article, a notice of violation shall be issued. The notice of violation
shall:
(1) Specify the violation or violations.
(2) Specify the length of time available to correct the violation.
(3) Clearly state any penalties associated with the subject violation.
(4) Provide a description of any rights of appeal.
B.
Cease-and-desist order. The Mayor and the head of the Department of
Water and Sewer are each authorized to issue cease-and-desist orders
whenever they become aware of violations of this article.
C.
Penalties. All costs incurred by the Town, including engineering and
attorney's fees for enforcing this article, shall be paid by the owner who
violated the provisions of this article. Violation of any cease-and-desist
order or of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.
D.
Fees. Fees for review of subdivision and development plans may be set
by the Town Council by resolution from time to time. Such fees may
E.
§ 109-38 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 109-39
107:368
include provisions intended to cover the reasonably estimated costs of
administrative and professional staff reviews and costs of any required
outside consultants.
§ 109-39 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 109-39
107:369
Chapter 110
WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 61.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 85.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 94.
Storm sewer systems — See Ch. 94A.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 98.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 110-1. Adoption of county provisions.
The Carroll County Water Resource Management Ordinance, known as
Chapter 218 of the Carroll County Code, adopted by the County
Commissioners of Carroll County, including all amendments thereto, shall
be automatically the Town of Mount Airy Water Resource Management
Ordinance without the necessity of further action on the part of the Town of
Mount Airy except as delineated below.
§ 110-2. Amendment of county provisions.
Section 218-2 of the Carroll County Water Resource Management
Ordinance, known as Chapter 218 of the Carroll County Code, shall be
amended for application within the Town of Mount Airy to provide that:
COUNTY — The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, the Town
Council of the Town of Mount Airy, or its designee.
§ 110-3. Enforcement.
The Mayor of the Town of Mount Airy is hereby authorized to enter into
agreement with the County Commissioners of Carroll County, a body
corporate and politic, with respect to enforcement of the Water Resource
Management Ordinance hereby adopted.
Chapter 112
ZONING
§ 109-39 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 110-3
107:370
ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 112-1. Purpose.
This chapter is made in accordance with the Mount Airy Master Plan and is
designed for the following purposes:
A. To control congestion in the streets.
B. To secure the public safety.
C. To promote health and the general welfare.
D. To provide adequate light and air.
E. To promote the conservation of natural resources.
F. To prevent environmental pollution.
G. To avoid undue concentration of population.
To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, recreation, parks and other public requirements.
H.
I. To conserve the value of buildings.
To encourage the orderly development and the most appropriate use of
land throughout the Town.
J.
To promote compatibility of site configuration and design within
surrounding areas. [Added 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-14]
K.
To promote protection of the architectural character of neighborhoods
and business districts within the community. [Added 5-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-14]
L.
§ 112-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-1
107:371

ARTICLE II
General Regulations
§ 112-2. Establishment of zoning districts and boundaries.
§ 112-3. Application of regulations. [Amended 6-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-2; 8-14-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10; 5-7-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-15]
No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof
shall be erected, moved or altered by permit unless for the use expressly
permitted by and in conformity with the regulations and minimum
construction, architecture and design requirements for the district in which
it is located.
For the purpose of this chapter, all land within the Town of Mount
Airy is hereby designated on the Zoning Map59 as being in one of the
following districts:
RE Existing Residential District
R1 Residential District
R2 Residential District
R3 Residential District
R5 Residential District
R7 Residential District
CD Conservation District
LC Limited Commercial District
NP Neighborhood Professional District
CC Community Commercial District
I Industrial District
A.
Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning district maps, the boundary
lines of the districts follow lot lines, center lines of streets, alleys,
railroad beds, or such center lines extended, center lines of creeks,
measured lines, or the corporate limit line as existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter and as subsequently and lawfully amended.
B.
Zoning of annexed areas. All territory which may hereafter be annexed
to the Town shall from time of annexation be considered as being in
the R-1 District until changed by ordinance, unless the resolution of
annexation by the Town Council provides for other district classification
or classifications.
A.
Referral to Planning and Zoning Commission. The Town Council shall
refer all annexations to the Planning Commission for recommendation
and report on annexation and the zoning classification. If the
B.
59.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Town offices.
§ 112-2 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-3
107:373
§ 112-4. Required open area not to be infringed upon.
Yards, parking space, or lot area required for one building cannot be used
for another main building nor can the size of a lot be reduced below the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 112-5. Uses not listed. [Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2002-30]
Any use not specifically enumerated as being allowed in a given district in
this chapter shall not be allowed by approval of a special exception from
the Board of Appeals unless the Board of Appeals find that the use not
specifically enumerated is identical in impact to a use permitted by right
or allowed by special exception in the district. All such uses must meet all
requirements for the identical use as well as the general requirements for
a special exception (§ 112-62E). This section shall not apply to any use (or
similar use) that is expressly listed in this chapter as being prohibited.
§ 112-6. Continuance of nonconforming uses.
Any lawful use of land or structure existing at the time of adoption of this
chapter, or subsequent amendment of this chapter, may be continued with
the following limitations:
Commission makes no report on either annexation or zoning within
120 days from the date the Town Council by motion refers it to the
Commission, it shall be considered to have made a report making
no recommendation, provided that the Town Council may extend this
period of 120 days for one definite additional period for a demonstrated
sufficient reason. The Town Council shall then hold a public hearing as
described in Subsection C below.
Public hearing. After the Planning Commission shall have rendered its
recommendation as described above in Subsection B, the Town Council
shall then hold a public hearing in relation thereto, as required by
Article 23A, § 19, of the Annotated Code by giving required notice of the
time and place of such hearing in a newspaper published in or having a
general circulation in the Town of Mount Airy. Zoning of annexed areas
must comply with Article 23A of the Annotated Code.
C.
Location of zoning line in vacated street. Whenever the Town Council
vacates a street or alley, adjacent districts shall extend to the center
line of the vacation.
D.
Expansion of nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses may upgrade,
repair, or make alterations to their facilities. However, for the
expansion of any nonconforming use, a site plan must be approved
by the Town Planning Commission. Such expansion must meet the
following requirements:
A.
§ 112-3 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-6
107:374
§ 112-7. Off-street parking. [Amended 2-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2009-7]
Expansion is limited to the lot that exists at the time of adoption of
this chapter and additional acreage may not be added to enlarge
any nonconforming use.
(1)
Provision for access drives, off-street parking and loading shall be
consistent with the requirements for the use as provided in this
chapter.
(2)
Provisions for yards, building height and building area shall be
consistent with the requirements for the most restricted permitted
uses for the zone in which the nonconformity is located.
(3)
Buffers and screens shall be provided as determined by the
Planning Commission to adequately protect neighboring
properties. This includes but is not limited to fences, walls,
plantings and open space.
(4)
Nonconforming uses not to rebuild. Any nonconforming use, which has
been damaged to the extent of 80% or more of its current fair market
value, as estimated immediately prior to damage, shall not be rebuilt,
replaced, or reconstructed except in conformity with this chapter, or
upon a finding by the Board of Appeals that the new use is of the same
type and would not have any more adverse impact than the prior use.
Nonconforming single-family dwellings are exempt from this section
and may be rebuilt.
B.
Discontinued nonconforming uses not to reestablish after one year. No
nonconforming use shall be established or reestablished after having
been discontinued for one year. Vacating of premises or building, or
nonoperative status shall be evidence of a discontinued use.
C.
Substitution of nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use may be
substituted for any other nonconforming use only through a special
exception approval where there Board of Appeals determines that the
new use would be a lesser use with a lesser impact on the community.
D.
Nonconforming structures not meeting dimensional requirements.
Nonconforming structures which do not meet the dimensional
requirements (i.e., height, setbacks, lot area, etc.) may be used for
special exception uses only so long as the nonconformity is not
increased and that the request complies with all other Board of Appeals
conditions for a special exception.
E.
Allowable projections of nonconforming building setbacks into yards.
Whenever a building exists with nonconforming setbacks, such building
may be expanded along the existing nonconforming setback line
provided that no new nonconformities are created and the existing
nonconforming setback is not increased.
F.
§ 112-6 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-7
107:375
Size of parking space. Each parking space shall not be less than nine
feet wide and 20 feet long (no exceptions), exclusive of passageways
and driveways appurtenant to the space and giving access to it.
Minimum parking aisle widths are:
(1) Twenty-four feet for 90° parking.
(2) Eighteen feet for 60° parking.
(3) Thirteen feet for 45° parking.
(4) Eleven feet for 30° parking.
A.
Spaces required. Off-street parking spaces must be provided for each
building erected or enlarged in accordance with the following schedule,
except as may be authorized below: [Amended 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
2015-22; 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
Type of Use Minimum Parking Space
Time of Use1
(a/b/c/d/e/f)
Residential
dwelling (other
than apartments)
3 spaces per unit 100/60/100/100/80/
100
Residential
apartment
2 spaces per unit 100/60/100/100/80/
100
Boardinghouse 1 space per bedroom 100/60/100/100/80/
100
Bed-andbreakfast
(special
exception)
2 spaces plus 1 per guest
room [refer to § 112-62F(26]
100/40/100/100/40/
100
Hotel, motel,
hotel with
conference
center
1 space per room plus 1
space employee
100/70/100/100/70/
100
Office building 1 space per 250 square feet 5/100/20/5/10/10
Retail store or
shop
1 space per 150 square feet
of gross floor area
5/70/80/5/100/100
Restaurant Indoor dining: 1 space for
each 90 square feet of gross
floor area of the building in
which the restaurant is
located or 1 space for each 2
seats, whichever is greater,
plus
5/80/100/5/80/100
B.
§ 112-7 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-7
107:376
Type of Use Minimum Parking Space
Time of Use1
(a/b/c/d/e/f)
Outdoor dining: 1 space for
each 90 square feet of land
area set aside or provided
for outdoor dining (served
seating and/or dedicated
seating for one particular
restaurant) or 1 space for
each 4 seats, whichever
requirement is greater
Bowling alley 4 spaces per lane plus 1
space per employee
5/20/60/5/100/100
Other
recreational
establishments
1 space per 250 square feet
of gross floor area
10/40/100/50/80/100
Automobile
repair, gasoline
1 space per 400 square feet
of gross floor area and
ground area devoted to
repair and service facilities
70/100/100/70/100/
100
Flex space,
industrial
1 space per employee plus 1
space per company vehicle
on the lot, or 3.5 spaces per
1,000 square feet gross floor
area, whichever is greater
5/100/20/5/5/5
Warehouses 2 spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area
5/100/20/5/5/5
Self-storage
(mini
warehouses)
1 space per 1,500 square
feet of gross floor area plus
2 spaces per employee
5/100/20/5/5/5
Funeral home 10 spaces per public room or
1 space per 50 square feet of
floor area, whichever
requirement is greater
5/100/100/5/100/100
Clubs, lodges
and other similar
places
1 space per 3 persons
capacity or 1 space per 100
square feet of floor area of
meeting rooms, whichever is
greater
5/50/100/5/100/100
Other
commercial
buildings
1 space per 250 square feet
of gross floor area
5/100/100/5/100/100
§ 112-7 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-7
107:377
Type of Use Minimum Parking Space
Time of Use1
(a/b/c/d/e/f)
Hospital,
sanitarium
1 space per bed plus 1 space
per 1.5 employees, or 1 per
200 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever is
greater
100/100/100/100/
100/100
Auditorium,
church without
preschool,
theater and other
such places of
public assembly,
non-weekday
institutional
1 space per 3 persons'
capacity
5/70/100/5/100/100
Convenience
stores
1 space per 200 square feet
of gross floor area
10/100/100/10/100/
100
Medical offices 5 spaces per doctor plus 1
space per employee or 1
space per 250 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever
is greater
5/100/20/5/100/20
Veterinary clinic 3 spaces per doctor, plus 1
space per employee
5/100/20/5/100/20
Beauty and
barber
3 spaces per operator or 1
space per 100 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever
is greater, plus 1 space per
employee
5/50/100/5/100/100
Preschool, daycare,
nursery
1 space per employee plus 1
space per 6 students
5/100/20/5/10/10
Grade school
(K-8), private
school, or
weekday
institutional
2 spaces per classroom plus
1 space per 8 seats in
auditoriums and assembly
halls
5/100/20/5/10/10
Grade school
(9-12), private
school, or
weekday
institutional
1 space per 10 students plus
1 space per school staff
(teachers and employees)
5/100/100/5/100/100
§ 112-7 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-7
107:378
Type of Use Minimum Parking Space
Time of Use1
(a/b/c/d/e/f)
Banks 1 space per 200 square feet
of gross floor area plus 1
space per employee; drivethrough
stacking that does
not impede through lanes
may be counted towards
total spaces required up to
50% of total requirement
5/100/40/5/100/40
Laundromat 1 space per 2 machines
(washers and dryers)
5/50/100/5/100/100
Mixed
commercial:
office, retail,
restaurant
1 space per 200 square feet
of gross floor area;
restaurant not to exceed
40% of gross floor area,
otherwise restaurant to be
calculated separately; any
outdoor land area set aside
or provided for outdoor
dining shall be included in
the gross floor area
5/100/55/5/65/50
Swimming pool 1 space per 4 persons'
capacity
5/60/20/5/100/20
Health and
fitness club
1 space per 250 square feet
of gross floor area
5/60/80/5/100/80
Skating rink 1 space per each 3 persons'
capacity
5/20/60/5/100/100
Home occupation
(special
exception)
In addition to dwelling
requirements, 1 space plus 1
space per member of
immediate family employed
[refer to § 112-62F(7)]
Not applicable
Professional
office (special
exception)
In addition to dwelling
requirements, 3 spaces per
professional [refer to
§ 112-62F(12)]
Not applicable
Shopping center
(special
exception)
1 space per 200 square feet
of gross floor area [refer to
§ 112-62F(15)]
5/80/100/5/80/100
Family apartment
(special
exception)
In addition to dwelling
requirements, 2 spaces for
the apartment [refer to
§ 112-62F(17)]
Not applicable
§ 112-7 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-7
107:379
Type of Use Minimum Parking Space
Time of Use1
(a/b/c/d/e/f)
Veterinary clinic
(special
exception)
9 spaces for clinic plus 2
spaces for residence [refer
to § 112-62F(18)]
Not applicable
Elderly housing
(special
exception)
2 spaces per unit, including
1 dedicated space per unit
[refer to § 112-62F(21)]
Not applicable
Retail and
commercial in
excess of 65,000
square feet (no
more than 4
establishments)
(special
exception)
1 space per 200 square feet
of gross floor area [refer to
§ 112-62F(23)]
5/70/80/5/100/100
Nonresident
professional
office (special
exception)
In addition to dwelling
requirements (if any), 3
spaces per professional
[refer to § 112-62F(24)]
5/100/20/5/10/10
OPE build to suit/
speculative
building
1 space per 250 square feet Not applicable
NOTE 1: Time of use based on the following schedule:
(a) Monday through Friday, 12:00 midnight through 8:00 a.m.
(b) Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m.
(c) Monday through Friday, 5:00 p.m. through 12:00 midnight.
(d) Saturday and Sunday, 12:00 midnight through 8:00 a.m.
(e) Saturday and Sunday, 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m.
(f) Saturday and Sunday, 5:00 p.m. through 12:00 midnight.
Location. The parking area must be on the same or nearby premises. If
on nearby premises:
The nearest point of the parking lot shall be not further than the
following distances to the nearest point of the property served: 100
feet in the case of a commercial use, 200 feet in the case of a
residential use, and 300 feet in the case of industrial use and all
other uses.
(1)
The parking area must remain under control of the owner or
operator of the use to which the parking area is appurtenant.
(2)
C.
Layout. Parking areas must be arranged so there will be no need for
motorists to back onto:
D.
§ 112-7 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-7
107:380
Local streets as defined in the Chapter 98, Subdivision of Land and
Site Plan Approval. This does not apply in the case of single-family
detached residential uses.
(1)
(2) Major thoroughfares as designated in the Town Master Plan.
Parking area adjacent to street and property lines. All parking areas
must be set back from all street and property lines a distance equal to
1/2 the yard setback, but in no case closer than 10 feet.
E.
Paving. All required parking or permitted motor vehicle or motor
equipment storage areas on all access drives shall be paved with
concrete, bituminous paving or other approved material in accordance
with Town of Mount Airy design specifications with a slope in any
area of parking that is no greater than the maximum slope permitted
under the Americans with Disabilities Act and in no event greater than
8%. The Planning Commission may permit a gravel pavement surface,
in accordance with the Town of Mount Airy design specifications, if
the applicant can satisfy the Commission of the existence of one of
the following: that the proposed gravel parking area will be used no
more than twice per month or 24 days per year total; will allow the
preservation of wooded areas that would otherwise be removed; is
within a well recharge area; and/or that it is in the best interest of
the Town that the pavement material not be permanent. [Amended
3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-1]
F.
Access driveways. Within 10 feet of a street right-of-way line, access
driveways for parking areas may not exceed 35 feet in width. Such
driveways may not enter a public street within 40 feet of the street
right-of-way line of an intersecting street and within 25 feet of another
access drive on the same property. For all uses except single-family
residential, access drives must be set back from a side property line
a minimum of 10 feet. Single-family residential driveways must be set
back from a side property line a minimum of three feet or as otherwise
determined by the Zoning Administrator or as recommended by the
Town Engineer. [Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-1]
G.
Existing buildings. Existing buildings not complying with off-street
parking requirements may be remodeled, repaired and structurally
altered, and any enlargement or change of use of existing buildings will
require that all parking areas be paved. Any enlargement must provide
the required parking spaces for said enlargement and a change of use
within existing buildings that cannot comply with parking can occur,
provided that the new use does not require more parking than the
existing use. However, any change to a new use which would require
more parking than the prior use may be permitted upon application
to the Planning Commission, provided that the distance between the
nearest point of the building involved to the nearest point of a municipal
parking lot is not greater than 1,000 feet. In granting any such
application, the Planning Commission shall consider the following
factors: existing and proposed parking of the applicant current and
H.
§ 112-7 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-7
107:381
projected usage of the municipal lot; proposed and projected number
of employees of the applicant; applicant's proposed hours of operation
in relation to the peak hours of use of the municipal lot; compatibility
and desirability of the proposed use in relation to other uses in the
immediate area; the hardship, if any, upon the applicant if denied; and
the benefit, if any, to the public in terms of increased sources of goods
and services and the economic vitality of the area involved. [Amended
3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-1]
Handicap parking. At a minimum, accessible parking shall be provided
in accordance with 28 CFR Part 36, ADA Standards for Accessible
Design (latest version). In general, for the first 100 parking spaces a
minimum of one handicap space per 25 total spaces is required with an
adjacent aisle five feet wide by 20 feet long. Each handicap space shall
be nine-feet wide by 20 feet long.
I.
Shared parking can be implemented via sharing arrangements made
between individual facility developers and owners. The total required
spaces must follow the minimum parking requirements and time-ofuse
requirements of this section of the Mount Airy zoning code. Such
arrangements shall be first reviewed and approved by the Town Zoning
Administrator and Town Attorney, and then recorded within the
respective County Circuit Court. Such agreement shall be recorded
prior to approval of any building permit.
J.
With respect to mixed-use development within the Community
Commercial District (MXU-CC) by special exception pursuant to
§ 112-39C(12), the Planning Commission, at the time of the concept
site plan, shall determine if the appropriate, approximate number of
spaces have been provided. At the time of the final site plan approval,
the Commission shall determine the final number of spaces, based upon
the considerations of safety, convenience, pedestrian and vehicular
circulation, and added landscaping within the parking areas provided.
In addition, the Planning Commission may reduce the number of spaces
required for any use in Chapter 112, Article II, § 112-7. [Added
9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
K.
Parking design standards. With respect to mixed-use development
within the Community Commercial District (MXU-CC) by special
exception pursuant to § 112-39C(12), where appropriate, the following
design guidelines shall be considered during the concept plan phase of
the development: [Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
Surface parking:
Surface parking lots shall be located to the rear of principal
buildings or the side.
(a)
Adhere to dimensional standards for parking spaces as
prescribed in § 112-7A.
(b)
(1)
L.
§ 112-7 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-8
107:382
§ 112-8. Off-street loading.
§ 112-9. Obstructions to vision at intersections prohibited.
On any corner lot in all districts there shall be no obstruction to traffic
visibility within 35 feet of the intersection of the two street property lines
of the corner lot. At driveway locations, there shall be no planting or other
sight obstruction greater than three feet in height at a location within 10
feet of the existing or planned sidewalk location.
§ 112-10. Structures and land development in floodplain.
No structure or land development (such as parking lot, fill or excavation)
shall be permitted within the annual, historical or one-hundred-year
floodplain, whichever is greater. The above requirements shall not be
considered prohibiting road crossings nor the placement of public service
lines, provided the intent is adhered to.
§ 112-11. Signs. [Amended 1-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2000-6]
Every building or structure used for retail, wholesale or similar
commercial uses, or industrial uses and constructed after the adoption
of this chapter shall provide space on the property to be used
exclusively for loading and unloading of vehicles. Such space shall be in
accordance with the following schedule:
Required Spaces
Building Floor Area
(square feet)
1 0 to 8,000 square feet
2 8,001 to 25,000 square feet
3 25,001 to 40,000 square feet
4 40,001 to 100,000 square feet
A.
For buildings over 100,000 square feet, four spaces plus one additional
space for each additional 50,000 square feet.
B.
For the purpose of determining adequacy of loading area, each space
shall not be less than 12 feet in width, 45 feet in length, and 14 feet in
height.
C.
Signs, general. The following signs are permitted in any district
according to the provision of this chapter:
A personal service sign for a professional office or a home
occupation; unlighted or indirectly lighted not to exceed two
square feet in size.
(1)
A farm sign, including farm produce stands, displaying the name
of the owner, the nature of the farm and advertising only those
(2)
A.
§ 112-8 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-11
107:383
products produced on the premises, not to exceed eight square feet
in size in the RR Zone and two square feet in residential zones.
A temporary real estate sign advertising sale or lease only of the
premises on which such sign is displayed as follows:
(a) Residential/other: six square feet maximum.
(b) Commercial/industrial: 32 square feet maximum.
Temporary real estate sign, not exceeding 100 square feet in
size, advertising the opening of a subdivision where such sign
is located. Temporary shall be until construction is complete.
(c)
Permanent residential subdivision name signs not exceeding
64 square feet in size.
(d)
(e) No permit is required for any of the above.
(3)
A sign identifying a nonprofit organization and giving direction
thereto, containing no commercial advertising, not exceeding 10
square feet in size.
(4)
A temporary sign noting an event of general interest, such as a
locally sponsored carnival, with a maximum sign size of 50 square
feet per road frontage and not to exceed 100 square feet total on
the premises. Such signs shall not be erected more than 30 days
prior to and shall be removed within 10 days after the event.
(5)
Banners, pennants and other devices are prohibited except for the
following:
A temporary business sign identifying a special, unique, limited
activity, service, product or sale of limited duration. Temporary
business signs may be requested for permitting no more than
three times in a year. Sign may be erected for a period of not
to exceed 30 days.
(a)
Temporary event signs announcing a campaign, drive, activity
or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious
organization for noncommercial purposes. The permitted
number of temporary event signs shall be determined by the
Zoning Administrator with consideration given to the public
health and safety. Any temporary event sign which shall be
allowed to extend over or onto a public right-of-way shall be
erected and maintained in such a manner as not to interfere or
obstruct access, activity or vision along any such public rightof-
way. Temporary event signs may be erected for a period not
to exceed 30 days.
(b)
(6)
One bulletin board on church, school or college property, not over
32 square feet in area.
(7)
§ 112-11 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-11
107:384
Signs, directional, informational, or warning in character, involving
neither advertising, nor real estate openings and each not
exceeding six square feet in area.
(8)
Political campaign signs or other signs containing political speech
or expressing opinions on matters of public concern are permitted,
provided that they are not placed in the public right-of-way.
Political campaign signs or other signs containing political speech
or expressing opinions on matters of public concern shall be
permitted up to a total area of six square feet in a residential
district and 32 square feet in a commercial or industrial district
or on property in a residential district abutting a state road with
a speed limit above 40 miles per hour where a commercial use
is authorized by the Board of Appeals or otherwise by this Code.
Placement of signs on property shall be at a location so as not to
cause sight line or other similar hazards for motorists on adjacent
public roads, and the Town's Zoning Administrator is empowered
to direct that signs be relocated on property so as to avoid such
hazards. [Amended 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-14]
(9)
Real estate/yard sale direction signs no larger than three square
feet in area and three feet in height shall be permitted from 6:00
p.m. Friday to 8:00 a.m. Monday. This period will be extended to
include legal holidays on Mondays or Fridays. Signs shall not be
attached to utility poles, traffic control posts/signs, or traffic signal
poles. Town staff is hereby authorized to remove any signs found to
be in violation of this section, which signs shall be destroyed if not
retrieved within five days, subject to an appeal to the Mayor if filed
in writing within said five-day period.
(10)
Business signs. Business signs calling attention to a business, service
or industry conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located
or in the case of a freestanding sign, which calls attention to a business,
service or industry, or multiple businesses, services or industries
conducted on the premises or within the Town limits are permitted
subject to the following conditions:
The total area for all attached signs per use or business on the
premise (commercial and industrial) shall not exceed one square
foot of sign per building front foot or frontage per premises with a
maximum size of 200 square feet (per individual sign) as provided
below. [Amended 6-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-6]
(a) Building unit. A building unit is equivalent to the tenant space.
Primary and secondary frontage. The frontage of any building
unit shall include the elevation facing a public street, facing a
primary parking area for the building or tenants, or containing
the public entrance to the building or building units.
[1] Definition.
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 112-11 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-11
107:385
PRIMARY FRONTAGE — The linear distance along which
a lot line adjoins a public street right-of-way. The "primary
frontage" of a corner lot, multiple corner lot, or through
lot, is the street with the highest functional street
classification or longest street frontage if functional street
classification is the same. If the street is a frontage road,
the functional classification of the road which the frontage
road fronts shall be used to determine maximum sign face
area.
The primary frontage shall be considered the portion of
any frontage containing the primary public entrance to the
building or building units.
[2]
The secondary frontage shall include those frontages:
Containing secondary public entrances to the building
or building units facing a public street or primary
parking area that are not designated as the primary
frontage by Subsection B(1)(b)[1] and [2] above; or
[a]
The secondary frontage shall include those frontages
facing a public street that are not designated as the
primary building frontage by Subsection B(1)(b)[1]
and [2] above.
[b]
[3]
Bonus secondary signage calculations. A principal building
or building unit(s) with more than one frontage, such as
a building located on a through lot or corner lot, shall be
allowed to add to its signage calculations the secondary
frontage equal to the signage allotment rate of the primary
frontage. However, if secondary signage is used, this
signage must be located and oriented toward the
secondary frontage.
[4]
Identification sign for an industrial plant not to exceed 50 square
feet.
(2)
An identification sign for a shopping center or industrial park or
other integrated group of commercial/industrial buildings shall not
exceed 150 square feet in area, and shall be subject to setback
requirements for the district in which located.
(3)
A single freestanding sign which does not exceed 50 square feet
per road frontage to a maximum of 150 square feet shall be
permitted which calls attention to a business, service or industry
conducted on the premises or within the Town limits, or in marquis
style or that calls attention to multiple businesses, services or
industries conducted within the Town limits.
(4)
§ 112-11 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-11
107:386
Where commercially or industrially zoned property adjoins
residentially zoned property, no freestanding sign shall be placed
within 100 feet of the residentially zoned property.
(5)
Menu/reader boards may be permitted on a freestanding sign but
will be included in total area allowed for a freestanding sign.
Letters may be manually attached or electronically remote
controlled. Periodic changes of messages are allowed, however,
boards shall not have flashing, blinking, fading or moving messages
of any type. Messages shall be limited to items pertaining to the
business on the premises or public service notices.
(6)
Sidewalk sandwich signs are permitted; they must be displayed
directly in front of the business and within 10 feet of the business;
they will be no greater than three feet in height with a width
not to exceed the greater of 1/2 of the sidewalk upon which they
are displayed or three feet; they may be displayed only during
normal business hours and may not impede any safety issues.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Zoning
Regulations or the Town Code, in the event that there is a violation
of this section, there will be a warning delivered to the business
establishment being advertised and in the event of a second
violation, it shall be lawful for the Town to confiscate the sign that
was used in violation of this subsection, subject to an appeal to the
Mayor filed in writing within five business days.
(7)
Signs, general provisions.
No overhanging sign shall extend over any building line more than
four feet.
(1)
All signs on and in front of the building shall be immobile,
nonflashing, and in no way resemble traffic signals or other
warning devices. They may be lighted indirectly or from within.
Illuminated signs shall be so constructed as to avoid glare or
reflection on any portion of an adjacent highway or residential
building.
(2)
All freestanding signs shall be subject to 1/2 the setback
requirements for the district in which located and shall be so
located and shall be so placed as to allow clear and ample visual
sight lines for driveways leading into a street and at intersecting
streets and alleys.
(3)
In no case shall any sign attached to a building project more than
three feet above the roof line.
(4)
A freestanding sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height above the
average grade of the road on which it faces.
(5)
The area of a billboard or other sign shall be the product of its
greatest horizontal and vertical dimensions measured over its
(6)
C.
§ 112-11 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-11
107:387
§ 112-12. Prohibited uses. [Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2002-31]
entire face including background and borders, but excluding
supports; provided that where a sign consists only of lettered,
figured, pictorial matter, device or representation applied directly
to the surface of a building, without special background or border,
then its area shall be determined by measuring the overall length
and height of the lettering or other matter.
Nonconforming signs may continue to exist but must be brought
into conformance with any change in size or location.
(7)
A V-shaped sign shall be considered as one sign, so long as the
interior angle does not exceed 30°. Such sign shall not be located
within 200 feet of a principal building on an adjoining lot.
(8)
A. Billboards are prohibited in all districts.
B. Private or public shooting ranges are prohibited in all districts.
Junkyards are prohibited in all districts, including those for storage of
wrecked, dismantled or abandoned motor vehicles and parts thereof,
and for the storage and sale of other similar scrap materials.
C.
Salvage yards of any waste materials, with the exception of recycling
facilities for waste construction materials, are prohibited in all districts.
D.
Mobile homes and mobile home courts or parks are prohibited in all
districts.
E.
Concrete plants, including but not limited to, concrete manufacturing
facilities and ready-mix concrete facilities, are prohibited in all
districts.
F.
Asphalt plants, including but not limited to asphalt manufacturing
facilities, are prohibited in all districts.
G.
Fertilizer plants and fertilizer manufacturing facilities are prohibited in
all districts.
H.
Sales as a regular course of business or trade with the principal
objective of profit (to include by way of Internet, arm's-length or mailorder
transactions) of alcohol, tobacco, or firearms shall be permitted
if and to the extent otherwise permitted as a use of right or special
exception in the Downtown Zone and the Limited Commercial,
Community Commercial and Industrial Districts, but shall be prohibited
in all other zoning districts. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2016-2760]
I.
Any industry not meeting the standards in § 112-45B of this chapter is
prohibited in all districts.
J.
60.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections I and J as Subsections
J and K, respectively.
§ 112-11 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-12
107:388
§ 112-13. Storage of inflammable fuels. [Amended 12-2-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-28]
Storage of compressed gases and liquid fuels shall conform to the following:
Any use not identical in impact to a use permitted by right or allowed
by special exception under the standards provided in § 112-5 of this
chapter.
K.
Compressed gases. Storage of compressed gases used for individual
homes, apartment houses, and commercial establishments may be
above ground in all districts if the total capacity of all containers
is less than 2,000 gallons in commercial and industrial districts and
500 gallons maximum in residential districts, and provided that each
individual container is no less than 25 feet from the nearest line of
adjoining property, except that containers totaling 500 gallons or less
may be no less than 10 feet from the nearest line of adjoining property.
Containers used for apartment houses and commercial establishments
shall be screened by evergreen plantings of a height not less than the
height of the containers so as to effectively obscure the containers from
view.
A.
Below-ground storage.
In all districts, storage of compressed gases shall be in accordance
with Town regulations. Each individual underground container
shall be located with respect to the nearest line of adjoining
property as follows:
Size of Container
(gallons)
Distance
(feet)
000 to 2,000 25
2,001 to 30,000 50
30,001 to 60,000 75
In excess of 60,000 100
(1)
(2) In residential districts underground containers are prohibited.
B.
Gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil and other liquid fuels. Gasoline, kerosene,
fuel oil and other liquid fuels shall be stored underground or within
the structure to be heated. In accordance with Town regulations, each
individual container shall be located with respect to the nearest line of
adjoining property as follows:
C.
§ 112-12 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-13
107:389
§ 112-14. Landscaping/screening requirements.
In any site plan review, the Planning Commission may require adequate
provision for landscaping/screening in order to protect adjoining properties;
to provide for aesthetic appearance of the site; and to screen parking,
loading and other objectionable views from the public and neighbors. All
commercial and industrial sites must provide at least 20% of their site in
landscaped area. Landscaped area is the area of a site not covered by
impervious surfaces, and may include stormwater management areas.
§ 112-15. Principal uses permitted per lot.
No more than one single-family detached dwelling shall be permitted per lot
and no more than two principal commercial or industrial buildings per lot,
except for shopping centers and industrial centers.
§ 112-16. Essential services exempt.
Below- and aboveground essential services, such as utility lines, cables,
poles, etc., shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter except for the
aboveground buildings and structures (pumping station, electric substation,
switching building, etc.) which will require approval of a special exception
by the Board of Appeals for compliance with §112-62E and F(13).
§ 112-17. Contractor's/lot owner's temporary structures.
Temporary structures of contractors and lot owners in conjunction with
a construction project will be permitted in any district where the project
is located subject to the setback requirements of the permitted use and
that the temporary structure be removed at completion of construction or
expiration of the permit.
Zoning Classification
Distance
(feet)
Water Capacity
(gallon) Residential* Commercial
000 to 2,000 25 10
2,001 to 10,000 50 15
In excess of 10,000 Prohibited 15
*NOTE: In residential districts, underground containers are
prohibited.
Emergency access. The location of all containers for the storage of
inflammable fuels shall be such to provide adequate fire vehicle and
apparatus access to such containers.
D.
§ 112-13 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-18
107:390
§ 112-18. Outdoor lighting requirements and restrictions.
[Amended 2-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-4]
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BULB — A lamp that produces the actual light.
DIRECT LIGHT — Light emitted directly from, through or off of the
lamp, reflector, reflector diffuser, refractor or diffuser lens of a light
source.
FIXTURE — The assembly that houses the lamp or bulb, which may
include a housing, mounting bracket, pole socket, lamp holder, ballast,
reflector or mirror, and/or refractor or lens.
FLOOD OR SPOT LIGHT — Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates
a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed
beam in a particular direction.
FOOTCANDLES — The amount of light striking a surface. One
footcandle is one lumen per square foot, or the amount of light given
off by a wax candle striking a one foot square surface which is one foot
from the candle.
FULL CUTOFF — A light fixture which cuts off all upward transmission
of light.
FULLY SHIELDED — A fixture with housing or an attachment which
prevents light from being emitted directly by the bulb or lamp, such
that it prevents a line of sight to the bulb when viewed from another
property and prevents light rays from being emitted at angles above the
horizontal place as certified by any photometric test report, if required.
GLARE — Light emitting from a light source with an intensity great
enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see, resulting in annoyance or
discomfort as well as loss of visual performance.
IESNA — Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.
LAMP — A light source, which may include a bulb, that produces the
actual light.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light projected onto a property from a fixture not
located on that property.
LUMENS — A unit used to measure the actual amount of light produced
by a bulb or lamp. One thousand eight hundred lumens is the output of
a one-hundred-watt incandescent lamp.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting system, including the bulb, lens,
fixture, diffuser and/or reflective enclosure.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING — Nighttime illumination of an outside area or
object by any device located outdoors that produces light by any means.
A.
§ 112-18 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-18
107:391
OUTDOOR TEMPORARY LIGHTING — The specific illumination of an
outdoor area for a period of less than 10 days, with at least 180 days
passing before being used again, except for emergencies.
WATT — A unit used to measure the amount of electrical energy
consumed by a lamp.
General requirements.
All outdoor lighting shall conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
(1)
All lighting in place prior to the effective date of this chapter shall
comply with this chapter with any change, other than replacement
of the existing bulb; with any change in location of any light source;
with any change of intensity level of the light being emitted; or with
any change in ownership of the underlying property.
(2)
B.
Control of glare.
Site lighting shall be provided by full cutoff fixtures and shall be
directed downward on site, so that the lamp does not create glare
on adjacent properties, is not visible from adjacent properties or
public streets, and so that the light does not spill onto adjacent
properties unless beneficial to and approved by the adjacent
property owner.
(1)
Any light source emitting more than 9,500 initial lumen output
(roughly equivalent to 100 watts if using a high-pressure sodium
light source) shall not emit direct light about a horizontal plane
through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the light source.
(2)
The maximum height of any light source shall be 25 feet except
around perimeters. Any light source emitting more than 9,500
initial lumen output (roughly equivalent to 100 watts if using a
high-pressure sodium light source) shall be mounted at a height no
more than the value (three plus D/3), where D is the distance in
feet to the nearest property boundary.
(3)
The maximum height of any light source on perimeters shall be 15
feet. Any light source emitting more than 9,500 initial lumen output
(roughly equivalent to 100 watts if using a high-pressure sodium
light source) shall be mounted at a height no more than the value
(three plus D/3), where D is the distance in feet to the nearest
property boundary.
(4)
Light trespass from originating property shall not exceed 0.1
footcandle on residentially zoned property or .5 footcandle on
commercially zoned property, measured on a vertical plane five feet
above grade at the property line.
(5)
C.
§ 112-18 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-18
107:392
Maximum illumination from any light source shall be 50,000 initial
lumen output (roughly equivalent to 400 watts if using a highpressure
sodium light source).
(6)
All lighting shall be subject to adjustment after installation to avoid
glare on adjacent properties.
(7)
Wall-mounted lighting.
Any wall-mounted lighting or wall-packs must be fully shielded, and
reflect light downward, below the horizontal rather than above the
horizontal.
(1)
Lighting fixtures shall be located, aimed and shielded so that light
is not directed toward adjacent streets, roads or adjacent
properties. Fixtures designed to wash light down the building
surface are preferred. No facade uplighting shall be permitted.
(2)
The maximum illumination on any vertical surface shall be five
footcandles except the surface immediately adjacent to any wallmounted
fixtures.
(3)
D.
Prohibitions.
No site lighting will be permitted except those equipped with full
cutoff fixtures and which are directed downward on site, so that
the lamp does not create glare on adjacent properties, is not visible
from adjacent properties or public streets, and so that the light
does not spill onto adjacent properties unless beneficial to and
approved by the adjacent property owner.
(1)
The use of search lights, laser lighting, or lights that pulse, flash,
rotate or simulate motion for any purpose is prohibited.
(2)
Tower lighting will not be permitted unless and to the extent
required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Any such required
lighting shall be of the minimum, lowest allowed intensity and shall
be red in color unless specifically forbidden under Federal Aviation
Administration requirements.
(3)
E.
Plan submissions.
The applicant for any permit required under this chapter in
connection with any proposed outdoor lighting shall submit as
part of the application for a permit evidence that the proposed
work will comply with this section. As necessary, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may require submission of the lighting plan to
a lighting engineer chosen by the Commission at the cost of the
applicant. The submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be
limited to the following, all or part of which may be in addition to
information required elsewhere in this chapter:
(1)
F.
§ 112-18 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-18
107:393
Plans indicating the specific location, height and type of
illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, or any other light
sources;
(a)
A full description of each light source, fixtures, lamps, and
other devices, to include catalog cuts by manufactures and
diagrams, where appropriate;
(b)
Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers, or
similar information demonstrating the angle of cutoff and/or
light emissions;
(c)
For any commercial site plan, analysis and illuminance level
diagrams showing that the proposed installation conforms to
the lighting level standards of this chapter;
(d)
Tests, reviewed by a lighting engineer, indicating that the
lighting plan is sufficient to meet IESNA recommendations,
i.e., not to exceed IESNA recommendations, may be required
by the Planning and Zoning Commission; and
(e)
Computer-generated, point-by-point lighting calculations on a
scaled site plan with a ten-feet-by-ten-feet grid of footcandle
readings, indicating initial horizontal footcandles at grade, and
initial vertical footcandles five feet above grade at the property
line.
(f)
For any site plan, if the above plans, descriptions and data does not,
due to the nature or configuration of the devices, fixtures or light
sources proposed, enable the Planning and Zoning Commission
to certify that the lighting plan complies with this chapter, the
applicant shall additionally submit such certified reports of tests by
a lighting engineer or recognized testing laboratory as will enable
such determination.
(2)
High-pressure sodium lighting shall be preferred unless the
Planning and Zoning Commission specifically permits other
lighting types.
(3)
Lamp, fixture, or light source substitution permit originally issued.
Should any outdoor light fixture, lamp or light source be changed
after the permit has been issued, a change request prior to the
substitution must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
together with adequate information to assure compliance with this
Code. Only the replacement of a failed or damaged lamp, fixture or
light source for outdoor lighting for which a permit was obtained
under this chapter may be allowed under a change request, that is,
without a permit.
(4)
Lamp, fixture or light source substitution installed before effective
date. Outdoor light fixtures, lamps or light sources in existence
before the effective date of this chapter must submit a change
(5)
§ 112-18 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-18
107:394
request prior to replacement of a fixture or light source, other
than a bulb or lamp, together with adequate information to assure
compliance with this Code. Only the replacement of a failed or
damaged lamp, fixture or light source for outdoor lighting for which
a permit was obtained under this chapter may be allowed under a
change request, that is, without a permit.
Existing lighting.
Any lighting fixture or light source which directs light towards
residential property, streets or parking lots shall be shielded or
redirected within 30 days after a notice of violation is sent to the
property owner and/or agent.
(1)
Any lighting fixture or light source which permits reaiming or
adjustment shall be brought into compliance with the terms of the
chapter within 30 days after a notice of violation is sent to the
property owner and/or agent.
(2)
Any lighting which, using IESNA recommended guidelines, is found
to create a public hazard and/or endanger health or safety of any
person may be ordered altered or removed at any time.
(3)
G.
Enforcement; violations and penalties.
In the event of a violation of any provision of this section, a notice
of violation detailing the violation and steps to be taken to correct
the violation shall be sent by certified U.S. Mail, return receipt
requested, and regular mail, to the property owner and/or property
owner's agent giving 30 days to make corrections, except in cases
of an imminent threat to health or safety, when as little as 24
hours' notice may be given. If both notices are not returned as
undeliverable, after the applicable deadline the Town may issue a
citation or take other legal action to enjoin or abate any violations
of any provisions of this section.
(1)
At the expiration of the deadline period stated in the notice of
violation, the Town may take action to abate the infraction and
charge costs to the property owner or agent as real estate taxes on
the property in question only if the intent to take such action was
stated in the notice of violation and both notices were not returned
as undeliverable.
(2)
In addition to taking any other action that may be permitted by
law, the Town may consider a violation of any provision of this
section to constitute a municipal infraction and such violation may
be punished by a civil penalty of $100 per day. In prosecuting a
citation the Town may seek an abatement order preventing future
violations and permitting the Town to take action to abate any
violations and charge the costs of correction as real estate taxes on
the subject property. Each day a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
(3)
H.
§ 112-18 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-18
107:395
§ 112-19. Front and rear yards. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-5]
Exemptions.
All vehicle lighting, emergency traffic lighting, and traffic control
lighting shall be exempt;
(1)
Temporary outdoor lighting which provides specific illumination of
an outdoor area shall be exempt from any permit requirement but
shall otherwise comply with this chapter;
(2)
Lighting up to 10:00 p.m. which is reasonably related to sports,
amusements, entertainment events or other public gatherings
operating as part of an athletic contest, carnival, fairground
activity, parade or public celebration;
(3)
Lighting up to 12:00 midnight which is reasonably related to
sports, amusements, entertainment events or other public
gatherings operating according to the requirements of an
appropriate permit and as part of an athletic contest, carnival,
fairground activity, parade or public celebration;
(4)
Emergency lighting, including lighting required for emergency
street, utility or construction repairs, shall be exempt if temporary
and discontinued immediately upon abatement of the emergency;
and
(5)
Emergency repairs conducted by a public agency, including the
Town of Mount Airy, shall be exempt if temporary and discontinued
immediately upon abatement of the emergency.
(6)
I.
For through lots, the Zoning Administrator or Planning and Zoning
Commission shall determine which lot line shall be designated the front
lot line and which shall be designated the rear lot line based on the
following factors:
Front and rear lot lines should coordinate with front and rear doors
of the residences and/or subdivision.
(1)
Yards primarily used for private or recreational purposes with
planned or existing buffers over three feet in height, or in which
accessory structures already exist, are generally considered
adjacent to rear lot lines.
(2)
If Subsection A(1) or (2) above does not provide guidance, yard
with main entrances or driveways should be considered adjacent to
front lot lines.
(3)
A.
Front and rear lot lines shall be uniform for each street or road in
a subdivision. Persons wishing to change delineation of the front and
rear lot lines of their residences must file a request for variance with
the Board of Zoning Appeals. The decision of the Board of Zoning
B.
§ 112-18 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-19
107:396
Appeals shall be based on the above guidelines and standards provided
at § 112-62 of this chapter.
§ 112-19 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-19
107:397

ARTICLE III
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 112-20. Zoning Administration.
This chapter shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator. (Appeals
from the decision of the Zoning Administrator may be taken to the Board of
Appeals; see Article VIII).
§ 112-21. Zoning certificate. [Amended 7-1-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-6; 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-20]
Zoning certificate required. It shall be unlawful to commence the
excavation for or the construction of any building or structure,
including accessory buildings, or to commence the moving, alteration,
or change of use of any land or buildings, including accessory buildings
or structures, until the Zoning Administrator has issued a zoning
certificate for such work. Building permits as required under a Building
Code may still be required before construction can begin.
A.
Issuance of a zoning certificate.
In applying to the Zoning Administrator for a zoning certificate,
the applicant shall submit a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale,
showing the name of the person making the application, the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon as shown by a survey, the size,
shape, and location of the building to be erected, and such other
information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of
this chapter. This section is applicable to the construction of signs
also.
(1)
If the proposed excavation, construction or use, as set forth in the
application, is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter
and other ordinances of the Town of Mount Airy, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a zoning certificate for such excavation,
construction or use. If a zoning certificate is refused, the Zoning
Administrator shall state such refusal in writing, with the cause.
The Zoning Administrator shall grant or deny the certificate within
10 days of the date of application, provided he has received
comment from any agency involved or having jurisdiction with
regard to said certificate. A record of applications, plats, and action
shall be maintained in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
(2)
B.
Zoning Administrator not to waive ordinance requirements. The
issuance of a zoning certificate for construction, use or excavation not
conforming to requirements of this chapter shall not be construed as
waiving any ordinance requirements and shall not be a valid permit
until all requirements are complied with, except as follows regarding
residential property only:
C.
§ 112-20 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-21
107:399
§ 112-22. Remedies and violations and penalties; costs of
enforcement. [Amended 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-7]
The Zoning Administrator may grant a waiver for up to 10% of
any requirement for which a variance would be authorized on
residential property, following the same standards as would be
applied by the Board of Appeals, and conditioned on written
consent by all adjoining property owners, obtained by the applicant
on a form to be supplied by the Town.
(1)
If written consent of all adjoining property owners is not obtained
by the applicant, the applicant may file a request with the Zoning
Administrator for a waiver of up to 10% of any requirement for
which a variance would be authorized on residential property. The
Town shall have the right to impose a reasonable filing fee for
the waiver request not to exceed $50. The Zoning Administrator
shall make a preliminary determination on the waiver following the
same standards as would be applied by the Board of Appeals. If
the determination is to grant the waiver, the Town must provide
written notice to all adjoining property owners, informing them of
the proposed waiver and of their right to contest the waiver within
30 days. If within 30 days after notice is sent to adjoining property
owners no objection is received, the waiver decision shall become
final. If an objection from one or more adjoining property owners
is received within 30 days after notice is sent, the waiver shall not
become effective and the applicant may file a request for a variance
with the Board of Appeals.
(2)
If a waiver under this section is denied, the applicant may file a
request for a variance with the Board of Appeals.
(3)
Zoning certificate may be outdated. A zoning certificate shall become
void two years from date of its issuance. The zoning certificate activity
must be completed in full in two years or restored to original condition;
however, the Board of Appeals may grant a one-year extension of the
zoning certificate after the two-year limitation expires.
D.
Zoning certificate fee schedule. To partially defray the expense of
administering this chapter, a fee equal to 1/2 of the amount of the
building permit fee, with a minimum fee of $15, shall be paid to the
Town of Mount Airy, Maryland, before any zoning certificate is issued.
When a building permit is not required, a fee of $15 shall be paid to the
Town of Mount Airy, Maryland.
E.
The owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a
violation of any provision of this chapter or of an approved special
exception, variance or site plan for such building or premises has been
committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building
or entire premises in or upon which such violation has been committed
or shall exist, or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other
person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation which
A.
§ 112-21 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-22
107:400
shall exist, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and the amount
of the infraction fine assessed therefor shall be $100; provided that
each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and
commencing with the second day that such violation continues the
infraction fine assessed therefor shall be $200 per day.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure
or land is used in violation of this chapter, the appropriate authorities
of the Town of Mount Airy, in addition to other remedies, may institute
injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, or to correct or abate such
violation, or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or
land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about
the premises.
B.
Hearings.
If the Board of Appeals receives written notice from the Mayor,
Zoning Administrator or Town Planner that any terms, conditions
or restrictions of an approved site plan, special exception or
variance, or that any terms, conditions or restrictions attached to
the grant of any permits issued under this chapter are not being
complied with, the Board may order the permit, special exception,
or variance holder and/or property owner to appear before the
Board of Appeals at a date, time and place specified to show cause
why the approval of the site plan, special exception, variance, or
permit should not be revoked, suspended, modified or reaffirmed,
or its terms and conditions amended, added to, deleted or modified.
(1)
Not later than 15 days after the close of the record of the
proceedings or the hearing itself, whichever is later, the Board
must determine the issues presented.
If the Board finds that any terms, conditions or restrictions of
an approved site plan, special exception or variance, or any
terms, conditions or restrictions attached to the grant of any
permits have been violated in a manner that may have an
impact on adjacent property owners or the surrounding area,
the Board may revoke or suspend the prior approval of the
site plan, special exception, variance or permit with or without
conditions for reinstatement, or reaffirm the approval of the
site plan, special exception, variance or permit. Violations
which have no impact on the building, site plan or surrounding
area shall not be subject to Subsection C(2)(a) but may be
considered under Subsection C(2)(b).
(a)
If the Board finds that any terms, conditions or restrictions of
an approved site plan, special exception, variance, or permits
have been violated in any way, the Board may reaffirm the
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 112-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-22
107:401
approval of the site plan, special exception, variance or permit,
or amend, add to, delete, or modify the existing terms and
conditions of such site plan, special exception, variance or
permit.
The owner of a building or premises, or agent thereof, shall reimburse
the Town its reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs incurred to
successfully enforce, by means of issuance of municipal infractions,
injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to
include any hearing, whether requested by the Town or the owner or his
agent, before the Board of Appeals as set forth in Subsection C above,
the provisions of this chapter and/or to remedy any violation of this
chapter, an approved special exception, variance or site plan for such
building or premises, including through litigation.
D.
§ 112-22 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-22
107:402
ARTICLE IV
Provisions Governing Residential Districts
§ 112-23. R-1 District. [Amended 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-18]
Purpose. The R-1 District is intended to provide low-density
development potential with concentration on good land management,
harmony with the physical environment and a variety of housing
options. It is also intended to encourage conservation of open land
and assure both the continuing beauty and agricultural potential of
areas located at the periphery of the community. The maximum gross
residential density permitted in the R-1 District is one dwelling per unit
acre.
A.
Uses permitted in the R-1 District. No building or structure may be
erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for one or
more of the following principal uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, public and private recreational
uses and cemeteries.
(2)
(3) Nature study preserves and reservations.
Schools, churches and other public buildings and those accessory
uses commonly associated with them.
(4)
(5) Accessory uses.
B.
Special exceptions in the R-1 District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
(1) Home occupations [§ 112-62F(7)].
(2) Nursery schools, child-care centers [§ 112-62F(10)].
(3) Professional office [§ 112-62F(12)].
(4) Public utility buildings [§ 112-62F(13)].
(5) Accessory apartments [§ 112-62F(22)].
(6) Veterinarian clinics [§ 112-62F(18)].
Churches, schools, libraries, and community centers
[§ 112-62F(19)].
(7)
(8) Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
(9) Elderly housing, detached and attached units [§ 112-62F(21)].
(10)Private parks and recreational facilities.
C.
§ 112-23 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-23
107:403
Nonresident professional offices [§ 112-62F(24)]. [Added
7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
(11)
Density, lot area and setback requirements of the R-1 District.
Maximum density. A maximum of one dwelling unit per gross
developable acre shall be permitted.
(1)
Lot area, lot width and setback requirements.
Minimum lot area: 18,000 square feet. No more than 25% of
the lots within a development may be less than 24,000 square
feet.
(a)
Average lot area: 24,000 square feet. No more than 25% of the
lots within a development may be less than 24,000 square feet.
(b)
(c) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(d) Front yard setback: 50 feet.
(e) Side yard setback: 12 feet.
(f) Rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(2)
D.
§ 112-23 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-23
107:404
§ 112-24. RE Residential-Existing District.
Purpose. The RE District is intended to maintain the attractive, pleasant
living environment of existing low-density residential neighborhoods,
and to keep these areas free from land usage which might adversely
affect these neighborhoods.
A.
Uses permitted in the RE District. No building or structure may be
erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for one or
more of the following principle uses.
(1) Detached dwellings.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Accessory uses or structures.
B.
Special exceptions in the RE District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
C.
§ 112-23 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-24
107:405
(1) Home occupations [§ 112-62F(7)].
(2) Nursery schools, child-care centers [§112-62F(10)].
(3) Professional office [§ 112-62F(12)].
(4) Public utility building [§ 112-62F(13)].
Family apartments [§ 112-62F(17)]. [Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-2]
(5)
(6) Veterinarian clinics [§ 112-62F(18)].
Churches, schools, libraries, and community centers
[§ 112-62F(19)].
(7)
(8) Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
(9) Elderly housing, detached and attached units [§ 112-62F(21)].
(10)Private park and recreational facilities.
Accessory apartments [§ 112-62F(22)]. [Added 10-6-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-4]
(11)
Nonresident professional offices [§ 112-62F(24)]. [Added
7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
(12)
Density, lot area and setback requirements of the RE District.
Maximum density. A maximum of 1.75 dwelling units per gross
developable acre shall be permitted.
(1)
Lot area, lot width and setback requirements:
Minimum lot area: 14,000 square feet. No more than 25% of
the lots within a development may be less than 18,000 square
feet.
(a)
Average lot area: 18,000 square feet. No more than 25% of the
lots within a development may be less than 18,000 square feet.
(b)
(c) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(d) Front yard setback: 50 feet.
(e) Side yard setback: 12 feet.
(f) Rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(2)
D.
§ 112-24 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-24
107:406
§ 112-25. R2 District.
Purpose. The R2 District is intended to encourage and promote the
development of low-density residential neighborhoods that include
some diversity of lot sizes and housing types, and certain other land
uses that complement the residential community. The typical
development should result in lot areas averaging approximately 16,000
square feet.
A.
Uses permitted in the R2 District. No building or structure may be
erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for one or
more of the following principle uses.
(1) Detached dwellings.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Accessory uses or structures.
B.
Special exceptions in the R2 District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62.
(1) Home occupations [§ 112-62F(7)].
(2) Nursery schools, child-care center [§ 112-62F(10)].
C.
§ 112-24 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-25
107:407
(3) Professional office [§ 112-62F(12)].
(4) Public utility buildings [§ 112-62F(13)].
Family apartments [§ 112-62F(17)]. [Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-2]
(5)
(6) Veterinarian clinics [§ 112-62F(18)].
Churches, schools, libraries, and community centers
[§ 112-62F(19)].
(7)
(8) Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
(9) Elderly housing, detached and attached units [§ 112-62F(21)].
(10)Private parks and recreational facilities.
Accessory apartments [§ 112-62F(22)]. [Added 10-6-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-4]
(11)
Nonresident professional offices [§ 112-62F(24)]. [Added
7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
(12)
Density, lot area and setback requirements of the R2 District.
Maximum density. A maximum of two dwelling units per net
developable acre shall be permitted.
(1)
New subdivisions yielding 50 or more lots shall provide a variety of
lot sizes as follows:
Ten-percent lots must be larger lots, with a minimum lot area
of 20,000 square feet.
(a)
Twenty-percent lots must be smaller lots, with a lot area
between 11,000 and 13,000 square feet.
(b)
(2)
Lot area, lot width and setback requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 11,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 85 feet.
(c) Front yard setback: 30 feet.
(d) Side yard setback: 10 feet.
(e) Rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(3)
D.
§ 112-25 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-25
107:408
§ 112-26. R3 District.
Purpose. The R3 District is intended to encourage and promote the
development of smaller lots, pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods with
land uses that complement the residential community. The typical
development should result in lot areas averaging approximately 9,000
square feet.
A.
Uses permitted in the R3 District. No building or structure may be
erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for one or
more of the following principle uses.
(1) Detached and semidetached dwellings.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Accessory uses or structures.
B.
§ 112-25 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-26
107:409
Special exceptions in the R3 District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
(1) Home occupations [§ 112-62F(7)].
(2) Nursery schools, child-care centers [§ 112-62F(10)].
(3) Professional offices [§ 112-62F(12)].
(4) Public utility building [§ 112-62F(13)].
(5) Elderly housing, apartments and condominiums [§ 112-62F(16)].
Family apartments [§ 112-62F(17)]. [Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-2]
(6)
(7) Veterinarian clinics [§ 112-62F(18).
Churches, schools, libraries, and community centers
[§ 112-62F(19)].
(8)
(9) Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
(10)Elderly housing, detached and attached units [§ 112-62F(21)].
(11)Private parks and recreational facilities.
Accessory apartments [§ 112-62F(22)]. [Added 10-6-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-4]
(12)
Nonresident professional offices [§ 112-62F(24)]. [Added
7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
(13)
C.
Density, lot area and setback requirements of the R3 District.
Maximum density. A maximum of three dwelling units per net
developable acre shall be permitted.
(1)
Variety of lot types required in subdivisions. New subdivisions
yielding 50 or more lots shall design at least 10% of the lots for
semidetached units and at least 10% of the lots for detached units.
(2)
Lot area, lot width and setback requirements:
R3 District: detached lots.
[1] Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
[3] Front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Side yard setback: 10 feet.
[5] Rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(a)
(3)
D.
§ 112-26 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-26
107:410
§ 112-27. R5 District.
R3 District: semidetached lots.
[1] Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
[3] Front yard setback: 20 feet.
Side yard setback: 10 feet. Side yard setbacks are not
applied where dwelling units adjoin a common lot line.
[4]
[5] Rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(b)
Purpose. The R5 District is intended to provide attractive, mediumdensity
residential neighborhoods of limited size. A mixture of detached
dwellings, semidetached dwellings, and townhouses is required in an
effort to promote housing diversity and a pedestrian-friendly
environment.
A.
Uses permitted in the R5 District. No building or structure may be
erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for one or
more of the following principal uses.
(1) Detached dwellings, semidetached dwellings, and townhouses.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Accessory uses or structures.
B.
§ 112-26 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-27
107:411
Special exceptions in the R5 District. The Board of Appeals my
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
(1) Boarding house, lodging house [§ 112-62F(1)].
(2) Clubs, fraternal and service organizations [§ 112-62F(3)]
(3) Convalescent or nursing home [§ 112-62F(4)].
(4) Home occupations [§ 112-62F(7)].
(5) Nursery schools, child-care centers [§ 112-62F(10)].
(6) Professional office [§ 112-62F(12)].
(7) Public utility building [§ 112-62F(13)].
(8) Elderly housing, apartments and condominiums [§ 112-62F(16)].
Family apartments [§ 112-62F(17)]. [Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-2]
(9)
(10)Veterinarian clinics [§112-62F(18)].
Churches, schools, libraries, and community centers
[§ 112-62F(19)].
(11)
(12)Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
(13)Elderly housing, detached and attached units [§ 112-62F(21)].
(14)Private parks and recreational facilities.
Accessory apartments [§ 112-62F(22)]. [Added 10-6-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-4]
(15)
Nonresident professional offices [§ 112-62F(24)]. [Added
7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
(16)
C.
Density, lot area and setback requirements of the R5 District:
Maximum density. A maximum of five dwelling units per net
developable acre shall be permitted.
(1)
Variety of lot types required in subdivisions. Property subdivided
under the requirements of the R5 District shall provide a variety of
lot types according to the following criteria:
No less than 30% of the total lot yield shall be detached
dwelling units.
(a)
No more than 40% of the total lot yield shall be semidetached
dwelling units.
(b)
(2)
D.
§ 112-27 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-27
107:412
§ 112-28. R7 District.
No more than 40% of the total lot yield shall consist of
townhouse units. No more than four dwelling units may be
attached in one grouping.
(c)
Lot area, lot width, and setback requirements:
R5 District Detached Semidetached
Townhouse
(midunit)
Townhouse
(end-unit)
Minimum lot
area* (square
feet)
6,000 4,000 2,000 3,000
Minimum lot
width (feet)
60 40 20 30
Front yard
setback (feet)
15 15 15 15
Side yard
setback (feet)
10 10** N/A** 10**
Rear yard
setback (feet)
40 40 40 40
NOTES:
*Minimum lot area does not include common areas such as
parking and sidewalks.
**Side yard setbacks are not applied where dwelling units adjoin
a common lot line.
(3)
§ 112-27 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-28
107:413
Purpose. The R7 District is intended to provide maximum flexibility to
design high-density residential neighborhoods in a safe, attractive and
environmentally responsible manner.
A.
Uses permitted in the R7 District. No building or structure may be
erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for one or
more of the following principal uses.
(1) Detached, semidetached, townhouses and multifamily dwellings.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Accessory uses or structures.
B.
Special exceptions in the R7 District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
(1) Boarding house, lodging house [§ 112-62F(1)].
(2) Clubs, fraternal and service organizations [§ 112-62F(3)].
(3) Convalescent or nursing home [§ 112-62F(4)].
(4) Home occupations [§ 112-62F(7)].
(5) Nursery schools, child-care centers [§ 112-62F(10).
(6) Professional office [§ 112-62F(12)].
(7) Public utility building [§ 112-62F(13)].
(8) Elderly housing, apartments and condominiums [§ 112-62F(16)].
Family apartments [§ 112-62F(17)]. [Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-2]
(9)
(10)Veterinarian clinics [§ 112-62F(18)].
Churches, schools, libraries, and community centers
[§ 112-62F(19)].
(11)
(12)Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
(13)Elderly housing, detached and attached units [§ 112-62F(21)].
(14)Private parks and recreational facilities.
Accessory apartments [§ 112-62F(22)]. [Added 10-6-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-4]
(15)
Nonresident professional offices [§ 112-62F(24)]. [Added
7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
(16)
C.
D. Density, lot area and setback requirements of the R7 District:
§ 112-28 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-28
107:414
Maximum density. A maximum of seven dwelling units per net
developable acre shall be permitted.
(1)
Maximum number of attached townhouses. No more than five
dwelling units may be attached in any one townhouse group.
(2)
Lot area, lot width, and setback requirements:
Requirement Mid-Unit End-Unit
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
2,000* 3,000*
Minimum lot width (feet) 20 30
Front yard setback (feet) 15 15
Side yard setback (feet) N/A** 10
Rear yard setback (feet) 40 40
NOTES:
*Minimum lot area does not include common area such as parking
and sidewalks.
**Side yard setbacks are not applied where dwelling units adjoin a
common lot line.
(3)
§ 112-28 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-28
107:415
§ 112-29. Conservation District. [Added 12-2-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-27]
R7 District Multifamily Dwelling
Minimum lot area (square feet/unit) 3,000
Front yard setback (feet) 30
Side yard setback (feet) 30
Rear yard setback (feet) 60
Purpose. The Conservation District is intended to provide a very lowdensity
development potential only for those areas where, due to
natural geographic factors, or sensitive environmental areas (including
watershed and subwatershed areas for existing or proposed reservoirs)
it is considered desirable to conserve open spaces, protect water supply
sources, and protect woodland areas, wildlife and other natural
resources. This district may include extensive steeply sloped areas,
stream valleys, watershed areas, water supply sources, and wooded
areas adjacent thereto. The maximum gross residential density
permitted in the Conservation District is one dwelling unit for every
three acres.
A.
Uses permitted in the Conservation District. No building or structure
may be erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for
one or more of the following principal uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
B.
§ 112-28 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-29
107:416
Agricultural, subject to any limitations on distance for keeping,
feeding or caring for farm animals that may be imposed where
adjacent to residential, commercial or industrial zoned land.
(2)
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, public and private recreational
uses and cemeteries.
(3)
Water supply works, flood control or watershed protection works,
and fish and game hatcheries.
(4)
(5) Nature study preserves and reservations.
(6) Accessory uses.
Special exceptions in the Conservation District. The Board of Appeals
may authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provision of Article VIII, § 112-62:
(1) Home occupations [§ 112-62F(7)].
(2) Professional office [§ 112-62F(12)].
(3) Public utility buildings [§ 112-62F(13)].
(4) Accessory apartments [§ 112-62F(22)].
(5) Veterinarian clinics [§ 112-62F(18)].
Churches, schools, libraries, and community centers
[§ 112-62F(19)].
(6)
(7) Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
(8) Private parks and recreational facilities.
C.
Density, lot area and setback requirements of the Conservation District:
Maximum density. A maximum of one dwelling unit for every three
gross developable acres shall be permitted.
(1)
Lot area, lot width and setback requirements.
Minimum lot area: 28,000 square feet. No more than 25% of
the lots within a development may be less than 40,000 square
feet.
(a)
Average lot area: 40,000 square feet. No more than 25% of the
lots within a development may be less than 40,000 square feet.
(b)
(c) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(d) Front yard setback: 50 feet.
(e) Side yard setback: 12 feet.
(f) Rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(2)
D.
§ 112-29 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-29
107:417
§ 112-30. Required lot area, lot width, and yards in residential
districts.
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
(feet)
One Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)
R1 District
Detached
dwelling
18,000 100 50 12 40
RE District
Detached
dwelling
18,000 100 50 12 40
R2 District
Detached
dwelling
11,000 85 30 10 40
R3 District
§ 112-29 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-30
107:418
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
(feet)
One Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Detached
dwelling
7,200 60 20 10 40
Semidetached
dwelling
6,000 50 20 10 40
R5 District
Detached
dwelling
6,000 60 15 10 40
Semidetached
dwelling
4,000 40 15 10 40
Townhouse
(mid unit)
2,000 20 15 -- 40
Townhouse
(end-unit)
3,000 30 15 10 40
R7 District
Detached
dwelling
6,000 60 15 10 40
Semidetached
dwelling
4,000 40 15 10 40
Townhouse
(mid-unit)
2,000 20 15 -- 40
Townhouse
(end-unit)
3,000 30 15 10 40
Multifamily
dwelling
3,000 (per
unit)
-- 30 30 60
Conservation
District
28,000 100 50 12 40
In all
residential
districts
Other
permitted uses
having
structures
12,000 75 35 12 40
§ 112-30 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-31
107:419
§ 112-31. Building height regulations in residential districts.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height, unless each side yard is
increased over the required minimum by one foot for every foot of additional
height above 35 feet. In no case shall the building height exceed 50 feet.
§ 112-32. Residential parking requirements.
Required parking spaces. For each residential unit there shall be three
parking spaces.
A.
For lots that have 70 feet or greater lot width, two of the required
parking spaces required for each dwelling shall be located in the side
or rear yard areas. All required parking spaces shall be located on the
lot. No more than two required parking spaces may be stacked front-toback
in a single row. (Refer to illustrations below.)
B.
For lots with less than a 70 feet lot width:
Two of the three required parking spaces shall be located on the
lot, or reserved for that lot in a common parking area. For each
required parking space not located on a lot or reserved for that lot,
two on-street parking spaces shall be provided.
(1)
Parking spaces on the lot shall be located in side or rear yard areas
only.
(2)
C.
Detached garages. On detached and semidetached lots, detached
garages shall maintain the minimum front yard setback from any public
street, and shall be set back a minimum of six feet from side or rear lot
lines. On townhouse lots, detached garages may not exceed 20 feet in
width or depth, shall be located so that they adjoin the adjacent garage
on the common lot line, and shall be set back a minimum of six feet from
rear lot lines.
D.
§ 112-31 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-32
107:420
§ 112-33. Fencing. [Amended 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-5]
§ 112-34. Accessory structures.
On-street parking. On-street parking spaces shall be parallel to the
edge of pavement.
E.
Permit required. A permit shall be obtained prior to the construction of
a fence in residential zones.
A.
Front yard area regulations. Fences up to 42 inches in height are
permitted in front yard areas on the front lot line and side lot lines, but
shall not be closer than 12 inches to any existing or planned sidewalk
location. Fences shall be designed to permit visibility through the fence
and shall be no more than 50% opaque.
B.
Side and rear yard area regulations. In side and rear yard areas, fences
my be located on the side and rear lot lines. The fence material shall
be no more than six feet in height and may be 100% opaque to provide
for privacy. Installed, the fence shall not exceed six feet six inches in
height.
C.
Setback from driveways. Fences shall be no closer than five feet to the
edge of pavement of a driveway.
D.
Homeowners' association. It is the homeowner's responsibility to have
his or her fence approved by his or her homeowners' association where
applicable. A permit from the Town does not negate a homeowners'
association's covenants and/or restrictions.
E.
Permit required. Accessory structures over 100 square feet require a
building permit.
A.
Location. Accessory structures are not permitted in front yard areas.
Accessory structures 100 square feet or less shall be set back three feet
from side and rear lot lines. Accessory structures over 100 square feet
shall be set back a minimum of six feet from side and rear lot lines.
B.
Maximum lot coverage. The total coverage of any structure on one lot
shall not exceed 30% of the total rear yard area.
C.
Height general rule. Accessory structures shall not exceed one story or
10 feet in height. For structures covered by a roof, the highest point
of the roof shall not exceed 15 feet in height. [Amended 3-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-6]
Garages may have up to two stories but shall not exceed the
elevation of the principal structure. Garages exceeding one story
must meet all setbacks and other requirements of this chapter that
apply to the principal structure.
(1)
Any use of a garage or accessory structure as a residence shall
be considered an accessory apartment and as such subject to the
(2)
D.
§ 112-32 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-34
107:421
§ 112-35. Special development modifications in R5 and R7 Districts.
special exception process and standards provided under
§ 112-62F(22) of this chapter, as well as any other applicable rules,
requirements and regulations for accessory apartments.
It is the homeowner's responsibility to have any accessory
structure approved by his or her homeowners' association where
applicable. A permit from the Town does not negate a homeowners'
association covenants and/or restrictions.
(3)
Permitted accessory uses and structures:
Detached garage (attached garages are considered part of the
principal use and structure.)
(1)
(2) Swimming pool.
(3) Garden or tool shed.
(4) Freestanding gazebo.
(5) Satellite dish.
(6) Hot tub or sauna.
E.
Homeowners’ association. It is the homeowner's responsibility to have
the accessory structure approved by his or her homeowners'
association where applicable. A permit from the Town does not negate
a homeowners' association's covenants and/or restrictions.
F.
Purpose. It is the intent of this chapter that the minimum lot width, lot
area and setback requirements for each zoning district be adhered to.
However, in higher density development districts, it is acknowledged
that due to specific site constraints strict adherence to the lot criteria
may result in a less desirable subdivision plan than an alternative plan.
The purpose of this provision is to allow for variation in the lot criteria,
without an increase in the permitted density, so that the approved plan
is the most appropriate design for a particular site.
A.
Applicability. The provisions of this section apply only to the R5 and R7
Zoning Districts.
B.
Maximum density. The maximum lot yield for a subdivision designed
under the provisions of this section shall not exceed the permitted
density for the district in which the subdivision is located. For the
purposes of this section, the term ”density” shall refer to the maximum
number of dwelling units, which could be built on the net developable
acreage.
C.
Justification. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prove that
the proposed modifications to the lot criteria are justified. In making
such a presentation, the applicant shall prove the following conditions:
D.
§ 112-34 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-35
107:422
§ 112-36. Site plans required for residential uses for multifamily
and single-family condominiums.
Whenever any use, except single-family detached dwellings, is to be
constructed, whether for sale, lease, rent or other purpose, a site plan
of the entire development must be submitted to the Planning Commission
and approved by them. Said site plan shall show all building locations on
the site, streets, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, landscaping, on-site
provisions for water sewerage facilities, provisions for storm drainage and
open space, recreation area, and streetlighting, all showing relationship
to adjacent development. The site plan shall conform to all specifications
and requirements of the district and of Article VI, Design Standards, and
Article VII, Improvements, of Chapter 98, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan
Approval.
That the modifications requested will not be detrimental to the
health, safety or public welfare.
(1)
That the modifications requested will result in a subdivision plan
that better protects environmental resource areas, and/or is the
best proposal to develop a more steeply sloping site.
(2)
That the modifications requested will result in a subdivision plan
that is more beneficial to the public interest than a subdivision plan
designed in strict conformance with the lot criteria in which the
site is located.
(3)
Procedure.
A concept plan shall be submitted which, in addition to other
information required at the concept plan review, shall identify the
modifications requested and the type of dwelling units proposed.
(1)
The Planning Commission shall review the request for
modifications and vote to recommend the concept plan and
requested modifications for development as a preliminary plan.
If approved, the applicant may submit a preliminary plan in
accordance with Chapter 98, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan
Approval.
(2)
If the preliminary plan and requested modifications are approved
by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall proceed with
platting of the development in accordance with Chapter 98,
Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review. Final plat shall bear
a statement indicating that the development received approval
for special development modifications and specifically list the
modifications that were approved.
(3)
E.
Site plan format. All site plans shall comply with the platting
requirements of a preliminary subdivision plat, Appendix E of Chapter
98, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Approval.
A.
§ 112-35 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-36
107:423
Site plan fee.
The following fee shall be paid by the developer for site plan review
(includes sketch, preliminary, final and/or revised) when submitted
to the Planning Commission.
(a) Five acres or less: $500.
(b) Six to 49 acres: $1,000.
(c) Fifty or more acres: $1,500.
(1)
The fee is payable at the time of submission. Charges will include
the cost of review by the Town's employees and consultants. At the
conclusion of the review process, if total charges are less than the
fee imposed, a refund will be given to the developer, and if greater,
the developer will be billed for the difference. Fifteen percent will
be added to the total charges for the Town's cost of administration
and overhead. The rates for charges shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Town Council. Charges will be
billed monthly if in excess of the fee imposed as set forth above.
If any charges are not paid within 60 days of billing, the Town will
withhold further review, approvals and/or issuance of any required
permits until paid in full together with interest at the rate of 1%
per month or fraction thereof from the date of billing to the date of
payment.
(2)
B.
§ 112-36 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-36
107:424
ARTICLE V
Provisions Governing Commercial Districts
§ 112-37. LC Limited Commercial District. [Amended 12-3-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-13]
Purpose.
The LC District is intended to serve as a transitional zone to
provide areas for a limited number of retail and service
establishments in close proximity to the residents they serve while
protecting the residential uses adjoining the district.
(1)
The LC District is intended to provide a less intensive commercial
zone than the CC District and must only be assigned where
adjacent to a more intensive commercial zone such as the CC or
any other more intense commercial zone.
(2)
Establishment of any of the specific uses under this District shall
not be considered a basis for change in any subsequent rezoning
petition to a more intensive zoning classification.
(3)
All plans for development in this District are subject to site plan
approval.
(4)
A.
Limitation of assignment of LC District. The Limited Commercial Zone
is intended as a transitional zone between residential uses and
approved commercial uses. It must only be assigned where it will be
adjacent to a more intensive commercial zone such as a Community
Commercial or any other more intense commercial zone.
B.
Uses permitted in the LC District. No building or structure may be
erected, used or occupied except in substantial conformity with the
below examples:
Residential uses in conjunction with commercial uses or in accord
with RE or R-2 zoning, depending on adjacent zoning.
(1)
(2) Public buildings, structures and services.
(3) Paint and wallpaper sales, retail.
(4) Hardware sales, retail.
(5) Drug stores, retail.
Professional uses in compliance with NP District zoning or resident
professional offices.
(6)
(7) Family apparel and accessories.
(8) Finance, insurance, and real estate services.
(9) Personal services: laundry, barbers, and beauty shops.
C.
§ 112-37 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-37
107:425
(10)Repair services: electric, appliances, upholstery and jewelry.
Professional services: medical, dental, legal, engineering,
consulting.
(11)
(12)Home furnishings, retail.
(13)Specialty shops, retail.
Restaurant without drive-throughs or a sit-down bar area, serving
alcoholic drinks only for on-site consumption by restaurant
patrons.
(14)
Residential uses related to professional office uses, including
resident professional offices.
(15)
Detached accessory buildings with not over 350 square feet floor
space.
(16)
(17)Public parks and playgrounds.
Special exceptions in the LC District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
Private and commercial schools: dance, business, trade
[§ 112-62F(11)].
(1)
(2) Nursery schools, child-care centers [§ 112-62F(10)].
(3) Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
D.
Prohibited commercial uses. The following uses are prohibited in the
LC District.
(1) Principal structures with area in excess of 5,000 square feet.
Operations beginning before 8:00 a.m. and/or after 10:00 p.m.
(except after 11:00 p.m. on Saturday).
(2)
(3) Gasoline stations and convenience stores.
(4) Drive-in or drive-through establishments.
(5) Public utility buildings, including power substations.
Motorized vehicle repairs or sales, including but not limited to
automobiles, trucks or motorcycles.
(6)
(7) Liquor stores.
Sit-down bars at which alcoholic drinks are served, whether
separate or as part of any establishment.
(8)
(9) Clubs and fraternal organizations.
E.
§ 112-37 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-37
107:426
§ 112-37.1. Downtown Zone (DTZ). [Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-4; amended 8-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-03]
Development requirements. All development plans are subject to site
plan approval. Development requirements include:
Height restriction. No building or structure shall exceed 20 feet
in height, not including the roof structure, or contain more than
two stories, not including the attic. Accessory structures shall not
exceed 15 feet in height.
(1)
Size limitation. Principal structures shall not be permitted with
area in excess of 5,000 square feet.
(2)
Lighting. Lighting shall not reflect or spill over upon adjoining or
nearby residential property or on roadways; all lighting shall be
equipped with full cutoff, fully shielded fixtures, and pole heights
shall not exceed 15 feet at the perimeters. High-density sodium
lighting shall be used for all outdoor lighting.
(3)
Buffers. Buffers protecting nearby residential areas shall be
required and maintained and shall consist of fencing and/or natural
barriers such as vegetation and trees of at least four feet in height.
(4)
(5) All other requirements for commercial development shall apply.
F.
Purpose. The Downtown Zone is intended to promote preservation
and appreciation of the historic town center, to strengthen the local
economy and to enhance and preserve an atmosphere of small-town
charm while combining business and residential uses. All plans for
development in this zone are subject to site plan approval and the
permit process, where applicable. This zone is intended to encourage
development of a pedestrian environment consistent with the overall
development concept for the Downtown Zone.
A.
Principally permitted uses. No building or structure may be erected,
used or occupied except in accordance with the following principally
permitted uses:
Retail and personal service establishments. The following specified
retail and personal service establishments, up to a maximum of
15,000 square feet of floor space:
Food and beverage sales as follows:
[1] Convenience store;
[2] Grocery store;
Specialty food store (e.g., health foods or dietary
supplements);
[3]
[4] Package liquor sale;
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 112-37 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-37.1
107:427
[5] Candy store; and
[6] Seafood store.
Food service and preparation for consumption on or off
premises as follows:
[1] Delicatessen and carry-out food;
[2] On- or off-premises catering facility;
[3] Bakery;
[4] Coffee and/or tea shop;
[5] Restaurant (with and without liquor sales);
Pub or bar (which may serve food and provide
entertainment);
[6]
[7] Dinner theater;
[8] Sandwich and pizza shop;
[9] Fast food without drive-through window service; and
[10] Ice cream, yogurt and/or dessert parlor.
(b)
Sidewalk seating subject to the following provisions:
Sidewalk seating shall be located adjacent to or in the
sidewalk/public right-of-way, in the front of the building
and facing the road, and shall be free from barriers that
would limit access to the general public.
[1]
Seating shall not be exclusive or reserved for use by any
specific business, and no table service shall be provided.
[2]
The consumption of alcohol prohibited in any sidewalk
seating areas.
[3]
The placement of seating may not impede or obstruct safe
passage along the sidewalks.
[4]
(c)
Sidewalk table dining subject to the following provisions:
Table dining shall be located on private property adjacent
to the sidewalk/public right-of-way, in the front of the
building and facing the road.
[1]
Table dining may be adjacent to sidewalks bordering Main
Street, Center Street to the extent located within the DTZ,
the first 250 feet of Prospect as it intersects with North
Main Street and the first 250 feet of Park Avenue as it
intersects with South Main Street.
[2]
(d)
§ 112-37.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-37.1
107:428
The table dining area shall be delineated from the public
right-of-way by a suitable barrier, which may be subject
to review by the Planning Commission. The dining area
shall not be enclosed in any part by temporary sheathing,
permanent walls greater than three feet in height (other
than walls associated with adjacent buildings) and shall
not serve as a basis for future approval of a permanent
enclosure.
[3]
Hours of service shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. and must be vacated by 10:00 p.m., at which time
lights, other than safety and security lighting, shall be not
provided.
[4]
The area must be cleared of trash and food waste within
one hour of the time the dining area is vacated.
[5]
[6] Lighting must adhere to Town standards.
Table dining areas shall be subject to site plan review and
approval by the Town of Mount Airy Planning Commission.
[7]
The business owner and/or property owner shall be
responsible for any violations of the Town Code, including
violations of noise, public nuisance and hours of operations
requirements.
[8]
All furniture in an outdoor dining area shall be of durable
construction, not be of a design and/or weight that will
create a wind-blown hazard and shall be kept in good
repair.
[9]
Alcoholic beverages may be served in outdoor dining areas
only in conjunction with the service of food and meals.
[10]
An outdoor dining area shall be subject to the same
development requirements as indoor areas including but
not limited to parking requirements, water use, and
capacity.
[11]
The use of any outdoor sound amplification device is
prohibited.
[12]
The use of portable heating and cooling equipment is
prohibited in table dining areas.
[13]
Signage other than a sandwich sign is prohibited in table
dining areas.
[14]
General merchandise as follows:
[1] Department store;
(e)
§ 112-37.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-37.1
107:429
Consignment sales or other shops for the sales of used
items of similar nature as otherwise permitted in this
section;
[2]
[3] Variety store; and
[4] Dollar store.
Clothing, apparel and accessory sales as follows:
[1] Clothing sales;
[2] Shoe sales; and
[3] Hat and other accessory apparel sales.
(f)
Personal service businesses. The following businesses which
involve the provision of personal services, including the repair,
alteration or servicing of small equipment and processing,
preparation, fabrication and/or assembly of items for retail sale
at the business location:
[1] Mailing/packing;
[2] Printing/photocopiers;
[3] Travel agent;
[4] Weight loss center;
[5] Interior decorator;
[6] Computer services and repair;
[7] Rental services;
[8] Internet access and faxing;
[9] Dry cleaning and laundering, including self services;
[10]Tailoring, clothing repair/alteration and shoe repair;
[11]Furniture upholstering and repair;
[12]Picture framing;
[13]Photographic studios;
[14]Film sales and processing;
[15]Pet grooming and pet supplies;
[16]Taxidermy sales and services;
[17]Locksmith;
[18]Bicycle repair and sales; and
(g)
§ 112-37.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-37.1
107:430
[19]Hair, beauty and barbering services and product sales.
Crafts and artisan activities. The following businesses that
involve the preparation, fabrication and/or assembly of the
crafts, artisan or art items for sale at the business location;
or the repair/alteration of items brought to the business for
servicing:
[1] Pottery creation and sales;
[2] Art, crafts and decoration creation;
[3] Jewelry making;
[4] Book binding; and
[5] Carving and furniture fabrication or repair or restoration.
(h)
Gift or specialty stores as follows:
[1] Gifts and/or curios;
[2] Books;
[3] Newspapers and magazines;
[4] Antiques and collectible sales;
[5] Decorative accessories;
[6] Party supply store;
[7] Christmas stores;
[8] Baby supply store;
[9] Candles and/or aromatherapy;
[10]Luggage and leather goods;
[11]Cards and stationery; and
[12]Medical, health and wellness supplies and equipment.
(i)
Home furnishings and accessories sales as follows:
[1] Dishes, china, cookware, glassware;
[2] Furniture;
[3] Home accessories;
[4] Drapes and curtains;
[5] Kitchen stores;
[6] Bed, bath and linen stores;
(j)
§ 112-37.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-37.1
107:431
[7] Floor coverings;
[8] Lamp and lighting; and
[9] Closet and container/storage stores.
Home improvement and hardware sales as follows:
[1] General and specialty hardware without outdoor storage;
[2] Paint and wallpaper sales; and
[3] Cabinetry sales.
(k)
Hobby and special interests sales as follows:
Sporting goods, including hunting and archery supplies,
sales and repairs;
[1]
[2] Toys and games;
[3] Medical, health and wellness supplies and equipment;
[4] Art gallery;
[5] Arts and crafts sales;
[6] Collectibles;
[7] Science, nature, wild bird supply sales;
[8] Photographic equipment sales and repairs; and
[9] Equestrian equipment sales and repair.
(l)
Home appliances and music supplies as follows:
Audio/video sales and/or rentals of tapes, discs and other
formats;
[1]
Musical records, sheet music and instrument sales and
repair;
[2]
[3] Computer hardware and software; and
[4] General electronics sales and repair.
(m)
The following other retail uses:
[1] Fabric and sewing machine sales;
[2] Clocks/watches repair and sales;
[3] Tobacco sales;
Flowers, plants and garden supplies with a maximum of
1,000 square feet of outdoor displays;
[4]
(n)
§ 112-37.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-37.1
107:432
[5] Pet supplies;
[6] Telephone/telecom sales and services;
Eyeglasses, sunglasses preparation and sales, optician
ophthalmologic services;
[7]
[8] Cosmetics and beauty supplies; and
[9] Office supplies.
The following businesses or operations that involve the
production, storage, distillation, manufacturing, processing,
distribution, and wholesale and retail sale of liquor, beer, wine,
coffee, and/or cider made from produce grown or produced
off site. The hosting of tours and tastings of such products
incident to such businesses or operations conducted on the
premises is also a permitted use. Such business or operations
must be conducted in an enclosed building. Such operations
shall be in compliance with any and all local and state liquor
laws and licensing requirements and Health Department
regulations, and shall possess any and all licenses which may
be required by Carroll or Frederick County, the Town of Mount
Airy, and/or the State of Maryland: [Added 11-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-19]
[1] Microdistillery.
[2] Microbrewery.
[3] Microwinery.
[4] Coffee-roasting operations.
(o)
Entertainment and community service establishments. The
following specified entertainment and community service
establishments:
(a) Martial arts and/or dance studios;
(b) Nurseries and day care for children and seniors;
Learning center for instruction, college credit classes and/or
continued learning and hobbies;
(c)
(d) Children's play gyms;
(e) Post offices;
(f) Government services;
(g) Teen, community or senior centers;
(h) Houses of worship;
(2)
§ 112-37.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-37.1
107:433
(i) Armed forces recruiting;
(j) Conference/meeting spaces;
(k) Museums/visitor centers;
(l) Movie theaters;
(m) Hotels; and
(n) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
Financial uses. The following specified financial uses:
(a) Banks (without drive-through windows);
(b) Finance companies;
(c) Savings and loans; and
(d) Brokerages.
(3)
General office uses. The following general office uses:
(a) Medical/dental/chiropractic clinics;
(b) Real estate agent or broker;
(c) Veterinary clinics;
(d) Insurance agent or broker;
(e) Accountants and lawyers offices; and
(f) Government offices.
(4)
Residential uses. The following residential uses: [Amended
1-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2016-23]
Apartments, on upper floors only (i.e., above primary ground
level entry floor for building in which apartment is located),
except that for properties which do not have frontage on Main
Street or Center Street, apartments shall be permitted on all
floors;
(a)
Condominiums, on upper floors only (i.e., above primary
ground level entry floor for building in which condominium is
located), except that for properties which do not have frontage
on Main Street or Center Street, condominiums shall be
permitted on all floors;
(b)
Loft units, on upper floors only (i.e., above primary ground
level entry floor for building in which loft unit is located),
except that for properties which do not have frontage on Main
Street or Center Street, loft units shall be permitted on all
floors; and
(c)
(5)
§ 112-37.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-37.1
107:434
Single-family attached homes (with parking or garage area in
rear of property).
(d)
Conversion of existing single-family residences. Conversion or
alteration of an existing single-family residence or apartment
building to any other principally permitted use.
(6)
Special exception uses in the DTZ District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following special exception uses in accordance with the
provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
(1) Banks with drive-through windows.
Second floor outdoor dining/seating area. [Added 10-4-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-6]
(2)
Fitness studios/clubs or gyms for properties situated along Center
Street that do not confront or adjoin North or South Main Street
(all other development provisions within the Downtown Zone
apply). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-2]
(3)
C.
Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited within the
Downtown Zone:
Fitness studios/clubs or gyms with the exception of those permitted
by § 112-37.1C(3); [Amended 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-2]
(1)
(2) Gasoline stations;
(3) Drive-in or drive-through food establishments;
(4) Public utility buildings, including power substations;
Motorized vehicle repair or sales, but not limited to automobiles,
trucks and motorcycles;
(5)
(6) Car washes;
(7) Pawn shops;
D.
Building setbacks.
Front yard.
New construction. The front yard setback shall be the distance
equal to the average of the front yard setbacks for existing
improved properties immediately adjacent to the subject
property.
(a)
Existing construction or alteration. The front yard setback
shall be the distance from the existing principal use on the
property as of the date of adoption of this section.
(b)
(1)
(2) Side yard.
E.
§ 112-37.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-37.1
107:435
§ 112-38. NP Neighborhood Professional District. [Added 12-3-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-14; amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10]
New construction. The side yard setback shall be the distance
equal to the closest side yard setback for existing improved
properties immediately adjacent to the subject property.
(a)
Existing construction or alteration. The side yard setback shall
be the distance from the existing principal use on either side of
the property as of the date of adoption of this section.
(b)
Rear yard.
Subject to the provisions of Subsection E(3)(b) below, the rear
yard setback shall be 10 feet.
(a)
Where the rear yard of the subject property adjoins property
which is residentially zoned (RE, R1, R2, R3, R5 or R7), the
rear yard setback shall be 40 feet; provided, however, that
parking shall be permitted up to a distance of 20 feet.
(b)
(3)
Parking.
Off-street parking requirements shall generally be required as set
forth in §§ 112-7 and 112-8.
(1)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an existing or proposed use may
request approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission of
a lesser amount of off-street parking. Any such request shall be
reviewed with Town staff and/or consultants, who shall make
appropriate recommendations to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for reasonable and appropriate off-street parking
considering the parking needs of the proposed use and the
availability of parking in the area of the use. Wherever possible,
parking should be located behind structures and in the rear of the
lot within the DTZ.
(2)
F.
Building height. Uses within the Downtown Zone shall observe the
following height restrictions:
Minimum height: two stories or 24 feet measured from the edge of
the principal structure at the average front yard grade level to the
interior ceiling of the second story of such principal structure.
(1)
Maximum height: three stories or 40 feet measured from the edge
of the principal structure at the average front yard grade level to
the interior ceiling of the third story of such principal structure.
(2)
Notwithstanding any provision contained in § 112-53 to the
contrary, uses within the Downtown Zone shall be allowed an
additional 10 feet in height for architectural and/or mechanical
appurtenances on the principal structure.
(3)
G.
§ 112-37.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-38
107:436
Purpose.
The NP District is intended to allow the redevelopment of existing
homes and structures for professional offices while protecting the
residential uses adjoining the district.
(1)
The location of the Neighborhood Professional Districts should
provide for adaptive reuse of existing homes and structures into
offices.
(2)
The NP Zone is intended to provide a less intensive commercial
zone than the LC District and must only be assigned where
adjacent to a more intensive commercial zone such as the LC, CC
or any other more intense commercial zone.
(3)
Establishment of any of the specific uses under this District shall
not be considered a basis for change in any subsequent rezoning
petition to a more intensive zoning classification.
(4)
All plans for development in this District are subject to site plan
approval subject, however, to the exception contained in
Subsection F(2) below.
(5)
A.
Limitation of assignment of NP District. The Neighborhood Professional
Zone is intended as a transitional zone between residential uses and
approved commercial uses. It must only be assigned where it will
be adjacent to a more intensive commercial zone such as Limited
Commercial or Community Commercial or any other more intense
commercial zone.
B.
Uses permitted in the NP District. No existing buildings or structures
may be used or occupied except in substantial conformity with the
below examples:
(1) Finance, insurance and real estate services without drive-throughs.
Professional services, including medical, dental, legal and
engineering.
(2)
Residential uses related to professional office uses, including
resident professional offices.
(3)
Detached accessory buildings with not over 500 square feet of
ground floor building footprint area.
(4)
(5) Public parks and playgrounds.
Residential uses in accord with RE or R-2 zoning, depending on
adjacent zoning.
(6)
C.
Special exceptions in the NP District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62.
D.
§ 112-38 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-38
107:437
Private and commercial schools: dance, business, trade
[§ 112-62F(11)].
(1)
(2) Nursery schools and child-care centers [§ 112-62F(10)].
Churches, schools, libraries and community centers
[§ 112-62F(19).
(3)
Convalescent, nursing homes or assisted living facilities
[§ 112-62F(4)].
(4)
(5) Fire and rescue stations. [§ 112-62F(20)].
(6) Residential uses more dense than RE or R-2 zoning.
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the NP District:
Principal structures with a footprint floor area of greater than
2,000 square feet, except as permitted under § 112-38F.
(1)
(2) Any twenty-four-hour operations.
(3) Any retail establishment or repair service.
(4) Drive -in or drive-through establishment.
(5) Public utility buildings.
(6) Clubs and fraternal organizations.
E.
Construction requirements. The NP District is intended to encourage
use of existing structures, but these requirements apply to any
construction within the District. All development plans for new
construction or those additions seeking to enlarge the ground floor
building footprint of existing construction are subject to site plan
approval. Construction requirements include:
Principal structure. Although the NP District encourages use and
adaptation of existing structures, new principal structures may be
built to replace those which are torn down or removed as long as
the new principal structure is built with a footprint that does not
exceed the size of that of the structure it replaces.
(1)
Additions to existing structures. An addition of up to 25% of the
existing ground floor building footprint will be permitted to an
existing structure that remains on the property as the principal
structure. Additions which result in increased height of the existing
structure shall be permitted subject to the requirements of
§ 112-38F(5). Notwithstanding the general requirement for site
plan approval, additions to accessory structures shall not require
site plan approval, provided that the addition to such structure will
not:
(2)
F.
§ 112-38 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-38
107:438
§ 112-39. CC Community Commercial District.
Generate an increase in water consumption of more than 10%
beyond the existing water consumption for the lot upon which
such structure is located as certified by a licensed professional
engineer; and
(a)
Generate more than 25 additional average daily trips to the
subject site as determined by a traffic consultant of the town's
choosing.
(b)
Waiver of setback and development requirements. In order to allow
an addition and/or continued reasonable use of an existing building
or structure, setback may be waived but only to the extent
necessary to permit use of the property and structure within the
NP District.
(3)
Size limitation for vacant lots. Principal structures shall not be
permitted on new lots without existing principal structures which
have a footprint in excess of 2,000 square feet.
(4)
Height restriction. No building or structure shall exceed the height
of the existing principal structure or, for vacant lots, 20 feet in
height, not including the roof structure. No building or structure
shall contain more than two stories, not including the attic.
(5)
Lighting shall not reflect or spill over upon adjoining or nearby
residential property or on roadways; all lighting shall be equipped
with full cutoff, fully shielded fixtures, and pole heights shall not
exceed 15 feet at the perimeters. High-density sodium lighting
shall be used for all outdoor lighting.
(6)
Buffers protecting nearby residential areas shall be required and
shall consist of fencing and/or natural barriers such as vegetation
and trees of sufficient height.
(7)
All other requirements for commercial development shall apply
unless waived under Subsection F(3) above.
(8)
Purpose. The CC District is intended to provide areas for shopping,
service, office, and entertainment establishments to service the needs
of the entire community and the surrounding area. The uses permitted
in this District should be of such character as to provide for
comparative shopping needs, service and repair needs, specialized
commercial activities and those establishments which cater primarily
to the motoring public. The location of such areas should be such
that stores and commercial activities can be grouped together in an
attractive and convenient manner at locations that will not infringe on
residential areas. It is also essential that areas for this District have
excellent vehicular accessibility on major thoroughfares that service
the community and surrounding area.
A.
§ 112-38 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-39
107:439
Uses permitted in the CC District. No building or structure may be
erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for one or
more of the following principal uses:
Clubs, fraternal and service organizations. [Amended 10-2-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-8]
(1)
(2) Public buildings, structures and services.
(3) Lumber and other building materials, retail.
Heating, plumbing and electrical equipment, retail, including
service contractors.
(4)
(5) Paint, glass and wallpaper sales, retail.
(6) Hardware sales, retail.
(7) General merchandise, variety, drug and major department stores.
(8) Food, retail.
(9) Apparel and accessories, retail.
(10)Furniture, home furnishings and office equipment, retail.
(11)Eating and drinking establishments.
(12)Finance, insurance, and real estate services.
(13)Personal services: laundry, barber, beauty, funeral.
Business services: advertising, employment agencies, business
management.
(14)
(15)Automobile repair and services.
(16)Repair services: electrical appliances, upholstery, jewelry.
Professional services: medical, dental, legal, engineering,
consulting.
(17)
Contract construction services. (No outdoor storage of equipment
or materials.)
(18)
Theaters, bowling alleys, health and fitness clubs, swimming pools,
skating rinks, amusements except arcades.
(19)
(20)Hotels and motels.
(21)Vehicle sales and service: autos, motorcycles, vans.
(22)Places of worship.
(23)Animal kennels and clinics.
(24)Specialty shops, retail.
B.
§ 112-39 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-39
107:440
§ 112-39.1. Mixed-use development in CC District (MXU-CC) special
exception. [Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
(25)Amusement arcades in shopping centers only.
Accessory uses and buildings, including coin-operated game
machines not to exceed a maximum of three , except when located
within a commercial recreation use, i.e., bowling alley, then the
number of machines may exceed three, provided that no more that
50% of the area and usage of the establishment is devoted to such
machines.
(26)
Special exceptions in the CC District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
Residential uses, only in conjunction with commercial uses
[§ 112-62F(14)].
(1)
Hospitals, institutions, convalescent and nursing homes
[§ 112-62F(8)].
(2)
(3) Gasoline stations [§ 112-62F(5)].
Private and commercial schools: dance, business, trade
[§ 112-62F(11)].
(4)
(5) Shopping centers [§ 112-62F(15)].
(6) Nursery schools, child-care centers [§ 112-62F(10)].
(7) Convalescent or nursing homes [§ 112-62F(4)].
(8) Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
(9) Elderly housing, apartments/condominiums [§ 112-62F(16)].
Retail and commercial uses in excess of 65,000 square feet.
[§ 112-62F(23)]. [Added 9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-9]
(10)
Freestanding signs. [§ 112-62F(25)]. [Added 1-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2000-6]
(11)
Mixed-use development (MXU-CC) in accordance with § 112-39.1
below [§ 112-62F(29)]. [Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
(12)
C.
Purpose. The purpose of the MXU-CC is to facilitate the integrated
and orderly development of residential uses and nonresidential uses
where high-quality mixed-use developments can occur in harmony with
surrounding land uses.
A.
Objectives. The following objectives are sought with respect to MXUCC:
B.
§ 112-39 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-39.1
107:441
Provide a more attractive residential and nonresidential
environment than would be possible through the strict application
of conventional zoning district requirements.
(1)
Encourage harmonious and coordinated development of sites that
is consistent with the existing natural features, bicycle, pedestrian
and vehicular circulation and compatibility with surrounding uses.
(2)
Encourage development that is of excellent design and architecture
with a mix of uses that will create synergy, efficiency of design, and
a reduction of vehicle miles traveled.
(3)
Create a mixture of office, retail, recreational, and residential uses,
along with restaurants, eateries and cafes, where all related
structures, parking, and open spaces are designed to establish and
maintain a cohesive community while protecting the character of
surrounding neighborhoods.
(4)
Expand the opportunity to support diversified housing options
within an integrated site design of varying land uses.
(5)
Permitted uses. An MXU-CC special exception shall combine one or
more of the uses listed in Subsection C(1) below with one or more of the
uses listed in Subsection C(2) below, up to a maximum of 25,000 square
feet of floor space per single user, or up to a maximum of 65,000 square
feet as permitted by, and under the conditions set forth in, Subsection
C(4) below, subject to site plan review and approval.
The following are the nonresidential permitted uses:
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any
permitted uses in this section.
(a)
Administrative, financial, real estate, bank and professional
offices.
(b)
Banks and savings and loan institutions with or without drivethrough
service compliant with § 98-61E.
(c)
(d) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(e) Bookstores, with the exception of adult entertainment.
Coffee shops, with or without drive-through services compliant
with § 98-61E.
(f)
(g) Day-care facilities.
Drugstores, with or without drive-through services compliant
with § 98-61E.
(h)
(i) Health services such as medical, dental, optical offices.
(j) Home occupations.
(1)
C.
§ 112-39.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-39.1
107:442
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments, with or without drivethrough
service compliant with § 98-61E.
(k)
(l) Physical fitness facilities.
(m) Public buildings, structures and properties.
(n) Restaurants and lunchrooms, without drive-through service.
(o) Retail sales and service.
(p) Veterinary clinic, animal hospital.
Video rental establishments, with the exception of adult
entertainment.
(q)
Clubs, fraternal organizations and service organizations [must
meet specific standards contained in § 112-62F(3)].
(r)
(s) Hotels.
Nursing home, including assisted-living centers [must meet
specific standards contained in § 112-62F(4)].
(t)
The following are the residential uses permitted:
(a) Townhouse.
Dwelling, multifamily, to include apartments and
condominiums.
(b)
(c) Dwelling, semidetached.
(d) Dwelling, detached.
(2)
Accessory uses. The accessory uses allowed in mixed-use
developments shall be those uses and structures customarily
accessory and incidental to any permitted principal use or
authorized conditional use. Accessory uses shall be screened from
public view by walls, fencing, landscaping, or a combination of the
three.
(3)
The Planning Commission may consider uses that exceed 25,000
square feet up to a maximum of 65,000 square feet of floor space
per single user only upon the finding that the applicant has met the
burden of proof that:
The use and relative scale of the building as proposed more
likely than not meets or accomplishes the purposes, objectives
and minimum standards of the zone, and other requirement of
the Town Code;
(a)
The use and relative scale of the building as proposed more
likely than not will be internally and externally compatible and
(b)
(4)
§ 112-39.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-39.1
107:443
harmonious with existing and planned land uses in the MXUCC
and adjacent areas;
Existing and planned public facilities are adequate to service
the proposed development contained in the plan; and
(c)
(d) The plan, if approved, would be in the public interest.
Minimum use percentage guidelines. Mixed-use developments shall
incorporate the following residential-to-nonresidential ratios with
respect to the site design and proposed land use:
Required land use mix. Subject to the exception contained in
Subsection D(2) below, residential-to-nonresidential land use mix
shall represent a ratio of no greater than 75% residential and no
less than 25% nonresidential, and no less than 25% residential
and no greater than 75% nonresidential, of the net developable
acreage, and in the case of mixed use within a single building
project shall be no greater than 75% residential and no less than
25% nonresidential of the square footage of the building.
(1)
Notwithstanding Subsection D(1) above, the Planning Commission
may authorize greater land use mix ratios of up to but no greater
than 85% residential and down to but no less than 15%
nonresidential, or up to but no greater than 85% nonresidential and
down to but no less than 15% residential, provided the applicant
proves that:
It is more likely than not that the development project would
not be economically viable in the long term at any lower ratio
of residential to nonresidential use, but would be economically
viable in the long term at the proposed ratio, given current and
forecasted market demands, the compatibility of surrounding
land uses, the adequacy of public facilities and other similar
factors;
(a)
It is more likely than not that the development project meets or
accomplishes the purposes, objectives and minimum standards
of the zone, and other requirements of the Town Code;
(b)
It is more likely than not that the development project will
be internally and externally compatible and harmonious with
existing and planned land uses in the MXD and adjacent areas;
(c)
Existing and planned public facilities are adequate to service
the proposed development proposed in the plan; and
(d)
(e) The plan, if approved, would be in the public interest.
(2)
D.
Conditions to use. Processes and equipment employed and goods
processed or sold shall be limited to those which are not objectionable
by reason of odor, dust, smoke cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibrations,
refuse matter or water-carried waste or otherwise create a nuisance.
E.
§ 112-39.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-39.1
107:444
§ 112-40. Building height regulations.
§ 112-41. Site plans required.
Whenever any new use or a change of use except residential or uses
involving no new structures or any site improvements such as grading,
parking, etc., is to be established within a NC or CC District, a site plan of
development must be submitted to the Planning Commission and approved
by them. Said site plan shall show proposed building location and use,
driveways, parking and loading areas, landscaping, water and sewer
facilities, storm drainage facilities and streetlighting, all showing
relationships to adjacent development. The site plan shall conform to all
specifications and requirements of the district and of Article VII, Design
Standards, and Article VIII, Improvements, of Chapter 98, Subdivision of
Land and Site Plan Approval.
F. Building height. No structure shall exceed 40 feet in height.
Location, dimension and buffer requirements. MXU-CC design shall
promote a pedestrian-oriented environment through the placement of
buildings in relation to public walkways, massing of buildings and
related architectural elements, and give consideration as to the
appropriate location of necessary amenities such as parking areas,
trash containers, alleys, loading areas, etc. so as to limit them as
much as possible from public view. During the concept plan phase
of the development approval process, the applicant shall provide the
Commission with a list of building setback requirements from public
streets, or other structures within the development, and the property
boundaries. Once approved by the Commission, these bulk
requirements shall be included in the Pattern Book described in
§ 98-61B and govern development of the MXU-CC. Property boundaries
that abut less intensive zoning districts shall contain suitable buffers to
be delineated in the development plans and Pattern Book and approved
by the Planning Commission. Buffer requirements may not be
eliminated through consolidation of parcels outside the CC District.
G.
Development plans. Any new use or a change of use involving structural
additions or changes and any site improvements, to include grading and
parking, to be undertaken within the MXU-CC shall require submission
and approval of site and/or subdivision plans, as may be applicable,
pursuant Chapter 98, including § 98-61.
H.
A. CC District. No building shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height.
Site plan format. In addition to the above requirements, the site plan
shall comply with the plat requirements of Article X of Chapter 98,
Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
A.
B. Site plan fee.
§ 112-39.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-41
107:445
§ 112-42. Required lot area, lot width, and yards.
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Widtha
(feet)
Front Yard
Depthb
(feet)
Each
Side
Yardb
(feet)
One Rear
Yard In
Depthb
(Feet)
NC
Neighborhood
Commerciala, e
None 60 25 10 25
CC Community/
Commercialc, d
None 80 40 20 40
A fee of $1,500 shall be paid by the developer for site plan review
(includes sketch, preliminary, final and/or revised) when submitted
to the Planning Commission.
(1)
The fee is payable at the time of submission. Charges will include
the cost of review by the Town's employees and consultants. At the
conclusion of the review process, if total charges are less than the
fee imposed, a refund will be given to the developer, and if more,
the developer will be billed for the difference. Fifteen percent will
be added to the total charges for the Town's cost of administration
and overhead. The rates for charges shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Town Council. Charges will be
billed monthly if in excess of the fee imposed as set forth above.
If any charges are not paid within 60 days of billing, the Town will
withhold further review, approvals and/or issuance of any required
permits until paid in full, together with interest at the rate of 1%
per month or fraction thereof from the date of billing to the date of
payment.
(2)
§ 112-41 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-42
107:446
NOTES:
aResidential uses in the NC Neighborhood Commercial District shall meet
lot area, width, and yard requirements of the R-3 District.
bNo side yard required when common or party walls are for structures on
adjacent lots. Yards adjacent to a residential district (not lot) must be equal
to the height of the building or required dimension, whichever is greater.
Parking is permitted in the yard area provided that in the case of front
yards, parking must be set back a distance equal to at least 1/2 the yard
requirement.
cWhenever a CC District abuts a residential district, a fifty-foot buffer yard
area with no impervious area, except parking within 1/2 the yard distance,
must be provided.
dWhen attached structures are used, the minimum lot width may be
reduced to 20 feet.
eIn no case shall parking or driveways in NC and CC Districts be closer than
10 feet to a property line.
§ 112-43. Off-street parking and loading. [Amended 3-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-1]
There shall be provided in the commercial districts adequate off-street
parking and loading areas in accordance with the requirements in Article II.
Temporary storage of motor vehicles and motor equipment is subject to the
requirements for off-street parking set forth in § 112-7F, related to paving.
§ 112-44. Fencing.
No fence shall be erected to a height of greater than 10 feet in the
commercial districts.
§ 112-42 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-44
107:447

ARTICLE VI
Provisions Governing Industrial Districts
§ 112-45. I Industrial District.
Purpose. The I District is intended for the location of both heavy
commercial and light industrial uses which are basically similar in
nature and too few in number to warrant separate districts. These uses
are of such size and character as to deem them inappropriate for other
commercial districts. This District is intended so that they are located
in a manner that makes them the least offensive to one another and to
adjacent land use districts.
A.
Uses permitted in the I District. No building or structure may be
erected and no land may be used or occupied except for one or more of
the following principal uses:
Warehousing and storage: indoor and outdoor storage of goods
and materials, including warehousing, pole yards, building material
storage, trucking storage, lumber yards, farm implement sales
and service and construction companies having outside storage
of equipment (not, however, to include auto wrecking, junk and
other salvage storage). Temporary storage of motor vehicles and
motor equipment is permitted in the I District subject to remaining
provisions of the Town Code applicable to the I District, but subject
to the requirements for off-street parking set forth in § 112-7F,
related to paving. [Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-1]
(1)
Manufacturing uses of a light nature, and research and
development or science-oriented industries that are free from any
objectionable odors, fumes, dirt, vibration, or noise detectable at
the lot line. Such uses shall not be established without an
application for a zoning certificate which shall be accompanied by
a certification by a registered engineer or architect indicating that
fumes, odors, dirt, vibration or noise produced by the industry will
not be detectable at the lot line.
(2)
(3) Transportation terminals.
(4) Heavy equipment sales and services.
(5) Wholesale trade.
(6) Heating, plumbing and electrical supplies.
Vehicle repair, services and sales. (Includes mobile homes,
campers, farm equipment, marine craft, etc.).
(7)
Accessory building and uses including the retail sale of products
manufactured or assembled as part of the principal use.
(8)
(9) Office buildings for professional and business offices.
B.
§ 112-45 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-45
107:449
Bowling alleys, health and fitness clubs, swimming pools, skating
rinks.
(10)
Clubs, fraternal organizations. [Added 9-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-5]
(11)
Auction houses and warehouses, not to include livestock. [Added
4-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-8]
(12)
Veterinary clinics/animal hospitals with overnight boarding for
treatment, evaluation or convalescence; overnight pet boarding
with or without pet day-care services; pet day-care facilities with or
without overnight pet boarding; and pet grooming facilities. These
uses shall be permitted so long as indoors in a single-user building.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, such a facility shall be permitted to
have accessory uses such as fenced, supervised outdoor exercise
and play areas, not to include individual outdoor dog runs. [Added
9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7]
(13)
Flex space. [Added 4-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-8; amended
11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13; 9-14-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-7]
Flex space uses permitted as part of a structure allowing
multiple uses, not subject to the requirements of individual site
plans for each suite:
Antique repairs/refinishing and sales
Appliance repair and sales
Auctioneering
Auto services, including body shops, tire shops, parts, glass
and general repair
Bakeries
Blacksmith or welding shops
Carpet cleaners
Carpet shops
Caterers
Communications company, including phone companies, radio
companies, etc.
Computer companies
Computer programming, repair, service, etc.
Confectionery production
(a)
(14)
§ 112-45 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-45
107:450
Construction services, including carpentry, cabinet-makers,
dry-wallers, painters, plumbers, electricians, bricklayers,
roofers
Dance studios
Dry-cleaning plant
Electronic repair
Engineering and architectural firms
Exterminators
Fence companies
Fire protection services
Fitness studios/clubs
Floor covering shops
Furniture cleaners
General office
Glass companies
Gyms
Indoor child-care facilities without outdoor playgrounds
Karate and other sport-related studios
Kitchen and bath shops (e.g., cabinetry and appliances)
Lawn and yard services
Lighting companies
Lock companies
Machine shops
Maintenance contractors
Maintenance supply houses
Medical and dental clinics
Pet grooming facility
Pool and hot tub repair, service and sales
Printing companies
Research and development
§ 112-45 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-45
107:451
Security services
Shade shops and screen shops
Sign companies
Silk flower shops
Taxidermists
Trophy companies
Vacuum cleaning and sewing machine repair companies
Veterinary clinic/animal hospital with overnight boarding for
treatment, evaluation or convalescence only
Video labs
Warehousing
Wholesalers
All uses shall be subject to the conditions contained within
§ 112-45B(2) of this chapter.
(b)
Flex space uses not listed above, including but not limited to
the following, are not permitted unless a special exception is
applicable:
[1] Elder-care facilities.
[2] Auctioneering of livestock.
(c)
All uses shall be subject to the conditions contained within
§ 112-45B(2) of this chapter.
(d)
Special exception uses in the I District. The Board of Appeals may
authorize the following principal uses as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
Bulk storage of oil, petroleum, gasoline and similar flammable
liquids and compressed gases [§ 112-62F(2)].
(1)
(2) Industrial center [§ 112-62F(9)].
(3) Public utility buildings [§ 112-62F(13)].
(4) Motels and hotels.
(5) Greenhouses, nursery [§ 112-62F(6)].
(6) Fire and rescue stations [§ 112-62F(20)].
Retail and commercial uses in excess of 65,000 square feet.
[Added 9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-9]
(7)
C.
§ 112-45 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-45
107:452
§ 112-46. Required lot area, lot width and yards.
§ 112-47. Building height regulation.
No building in the I District shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in height.
§ 112-48. Off-street parking and loading. [Amended 3-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-1]
There shall be provided in the I District adequate off-street parking and
loading in accordance with the schedule in Article II. For office buildings
devoted entirely to office use, only one loading space shall be required
per building. Temporary storage of motor vehicles and motor equipment
is subject to the requirements for off-street parking set forth in § 112-7F,
related to paving.
§ 112-49. Site plan required.
Whenever an industrial establishment or other use or change of use, except
residential, eligible under § 112-45 is to be constructed, or any existing use
Freestanding signs [§ 112-62F(25)]. [Added 1-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2000-6]
(8)
Child-care facilities in single-user buildings with a designated
outdoor play yard. [§ 112-62F(28)]. [Added 8-1-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-5]
(9)
Residential uses will not be permitted on the same parcel of land within
a permitted industrial use.
D.
Lot area, lot width and yards in the industrial district shall comply with
the following:
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
One
Front
Yard
(Depth-
Feet)
Each
Side
Yard
(Feet)
One
Rear
Yard
(Feet)
Industrial
District uses
Not
specified
100 40 25 40
A.
B. Office buildings shall have a maximum floor area ratio of .40.
Parking is permitted in the yard area provided that in the case of front
yards, parking must be set back a distance equal to at least 1/2 the
yard requirement. Whenever an Industrial District abuts a residential
district, a fifty-foot buffer yard area, with no impervious area except
parking within 1/2 the yard distance, must be provided. In no case shall
parking or driveways be permitted within 10 feet of the side property
line.
C.
§ 112-45 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-49
107:453
with changes in improvements such as parking, grading, etc., a site plan
of the development must be submitted to the Planning Commission and
approved by them. Said site plan shall show building use and location on
the site, streets, access, driveways, parking and loading areas, locations of
major signs and landscaping, railroad access, water and sewerage facilities,
provisions for storm drainage, and streetlighting, all showing relationships
to adjacent development. The site plan shall conform to all specifications
and requirements of the I District and of Article VI, Design Standards, and
Article VII, Improvements, of Chapter 98, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan
Review.
§ 112-50. Fencing.
No fence shall be erected to a height of greater than 10 feet in the industrial
district.
§ 112-50.1. Office Park Employment District (OPE). [Added
2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
Site plan format. In addition to the above requirements, the site plan
shall comply with the plat requirements of Appendix A of Chapter 98,
Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
A.
Site plan fee.
A fee of $1,500 shall be paid by the developer for site plan review
(includes sketch, preliminary, final and/or revised) when submitted
to the Planning Commission.
(1)
The fee is payable at the time of submission. Charges will include
the cost of review by the Town's employees and consultants. At the
conclusion of the review process, if total charges are less than the
fee imposed, a refund will be given to the developer, and if more,
the developer will be billed for the difference. Fifteen percent will
be added to the total charges for the Town's cost of administration
and overhead. The rates for charges shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Town Council. Charges will be
billed monthly if in excess of the fee imposed as set forth above.
If any charges are not paid within 60 days of billing, the Town will
withhold further review, approvals and/or issuance of any required
permits until paid in full, together with interest at the rate of 1%
per month or fraction thereof from the date of billing to the date of
payment.
(2)
B.
Purpose. The Office Park Employment District zoning is established to
provide for advanced employment opportunities related to professional
business-, education-, health-, and science-oriented applications, which
may include associated light fabrication and assembly operations, in
addition to professional or business offices. The combined opportunities
shall be available within a planned employment center environment
and generally arranged in a business park, office park, or campus-
A.
§ 112-49 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-50.1
107:454
style setting. Buildings shall be designed and constructed with highquality
architectural aesthetics, taking into account the characteristics
of the Office Park Employment District, surrounding area, and overall
character of the Town. All permitted uses shall be conducted wholly
within enclosed buildings and shall minimize adverse impact on the use
and enjoyment of surrounding properties.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
Research, testing, analytical and product development laboratories
and pilot plant facilities not involving the manufacturing, sale,
processing, warehousing, distribution or fabrication of material,
products or goods, except as incidental to the principal permitted
uses. Biomedical technology facilities and laboratories shall be
rated at a biosafety level 2 (BSL-2), as defined by the OSHA and the
American Biological Safety Association Alliance.
(1)
Light manufacturing associated with such specialty industry
groupings as aerospace, computer science, telecommunications,
instrumentation, biomedicine, (BSL-2), medical, energy,
pharmaceutical, electronics, transportation (parts and
accessories), agriculture, economics, biology, and environmental
science.
(2)
Light manufacturing, fabrication, production, testing, repair, sale
or resale of materials, goods and products incidental to the
principal use and located on the same lot as the principal use.
(3)
(4) Computer and data processing service center/call centers.
(5) Hotels with conference centers.
General business, corporate, administrative, educational, medical,
professional and government offices.
(6)
Radio and television broadcasting facilities and studios without
antennas or towers.
(7)
Office, computing, and accounting machine sales, rental and
service establishments (but not to include large or industrial
machinery repair).
(8)
Hospitals and other health care facilities, including immediate care
facilities.
(9)
(10)Restaurants 3,500 square feet or larger.
Schools, including trade or technical schools and colleges and
universities.
(11)
Workforce amenities.
As an accessory use only, workforce amenities incidental to the
principal building use serving primarily employees and guests
(a)
(12)
B.
§ 112-50.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-50.1
107:455
of the principal use, which shall include but not be limited to
the following uses:
[1] Day-care facilities, to include outdoor play area.
[2] Cafeterias.
[3] Banks, savings and loan associations.
[4] Health clubs.
[5] Classroom and training facilities.
Convenience stores up to 2,500 square feet; hours limited
to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
[6]
Delicatessens up to 1,500 square feet but without alcohol
or tobacco sales.
[7]
However, with respect to the uses set forth in Subsection
B(12)(a)[1] through [7] above, with the exception of the
outdoor play area in Subsection B(12)(a)[1] above, there shall
be no external evidence of such use, with the exception of
directional signage.
(b)
Uses incidental and subordinate to the office park as a whole,
which may include sales and services for employees and visitors, as
follows:
Stand-alone delicatessens up to 1,500 square feet but without
alcohol or tobacco sales.
(a)
(b) Stand-alone day-care facilities, to include outdoor play area.
(13)
(14)Build-to-suit/speculative buildings.
(15)Municipal, recreational and cultural uses.
Special uses in OPE District. The Board of Appeals may authorize the
following principal uses as special exceptions in accordance with the
provisions of Article VIII, § 112-62:
Bulk storage of oil, petroleum, gasoline and similar flammable
liquids and compressed gasses for the purposes of on-site use only
and in full compliance with § 112-13 as relates to industrial and
commercial districts and subject to the general standards set forth
in § 112-62E.
(1)
Metal production or fabrication, including coating, enameling,
galvanizing, and plating as a manufacturing-related activity so long
as operated in accordance with environmental and other applicable
laws and regulations and subject to the general standards set forth
in § 112-62E.
(2)
C.
§ 112-50.1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-50.1
107:456
§ 112-50.2. Required lot area, lot width and yards. [Added 2-1-2016
by Ord. No. 2015-22]
§ 112-50.3. Building height regulation. [Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
2015-22]
No building in the OPE District shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in
height with the exception of hotels with conference centers, which may be
up to five stories or 55 feet in height.
§ 112-50.4. Off-street parking and loading. [Added 2-1-2016 by Ord.
No. 2015-22]
There shall be provided in the OPE District adequate off-street parking and
loading in accordance with the schedule in Article II.
§ 112-50.5. Subdivision plans. [Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
2015-22]
For subdivisions in the Office Park Employment District, pursuant to
Chapter 98, the developer shall be required to submit an overall concept
plan for the entire development area, including, but not limited to,
identifying land uses, building locations, architectural style of all structures,
parking, driveways, landscaping, screening and proposed pedestrian
connections. Said concept plan shall be approved by the Planning
Commission. Subdivision plans shall be subject to the approval process set
forth in Chapter 98 for major and minor subdivisions.
Stand-alone convenience stores up to 2,500 square feet but with
hours limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., and subject to the general
standards set forth in § 112-62E.
(3)
Lot area, lot width and yards in the OPE District shall comply with the
following:
Minimum
Lot Area
(acres)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Front
Yard
(depthfeet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
OPE
District
Uses
1 100 40 25 40
A.
Parking is permitted in the yard area, provided that in the case of front
yards, parking must be set back a distance equal to at least 1/2 the yard
requirement. In no case shall parking or driveways be permitted within
10 feet of the side property line.
B.
Whenever an OPE District abuts a residential district, there shall be a
minimum fifty-foot buffer yard area, without any parking permitted.
C.
§ 112-50.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-50.6
107:457
§ 112-50.6. Site plan required. [Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
2015-22]
A site plan of development must be submitted to the Planning Commission
and approved by it whenever any use, or any new use or a change involving
structures or site improvements such as grading, parking, etc., is to be
established within an OPE District. Said site plan shall show the proposed
building location and use, architectural elevations, driveways, parking and
loading areas, landscaping, water and sewer facilities, storm drainage
facilities and streetlighting, all showing relationships to adjacent
development. Speculative buildings may be approved based on the
anticipated use or uses in accordance with the district. Parking
requirements for speculative buildings shall be determined by the mixed
employment standard. Whenever a use or uses are identified, an amended
site plan shall be deemed necessary except where 1) there are
nonmanufacturing uses involving no new structures, or 2) no site
improvements such as parking are required. The site plan shall conform
to all specifications and requirements of the OPE District and of Article
VI, Construction, Architecture and Design Standards, and Article VII,
Improvements, of Chapter 98, Subdivisions of Land and Site Plan Review.
Site plans in the OPE District shall be subject to the approval process set
forth in Chapter 98 applicable to site plans.
§ 112-50.7. Prohibited uses. [Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
The following uses shall be prohibited in the Office Park Employment
District:
Site plan format. In addition to the above requirements, the site plan
shall comply with the plat requirements of Appendix A of Chapter 98,
Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
A.
Site plan fee.
A fee of $1,500 shall be paid by the developer for site plan review
when submitted to the Planning Commission.
(1)
The fee is payable at the time of submission. Charges will include
the cost of review by the Town's employees and consultants. At the
conclusion of the review process, if total charges are less than the
fee imposed, a refund will be given to the developer, and if more,
the developer will be billed for the difference. Fifteen percent will
be added to the total charges for the Town's cost of administration
and overhead. The rates for charges shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Town Council. Charges will be
billed monthly if in excess of the fee imposed as set forth above.
If any charges are not paid within 60 days of billing, the Town will
withhold further review, approvals and/or issuance of any required
permits until paid in full, together with interest at the rate of 1%
per month or fraction thereof from the date of billing to the date of
payment.
(2)
B.
§ 112-50.6 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-50.7
107:458
A. Automobile service center.
B. Commercial and retail uses, except as enumerated.
C. Mini-storage facilities.
D. Outside storage of any type/outdoor manufacturing of any type.
E. Vehicle repair shop.
F. Vehicle sales lot.
G. Adult entertainment business.
H. Tattoo parlor.
I. Stand-alone bar establishments.
J. Gas stations.
K. Prohibited uses as listed under § 109-33 (Wellhead Protection District).
Public utility buildings, including power substations, except for
administrative offices.
L.
M. Upper level or second floor outdoor dining.
N. Freestanding communications towers.
Chemical product manufacturing, with the exception of finished
chemical products to be used for ultimate consumption, including
drugs/pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, and soaps.
O.
P. Concrete, gypsum, and plaster product manufacturing.
Q. Garbage transfer station.
R. Paving and roofing materials manufacturing.
S. Petroleum refining and related industries.
T. Plastics, and other synthetics and rubber product manufacturing.
Primary metal industries engaged in the smelting and refining of
ferrous and nonferrous metals from ore, pig, or scrap; the rolling,
drawing, and alloying of metals; the manufacture of castings, forgings,
stampings, extrusions, and other basic metal products; and the
manufacturing of nails, spikes, and insulated wire and cable. Also
includes merchant blast furnaces and by-products or beehive coke
ovens.
U.
V. Pulp and pulp product manufacturing.
Leather manufacturing, to include any process that transforms hides
into leather by tanning or curing.
W.
§ 112-50.7 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-50.7
107:459
§ 112-50.8. Performance standards. [Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
2015-22]
These regulations are intended to ensure a high-quality environment with
regard to health, safety and aesthetics. Establishments must meet all
applicable county, state and federal requirements, and Town of Mount Airy
regulations.
X. Coating, waterproofing, or otherwise treating fabric.
Motor vehicle and transportation manufacturing, with the exception of
the light manufacture of motor vehicle parts and accessories.
Y.
Z. Stone and cut stone product manufacturing.
AA. Structural clay and pottery product manufacturing.
BB. Taxidermist.
CC. All other prohibited uses set forth by Town Code § 112-12.
Manufacturing uses shall not be established without a zoning approval
certificate, which shall be accompanied by a certification by a
registered engineer or architect indicating that fumes, odors, dirt,
vibration or noise produced by the industry will not be detectable at the
lot line.
A.
All permitted and conditional uses and accessory activities shall be
confined within completely enclosed buildings, with the exception of
off-street parking spaces, off-street loading facilities, signs, and
recreational facilities.
B.
Truck loading, vehicle storage, and dumpster spaces shall be situated
to the rear or side of the building(s). All dumpster areas shall be
screened, at minimum, on three sides.
C.
All mechanical equipment, including roof-mounted, shall be enclosed or
screened so as to be an integral part of the architectural design.
D.
Truck parking, delivery and unloading areas are not permitted within
100 feet of any residential district.
E.
Automobile parking areas are not permitted within 25 feet of any R
District.
F.
Bulk storage of fuel oil, gasoline or liquefied petroleum shall be limited
to above-ground tanks no greater than 2,000 gallons, and all such
storage shall occur in such a manner as to minimize any possibility
of leakage and groundwater contamination. Underground storage shall
conform to Town Code § 112-13.
G.
Heavy-duty diesel vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of over 14,001
pounds shall be restricted from idling on site for no more than five
minutes in any sixty-minute period.
H.
§ 112-50.7 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-50.8
107:460
The following exemptions shall apply to this section:
(1) Emergency vehicles performing their emergency duties.
Vehicles that must idle to operate auxiliary equipment to
accomplish the intended use of the vehicles, such as refrigerating
or operating a hydraulic lift. The exemption does not apply when
the vehicle idling is solely for cabin comfort or to operate
nonessential equipment, such as air conditioning, heating, or
televisions, except in the case of a safety or health emergency.
(2)
I.
§ 112-50.8 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-50.8
107:461

ARTICLE VII
Modifications
§ 112-51. Lot of record. [Amended 4-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
On a legal lot of record which existed on the effective date of this chapter or
any amendment thereto, or which existed at the time of the application of
this chapter or any amendment thereto to the lot by reason of annexation,
which does not fulfill the regulations for the minimum lot area and/or width
for the zone in which it is located, a building may be erected, altered and
used and the lot may be used for a conforming (permitted) use, providing
the yard and other requirements of this chapter are not less than the
minimum specified for the zone in which the lot is located.
§ 112-52. Modification to yard requirements.
§ 112-53. Modification to height limitations.
Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire
towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, tanks, water
towers, spires, radio and television towers, grain elevators, or other such
architectural and mechanical appurtenances may exceed the height
regulations, provided that the required setback of the appurtenance is
increased at least one additional foot for each foot that the height limit is
exceeded.
Allowable projections of structure into yards and other modifications
to yard requirements. Architectural features of buildings such as
windowsills, cornices, roof overhangs, open fire escapes, fireproof
outside stairways, chimneys and flues may project into the required
yard not more than six feet. Unenclosed porches and decks may project
into the required side and rear yards a distance not to exceed 1/2
of the required yard distance. Unenclosed ground floor terraces or
unenclosed patios may extend into any yard area but may not be closer
than six feet to a lot line.
A.
Side yards not required for second story residential uses in
nonresidential structures. Side yards shall not be required for
residential dwellings erected above commercial structures.
B.
Allowable projections of business structures into yards. Signs, awnings,
canopies, marquees, as attached to and part of a building, may project
into the front yard in the commercial districts only.
C.
Front yard depth modifications along developed streets. In order to
maintain an established street character, the Planning Commission may
allow the required front yard depth for a proposed building to be the
same as the average front yard depth of the adjacent buildings on the
same side of the street. In no case shall the front yard of the proposed
building be less than 20 feet.
D.
§ 112-51 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-54
107:463
§ 112-54. Modifications to lot width.
In the case of lots located along the circumference of a cul-de-sac, the
minimum lot width shall be measured (arc definition) at the required
minimum front building setback line and there shall be provided a minimum
front lot line width of not less than 50% of the minimum lot width.
§ 112-55. Lot reduction and public sites.
In any residential district, on parcels of 30 acres or greater where the
Planning Commission deems it to be in the public interest to require the
dedication of land within a proposed development for specific public
purposes beyond those normally required of the development, the Planning
Commission may recommend the land dedication and a corresponding
reduction of lot area, lot width and setback requirements to the Town
Council. The reduction in lot area, lot width and setback requirements shall
be equal to the percent of the development site dedicated to the specified
public use, but in no event shall the reduction be greater than 20%. The
maximum density of the zoning district in which the site is located shall
not be exceeded. Any land dedication or reduction in lot requirements
considered pursuant to this section of this chapter shall be subject to a final
decision of the Town Council.
§ 112-56. Lots abutting more than one street.
Front yard setback. Corner lots or any lot abutting more than one street
shall maintain the front yard setback required by the zoning district in
which the lot is located along each street frontage.
A.
Rear yard setback. Corner lots shall maintain one rear yard setback,
and the dwelling shall be oriented on the lot so that the functional rear
of the dwelling abuts the rear yard area.
B.
§ 112-54 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-56
107:464
ARTICLE VIII
Board of Appeals
§ 112-57. Authorization and appointment.
The Board of Appeals is hereby authorized. Such Board shall consist of
five members, all of whom shall be taxpayers and residents of the Town
of Mount Airy. The members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the consent of the Town Council. Two members of said
Board shall be appointed to serve for a period of one year; two for a period
of two years; and one for a period of three years. Thereafter members
shall be appointed for a period of three years. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term only. Members of the Board shall serve
without compensation. The Council shall designate one alternate member
for the Board of Appeals who may be empowered to sit on the Board in the
absence of any member of the Board; and when the alternate is absent the
Town Council may designate a temporary alternate.
§ 112-58. Meetings.
§ 112-59. Appeals.
The members of the Board of Appeals shall meet at least once each year
at such time and place as they may fix by resolution. They shall select
one of their members as chairman and one vice chairman, who shall
serve one year or until their successors have been selected. Special
meetings may be called at any time by the chairman, or in his absence,
by the vice chairman. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. The Board shall make a transcript of all
its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The chairman, or
in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses.
A.
The Board shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and
after a public hearing conducted by the Board. A notice of time and
place of such public hearing shall be published in a paper of general
circulation in the Town of Mount Airy at least once, not more than 30
nor less than 15 days previous to the hearing. Such notice shall contain
the particular address of location of the property for which the variation
or other ruling by the Board is sought, as well as a brief description of
the nature of the appeal, and specifications of the proposed variance.
B.
An appeal to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town of
Mount Airy, affected by any decisions of the Zoning Administrator based
in whole or in part upon the provisions of this chapter.
A.
§ 112-57 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-59
107:465
§ 112-60. Powers.
Such appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and the Board
of Appeals within 30 days from the decision being appealed from. Upon
appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Appeals
all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
form was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the
Board that a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of
Appeals or by a court of record on application on notice to the Zoning
Administrator and on due cause shown. The Board shall fix a reasonable
time for the hearing of the appeal, give not less than 15 days' public
notice thereof by the posting of not less than one sign of at least three
square feet in area, containing notice of the hearing in a conspicuous
place on or near the property upon which application for appeal is
made, and advertising in a weekly or daily paper of general circulation
in the Town, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide
the same within 30 days of conclusion of the public hearing. Upon the
hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
B.
The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant upon any
matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance, or
to effect any variation in such ordinance.
C.
A fee of $300 for variances, administrative error and special exceptions
shall be paid to the Town at the time the application is filed. Charges
will include the costs of the Town's employees and consultants. When
the Board of Appeals concludes the matter the charges will be assessed,
and if less than the fee imposed, a refund will be given to the applicant,
and if greater, the applicant will be billed for the difference. Fifteen
percent will be added to the total charges for the Town's administrative
costs and overhead.
D.
The rates for charges shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Town Council. Charges will be billed monthly if in
excess of the fee imposed as set forth above. If any charges are not
paid within 60 days of billing the Town will withhold further review,
approvals and/or issuance of any required permits until paid in full,
together with interest at the rate of 1% per month or fraction thereof
from the date of billing to the date of payment.
E.
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter or any
ordinance adopted pursuant to Article 66B.
A.
§ 112-59 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-60
107:466
§ 112-61. Variances.
To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter as
required under this chapter.
B.
To authorize upon appeal in specific cases a variance from the terms of
this chapter.
C.
Filing of variance.
An application may be made to the Board of Appeals for a variance
where it is alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The application must be
on a form provided for that purpose by the Town. The applicant
must provide all the information requested on the form, together
with any other information and data that may be required to advise
the Board on the variance, whether such information in called for
by the official form or not.
(1)
Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Board, a variance
authorized by it expires if the applicant fails to obtain subdivision
approval, a building permit, or use certificate within 12 months
from the date of authorization of the variance.
(2)
A.
Standards for variances. Where there is unnecessary hardship or
practical difficulty, the Board may grant a variance in the application of
the provisions of this chapter provided that the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case: [Amended 12-7-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-6]
That there are unique physical conditions including irregularity,
narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship or practical
difficulty is due to such conditions.
(1)
That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(2)
That such unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty has not been
created by the applicant or the applicant's predecessor in title.
(3)
That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property,
nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
(4)
B.
§ 112-60 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-61
107:467
§ 112-62. Special exceptions.
That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(5)
No grant of a variance shall be authorized unless the Board
specifically finds that the condition for which the variance is sought
is not so general or recurrent a nature to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation for such
conditions
(6)
Conditions. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it considers necessary to
implement purposes of this chapter.
C.
Filing of special exceptions.
For any use or expansion of use listed in §§ 112-23C, 112-24C,
112-25C, 112-26C, 112-37C, 112-39C, and 112-45C, a special
exception must be obtained from the Board of Appeals. In addition
to the information required on the building permit application, the
special exception application must show:
Site plans, ground floor plans and elevations of proposed
structures, if requested by the Board.
(a)
(b) Names and addresses of adjoining owners.
(1)
Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Board of Appeals a
special exception authorized by the Board expires if the applicant
fails to obtain, where required to do so, a building permit or use
certificate within 12 months of the date of the authorization of the
special exception.
(2)
A.
Referral to Planning Commission. All applications for a special
exception shall be referred to the Town Planning Commission for a
recommendation.
B.
Conditions. The Board of Appeals, in passing upon special exception
applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the
public welfare and the Town Master Plan, including conditions which
are more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same
zone.
C.
Application of extent-of-use regulations. The lot area, lot width and
yard requirements as set forth in this chapter must be followed as the
minimum by the Board of Appeals. Where no extent-of-use regulations
are set forth for the particular use, the Board must impose extent-of-use
requirements as necessary to protect the public welfare and the Town
Master Plan.
D.
E. General standards.
§ 112-61 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-62
107:468
A special exception may be granted when the Board of Appeals
finds from a preponderance of the evidence produced at the
hearing that:
The proposed use, including its nature, intensity and location,
is in harmony with the intent of the Town Master Plan and the
orderly and appropriate development of the district.
(a)
That adequate water supply, sewerage disposal, storm
drainage and fire and police protection are or can be provided
for the use.
(b)
That the use of adjacent land and buildings will not be
discouraged and the value of adjacent land and buildings will
not be impaired by the location, nature and height of buildings,
walls and fences.
(c)
That the use will have proper location with respect to existing
or future streets giving access to it, and will not create traffic
congestion or cause industrial or commercial traffic to use
residential streets.
(d)
That the specific standards (§ 112-62F) set forth for each
particular use for which a special exception may be granted
have been met except in the case of nonconforming structures
where the Board determines that no adverse impact will result.
(e)
(1)
The applicant for a special exception shall have the burden of proof,
which shall include the burden of going forward with the evidence
and the burden of persuasion on all questions of fact which are to
be determined by the Board of Appeals.
(2)
Specific standards for special exception uses. In addition to the general
standards for all special exceptions as contained in § 112-62E, the
following specific standards for particular uses must be met prior to the
granting of a special exception:
Boarding house, lodging house. In a R-5 and R-7 District and
subject to the requirements of that district except as herein
provided:
Lot area: there shall be at least 3,000 square feet of lot area
for each dwelling unit or guest room.
(a)
Lot width: there shall be a minimum lot width of at least 150
feet.
(b)
(c) The maximum number of guests permitted shall be nine.
(1)
Bulk storage of oil, petroleum, gasoline and similar flammable
liquid and compressed gases. In an I District and subject to the
requirements of that district except as herein provided:
(2)
F.
§ 112-62 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-62
107:469
(a) Total storage not to exceed 200,000 gallons.
Each container shall be set back from the nearest line of
adjoining property as follows:
Water Capacity of
Container
(gallons)
Underground
Storage
(feet) Aboveground Storage
0 to 2,000 25 feet 25 feet, plus 1 inch per
each foot of height of
the container.
2,001 to 30,000 50 feet 50 feet, plus 1 inch per
each foot of height of
the container.
30,001 to 200,000 75 feet 100 feet, plus 1 inch
per each foot of height
of the container.
(b)
Storage of liquids above the ground shall be restricted by dikes
sufficient in size to contain the amount of liquid stored.
(c)
Clubs, fraternal and service organizations. In R-5, R-7 and CC
Districts and subject to the requirements of the district in which
located except as herein provided: [Amended 9-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-7]
(a) Lot area: 20,000 square feet minimum.
(b) Lot width: 150 feet minimum.
Yards, minimum for each yard: front 50 feet, side 30 feet, rear
60 feet.
(c)
(d) Building coverage: 15% of the total lot area maximum.
Access must be on a major street as designated in the Town
Master Plan.
(e)
(3)
Convalescent or nursing home. In R-5, R-7 and CC Districts and
subject to the requirements of the district in which located except
as herein provided.
(a) Lot area: 30,000 square feet minimum.
(b) Maximum density: one bed per 1,000 square feet of lot area.
(c) Lot width: 150 feet minimum.
Yard, minimum for each: front 35 feet, side 30 feet, rear 60
feet.
(d)
(4)
§ 112-62 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-62
107:470
Building coverage: 25% of the total lot area maximum.
[Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-3]
(e)
Access must be on a major street as designated in the Town
Master Plan.
(f)
Gasoline station. In CC District and subject to the requirements of
the district in which located except as herein provided:
(a) Buildings must be set back at least 40 feet from the street line.
Pumps must be set back at least 35 feet from all street rightof-
ways.
(b)
Access drives must be located as follows:
Minimum offset from intersection of street right-of-way
lines: 40 feet.
[1]
[2] Side lot line offset: 10 feet.
[3] Minimum width: 12 feet.
[4] Maximum width: 35 feet.
[5] Minimum separation of drives on same lot: 50 feet.
(c)
Except along access drives, a concrete curb eight inches in
height must be placed along all street right-of-way lines.
(d)
All lights shall be diverted toward the gasoline station or
downward on the lot.
(e)
No outdoor stockpiling of tires or outdoor storage of trash
is permitted. An area enclosed by a wall or fence, screened
from view of adjoining properties, shall be provided whenever
outdoor storage is required. No materials may be stored so as
to create a fire hazard.
(f)
(5)
Greenhouse, nursery. In I District and subject to the requirements
of the district in which located except as herein provided:
(a) Lot area: one-acre minimum.
No part of any buildings thereon shall be less than 25 feet from
a residentially zoned lot.
(b)
(c) No outdoor displays of tools and equipment.
(6)
Home occupations. In all residential districts and subject to the
requirements of the district in which located except as herein
provided:
(7)
§ 112-62 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-62
107:471
Persons residing in the dwelling only may be employed or
engaged in the occupation. Accessory structures on property
may used for the home occupation.
(a)
The character of external appearance of the dwelling unit or
accessory structure must be that of a dwelling or its accessory
structure. No display or products may be shown so as to be
visible from outside the dwelling. A nameplate not larger than
two square feet in area attached to the building and
illuminated only by indirect lighting is permitted.
(b)
Not more than 25% of the ground floor area of a dwelling unit
may be devoted to a home occupation.
(c)
Besides the required parking for the dwelling unit, additional
parking located in the rear yard is required as follows:
One space for the home occupation and one space for each
member of the immediate family employed in the home
occupation.
[1]
[2] Three additional spaces for a physician or dentist.
(d)
Hospitals, institutions. In the CC District and subject to the
requirements of the district as herein provided:
(a) Lot area: two acres minimum.
(b) Lot width: 200 feet minimum.
Yards: no portion of a building shall be within 50 feet of a lot
line or street line.
(c)
(d) The required parking shall not be permitted in front yard area.
(e) Building coverage: 40% of the total lot area maximum.
Access must be on a major street as designated in the Town
Master Plan.
(f)
(8)
Industrial center. In an I District and subject to the requirements of
that district except as herein provided:
(a) Lot area: five acres minimum.
(b) Lot width: 300 feet minimum.
All buildings must be set back at least 50 feet from any
property line and 100 feet from any street line.
(c)
Access must be on a major street as designated in the Town
Master Plan. Traffic routes and exits shall be far enough from
houses so that truck noise and vibration will be minimized.
(d)
(9)
§ 112-62 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-62
107:472
A buffer yard 150 feet wide must be provided on the site in all
instances where the site adjoins an R District. The buffer yard
shall be naturally landscaped, have no impervious cover and
shall not be used for building, loading, or storage purposes.
Parking is permitted in the buffer area provided that no
parking is located closer to the property line than 1/2 the
buffer setback.
(e)
Appearance should be harmonious with adjoining properties.
This feature includes but is not limited to: landscaping,
enclosure of principal and accessory uses, height control, sign
control, building coverage, and architectural controls.
(f)
Nursery schools, child-care center. In all residential, NC and CC
Districts and subject to the requirements of that district in which
located except as herein provided:
(a) Lot area: 12,000 square feet minimum.
(b) Lot width: 100 feet minimum.
Pupil density: the maximum attendance at any one time shall
be based upon the total square footage of the lot area as
follows:
[1] One pupil per 1,000 square feet in RE, R2, R3.
[2] One pupil per 500 square feet in R5, R7, NC, CC.
(c)
(d) Yards: 25 feet from all property lines.
There shall be an adequately sized play area, fully fenced and
enclosed.
(e)
(10)
Private school. In NC and CC Districts and subject to the
requirements of the district in which located except as herein
provided:
(a) Lot area: one acre minimum.
(b) Lot width: 125 feet minimum.
(c) Yards: 30 feet minimum.
The maximum attendance (number of students physically
present) at any one time may not exceed one student per 1,000
square feet of the lot area devoted to the use.
(d)
(11)
Professional office (physician, dentist, architect, engineer, attorney,
or similar). In all residential districts and subject to the
requirements of the district in which located except as herein
provided:
(a) The professional person must be a resident of the dwelling.
(12)
§ 112-62 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-62
107:473
That there is not exterior evidence, other than a permitted sign
not exceeding two square feet, to indicate that the building is
being used for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
(b)
(c) That there is no show window or display window.
Only one person other than the resident professional may be
employed.
(d)
Sufficient off-street parking in the side or rear yard must be
provided with the minimum being three spaces per
professional plus residential requirements.
(e)
The total area devoted to the office does not exceed 30 % of
the square footage of the dwelling unit.
(f)
Public utility building. In all districts and subject to the
requirements of the district in which located except as herein
provided:
Side setback: as stated in the applicable zone but in no case
less than 30 feet.
(a)
Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed with fence or wall not
less than six feet in height, which shall be so constructed as
not to have openings, holes, or gaps larger than six inches in a
dimension.
(b)
Housed equipment: when the equipment is totally enclosed
with a building, no fence or screen planting shall be required
and the yard shall be maintained in conformity with the district
in which the facility is located.
(c)
Screen planting: the required fence for unhoused equipment
shall be surrounded by evergreen plantings.
(d)
(13)
Residential uses. In CC District and subject to the requirements of
that district except as herein provided:
Must be located within a structure that is existing on the date
of adoption of this chapter or must be in conjunction with
a commercial use (e.g., caretaker dwelling etc.); or located
within a building that is principally for a commercial use.
(a)
(b) Must comply with the parking requirements of this chapter.
(14)
Shopping centers. In NC and CC Districts and subject to the
requirements of the district in which located except as herein
provided:
(a) Lot area: two acres minimum.
(b) Lot width: 200 feet minimum.
(15)
§ 112-62 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-62
107:474
All buildings must be set back at least 50 feet from any
property line and 100 feet from a street line.
(c)
Parking must be provided at the minimum ratio of one parking
space to 200 square feet of gross floor area.
(d)
Access must be on a major street as designated in the Town
Master Plan (CC District only).
(e)
A buffer yard 100 feet wide must be provided on the site in
all instances where the site adjoins an R District. The buffer
yard shall be naturally landscaped, have no impervious cover
and shall not be used for building, loading or storage purposes.
Parking and access drives are permitted in the buffer area
provided that it is located no closer to the property line than 1/
2 the building setback, except where the property adjoins an R
District. [Amended 11-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-8]
(f)
Where the site adjoins a R District, the Board may require
screen planting to screen the buildings from the R District.
(g)
In a NC District the gross floor area of the shopping center
shall not exceed 25,000 square feet and the shopping center
shall not contain more than 15 stores, shops or establishments.
(h)
Uses.
CC District: any commercial use permitted in the NC or CC
District.
[1]
NC District: any commercial use permitted in the NC
District plus gasoline stations, commercial recreation,
business services and eating and drinking establishments.
[2]
(i)
Elderly housing, apartments and condominiums. In R3, R5, R7 and
CC Districts and subject to the requirements of the district in which
located except as herein required.
(a) Maximum permitted density is 12 units per acre.
Minimum setback requirements:
[1] Front: 35 feet.
[2] Side: 20 feet.
[3] Rear: 35 feet.
(b)
(c) Maximum building coverage: 25% of the total lot area.
(d) Two parking spaces per unit are required.
An elevator must be provided for all units not accessible from
the same level as the exterior entrance. All common areas and
individual units must be handicap accessible.
(e)
(16)
§ 112-62 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-62
107:475
The primary road providing access to the site must be a
collector or higher classification road, or access must be
approved in writing by both the Planning Commission and
emergency services.
(f)
Covenants must be developed to require that: [Amended
5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-4]
Occupancy be restricted to persons 55 years of age or
older, or who are permanently totally disabled, provided
in that instance that at least one resident be 55 years of
age or older. For purposes of this section, ”permanently
totally disabled” means a disability (mental or physical)
which has existed or is expected to last for at least one
year, and is of a nature that would meet the definitions of
total disability under the Federal Social Security Program
or permanent total disability as defined for purposes of
Maryland Workers' Compensation Law.
[1]
All exterior areas and improvements therein must be
managed under a common maintenance agreement,
(excluding areas to be dedicated to or maintained by the
Town).
[2]
(g)
Family apartment. In all residential districts and subject to the
requirements of the district except as herein provided: [Amended
9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2]
The family apartment must be in an owner-occupied dwelling
unit.
(a)
Only one family apartment per dwelling of which no more than
30% of the gross floor area of the principal structure is utilized
for the apartment.
(b)
Two additional parking spaces shall be provided for the family
apartment.
(c)
At least one owner of the property must reside in the principal
dwelling. If such residency ceases for a period of more than 60
days consecutively, then the use of the family apartment shall
cease.
(d)
If a separate entrance is utilized, it shall be to the side or
rear of the structure in order to maintain the appearance of a
single-family residence.
(e)
The applicant for special exception must prepare at his, her, or
their expense a deed covenant in form suitable for recording
which covenants that any apartment use of the property is
subject to the provisions of this chapter. Said deed covenant
shall be in form satisfactory to the Town Attorney, and after
(f)
(17)
§ 112-62 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-62
107:476
proper execution and the granting of any special exception,
shall be delivered to the Town Attorney for recording at the
applicant's expense.
On or before January 30th of each and every year, the owners
of any property for which such a special exception is granted
shall file with the Town Clerk an affidavit certifying as true
and correct that at least one owner of the property is residing
in the principal dwelling on the property and that the family
apartment is occupied by no one other than persons having
a parent-child, child-parent or in-law relationship with one of
the owners. The Zoning Administrator shall establish the form
of such affidavit, which form shall be made available at the
Town Hall for the use of persons who have been granted such
a special exception. The failure to file such affidavit on time or
the making of any material misstatement of fact therein shall
be cause for immediate revocation of the special exception,
which revocation may be accomplished by a notice from the
Zoning Administrator, to the last known address of the owner
or owners of the property, after approval of such action by the
Town Council.
(g)
Veterinarian clinics. In all residential districts subject to the
requirements of those districts wherein located except as herein
provided:
One professional veterinarian who must be a resident of the
dwelling on the property and one additional veterinarian.
(a)
All operations in connection with the clinic must be conducted
indoors.
(b)
One person, other than the professional veterinarians, may
be employed full-time plus one part-time employee for
maintenance of the clinic facility.
(c)
That there is no exterior evidence other than a permitted sign
not exceeding 16 square feet to indicate that the building is
being used for other than residential purposes.
(d)
Sufficient off-street parking in the side or rear yard must be
provided with nine spaces being the minimum for the clinic use
and two space for the residential use.
(e)
The total building area devoted to the clinic may not exceed 10
% of the land area of the site.
(f)
No work on large animals (bovine or equine) is to be performed
on the premises.
(g)
Must have direct access onto a collector or higher
classification roadway as designated in the Town Master Plan.
(h)
(18)
§ 112-62 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-62
107:477
(i) The minimum lot area must be 30,000 square feet.
The minimum building setbacks for clinic operations must be:
[1] Front: 50 feet;
[2] Rear: 50 feet; and
[3] Side: 30 feet.
(j)
Screening and buffers must be provided where the site abuts
residential zoning districts and must include no less than two
off-set rows of coniferous plantings with five-foot separation
plus a hedge planting.
(k)
No crematorium or incinerator device may be used on the site
in conjunction with the clinic operation.
(l)
Churches, schools, libraries, community centers. In all residential
districts, subject to the requirements of the district wherein
located, except as herein provided:
(a) Lot area: one acre minimum.
(b) Lot width: 150 feet minimum.
No building shall be located within 100 feet of a street line and
50 feet of any property line.
(c)
(d) Building coverage: 25% maximum.
Access must be on a major street as designated in the Town
Master Plan.
(e)
Screening and buffers must be provided where the site abuts
residentially used properties.
(f)
(19)
Fire and rescue stations. In all districts and subject to the
requirements of the district except as herein provided:
(a) Lot area: two-acre minimum.
(b) Lot width: 200 feet minimum.
No building shall be located within 50 feet of any street or
property line.
(c)
Access must be on a collector or higher classification roadway
as designated in the Town Master Plan.
(d)
Where the site abuts residentially used or zoned properties,
no parking or driveways shall be located within 25 feet of
any property line and screening and buffers must be provided
along property lines.
(e)
(20)
§ 112-62 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-62
107:478
Accessory uses for a fire or rescue station in a residential
zone may include use of meeting rooms by the public but shall
exclude social and fundraising events such as bingo, carnivals,
dances, etc.
(f)
Elderly housing, detached and attached units. In all residential
districts and subject to the requirements of the district in which
located except as herein provided:
(a) Maximum permitted density is eight units per acre.
(b) No more than four units may be attached in any one grouping.
The overall site must meet the setback requirements of the
district in which located; however, individual units shall not
be required to conform to setback requirements unless so
required by the Planning Commission.
(c)
Two paved parking spaces per unit are required. One of the
paved spaces must be reserved for and directly accessible to
each unit.
(d)
The primary road providing access to the site must be a
collector or higher classification road, or access must be
approved in writing by both the Planning Commission and
emergency services.
(e)
All major living spaces must be handicap accessible, and a
handicap accessible entrance is required from the parking
area to each dwelling unit.
(f)
Covenants must be developed to require that: [Amended
5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-4]
Occupancy be restricted to persons 55 years of age or
older, or who are permanently totally disabled, provided
in that instance that at least one resident be 55 years of
age or older. For purposes on this section, ”permanently
totally disabled” means a disability (mental or physical)
which has existed or is expected to last for at least one
year, and is of a nature that would meet the definitions of
total disability under the Federal Social Security Program
or permanent total disability as defined for purposes of
Maryland Workers' Compensation Law.
[1]
Each dwelling unit must be occupied by the owner, or
a grandparent, parent, spouse, child, or other lineal
descendant of the legal owner, or occupied by a
beneficiary of a trust established by or for the benefit of
such occupant, and
[2]
All exterior areas and improvements therein must be
managed under a common maintenance agreement,
[3]
(g)
(21)
§ 112-62 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-62
107:479
(excluding areas to be dedicated to or maintained by the
Town).
Accessory apartment. In all residential districts and subject to the
requirements of the district except as herein provided: [Added
10-6-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-4]
(a) Accessory apartment must be in owner-occupied dwelling.
No external structural changes can be made to the existing
structure (except minor appurtenance changes such as fire
escapes, dormer windows, etc.)
(b)
Off-street parking can be provided in accordance with the
zoning requirements for each dwelling unit or apartment.
(c)
Only one accessory unit, with no minimum floor area, would be
permitted for each 900 square feet of gross floor area in the
existing structure.
(d)
The structure to be converted must have existed prior to
October 8, 1951, and contain at least 1,800 square feet of gross
floor area for conversion to be approved.
(e)
There will no minimum lot size or density provisions providing
the above requirements are met.
(f)
(22)
Retail and commercial uses in excess of 65,000 square feet. Retail
or commercial uses in excess of gross flooring area of 65,000
square feet for a single establishment or a group of four or less
in the CC District, subject to the requirements of the CC District
except as herein provided: [Added 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-7]
(a) Lot area: 15 acres minimum.
All buildings must be set back at least 100 feet from the street
lines and 100 feet from all property lines, except 200 feet from
residential lines where adjacent property is in a residential
zone.
(b)
Parking is required at a minimum ratio of one parking space to
200 square feet of gross store area.
(c)
(d) Access must be on a single major collector street.
A buffer yard 100 feet wide must be provided on the site in
all instances in which the site adjoins a R District. The buffer
yards shall be naturally landscaped and plantings shall include
(but are not limited to) berms, plantings, fences and other
barriers. Except where property adjoins a R District, parking
and access drives are permitted in the buffer area, provided
they are located no closer to the property line than 1/2 the
building setback.
(e)
(23)
§ 112-62 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-62
107:480
Where the site adjoins a R District, the Board may require
screen plantings (specifying spacing, height, and diameter/
caliper of plantings) and/or fencing to screen buildings from
the R District and provide protection to the R District.
(f)
The following lighting standards, in addition to those found in
§ 112-18 of this chapter, shall apply:
All lighting shall be consistent with current Town lighting,
e.g., high-density sodium lighting.
[1]
Poles shall not exceed 30 feet in height, or 25 feet on the
perimeter of the property.
[2]
[3] Lamp wattage in each fixture shall not exceed 400 watts.
Full cutoff adjustable fixtures shall be required for
lighting, including wall packs.
[4]
[5] Floodlights shall be prohibited.
(g)
(h) Uses. Any commercial use permitted in the CC District.
Nonresident professional offices. In all residential districts and
subject to the requirements of the districts in which located in
addition to the requirements herein provided: [Added 7-7-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-12; amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
Primary professional shall be defined to include physician,
dentist, architect, insurance sales, engineer, surveyor, attorney
or other position requiring training and licensing and the like
but shall not include paraprofessionals or positions serving to
support the primary professional such as dental hygienists and
veterinarian technicians.
(a)
Residency of a professional in a building is preferred but not
required.
(b)
No more than two primary professionals of a similar profession
shall be permitted to have offices in the property, and no
more than two such primary professionals shall be present and
working on the premises at any time.
(c)
The character of the external appearance of the building and
accessory structures must be that of a dwelling or its accessory
structures. No display or shop window is permitted, and no
display or products may be shown so as to be visible from
outside the dwelling. A nameplate not larger than two square
feet in area attached to the building and illuminated only by
indirect lighting is permitted. Other outdoor signs, including
sidewalk sandwich signs, shall not be permitted except to the
extent permitted in residential zones.
(d)
(24)
§ 112-62 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-62
107:481
The building and grounds must be maintained and in
compliance with all applicable housing and maintenance
codes.
(e)
Not more than five total employees, including primary
professionals, supporting professionals and paraprofessionals,
support staff and nonprofessionals, shall be present and
working at the premises at the same time. Hours must be
limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. on Saturdays and legal holidays. Sunday hours shall
not be permitted.
(f)
Sufficient off-street parking in the side or rear yard must be
provided, with a minimum of three spaces per professional plus
those required for residential use, if any.
(g)
The property must be a residential-style, detached building
with a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet and located on a
corner lot with frontage on at least one major collector street
or arterial road.
(h)
The lot must either adjoin or confront, in whole or part,
property zoned commercial or industrial. [Amended
11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-9]
(i)
The proposed usage is subject to site plan approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
(j)
Freestanding signs. More than one freestanding sign on a property
may be permitted in commercial and industrial districts as a special
exception use as long as the freestanding signs call attention to
a business, service or industry conducted on the premises upon
which the sign is located or within the Town limits, which serves
to direct the public to the business site or sites, subject to all
other standards for freestanding signs, including but not limited to
illumination, size, total permitted area given the road frontage and
setback requirements. [Added 1-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2000-6]
(25)
Bed-and-breakfasts. Bed-and-breakfast facilities in the CC, NP, LC
and RE zones, subject to the following conditions: [Added
10-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-8]
The primary use of the structure and property shall be
residential.
(a)
Individual bed-and-breakfast units shall not contain cooking
facilities.
(b)
Interior residential features shall be retained in a manner
which allows reconversion to a residential use.
(c)
(d) The dwelling shall be owner-occupied and managed.
(26)
§ 112-62 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-62
107:482
(e) No more than four rooms shall be rented.
Parking shall be provided on site with one additional space
required for each room that is available to be rented.
(f)
The use of the property as a bed-and-breakfast shall be shown
by the owner not to be detrimental to the neighborhood.
(g)
Other than an authorized sign, the bed-and-breakfast use shall
be shown to be compatible with the neighborhood and shall
be maintained and landscaped to eliminate outward signs of
transient use.
(h)
No residential structure shall be removed in order to allow for
a bed-and-breakfast use or removed for parking for such a use.
(i)
Meals shall be served only to customers who are actually using
the bed-and-breakfast accommodations overnight, nonpaying
residents, or their bonafide guests.
(j)
The maximum stay for each customer using the bed-andbreakfast
accommodations shall be 14 days, and a guest book
shall be maintained by the owner which accurately identifies
all customers for each night's lodging.
(k)
No more than one nonresident person may be employed on the
premises on a full-time basis (i.e., at least 35 hours per week).
(l)
A bed-and-breakfast shall not have any sign or other evidence
of its use except one sign not exceeding two feet by three feet
in area, which may be double-faced and illuminated by indirect
lighting.
(m)
The Board shall not approve a proposed bed-and-breakfast
use unless it finds that the use will achieve a maximum of
compatibility, safety, efficiency and attractiveness. In making
such determination, the fact the proposed bed-and-breakfast
complies with all other stated general regulations contained
in this Subsection F(26) (as well as all general development
standards or other specific requirements of the applicable zone
within the Town) shall not be deemed to create a presumption
that the proposed bed-and-breakfast use is, in fact, compatible
with surrounding land uses and, in itself, shall not be sufficient
to require its approval.
(n)
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary,
a bed-and-breakfast use shall not be permitted on any lot
which is included within a plat of subdivision if such plat
was recorded among the Land Records of Frederick or Carroll
Counties after January 1, 1951.
(o)
§ 112-62 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-62
107:483
Second floor outdoor dining/seating. Second floor outdoor dining/
seating in the DTZ District, subject to the following conditions:
[Added 10-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
Any restaurant establishment offering outdoor second floor
dining/seating must have an indoor dining/seating area of a
size at least equivalent in size or greater than the outdoor
dining/seating area.
(a)
The maximum size of the outdoor second floor dining/seating
area shall be greater than 1,000 square feet.
(b)
Any second floor outdoor dining/seating area must be covered
by a permanent, solid roofing structure and covered with
acoustical tiling or sound-absorbing materials. No temporary
roofs, tents or awnings shall be permitted.
(c)
Any outdoor second floor dining/seating area shall be
surrounded on all sides by a wall, constructed of either
completely solid materials such as masonry or a combination
of solid and opaque materials, at a total minimum height of 48
inches, designed in order to prevent objects from being placed
upon or falling over the wall and for safety purposes to prevent
people from sitting on, leaning over or falling over the wall.
(d)
Any outdoor second floor dining seating area shall have selfclosing
doors which shall not be propped open.
(e)
Hours of service shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., and
said area must be vacated by 10:00 p.m., at which time lights,
other than safety and security lighting, shall not be provided
except for one hour for the purposes of trash removal and
cleanup.
(f)
Beverages shall be served only in paper or plastic containers.
Glass containers of any type shall be prohibited in an outdoor
second floor dining/seating area.
(g)
The service and consumption of any alcoholic beverages in
any outdoor second floor dining/seating area shall be in strict
compliance with all state and local alcoholic beverage laws and
may be served in second floor outdoor dining areas only in
conjunction with the service of food and meals.
(h)
Operation of any outdoor second floor dining/seating area shall
comply with all state and local noise ordinances.
(i)
Operation and use of any outdoor second floor dining/seating
area may be throughout the entire calendar year.
(j)
The operation of any outdoor second floor dining/seating area
shall be required to comply with all state and local laws, codes,
regulations and ordinances and all licensing and permitting
(k)
(27)
§ 112-62 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-62
107:484
requirements, including but not limited to all Health
Department and Liquor Board laws and regulations. The
business owner and/or property owner shall be responsible for
any violations of noise, public nuisance and hours of operation
requirements.
The outdoor second floor dining area mast be cleared of trash
and food waste within one hour of the time the dining area is
vacated.
(l)
(m) Lighting must adhere to Town standards.
Outdoor second floor dining areas shall be subject to the site
plan review and approval by the Town of Mount Airy Planning
Commission.
(n)
A second floor dining area shall be subject to the same
development requirements as indoor areas, including, but not
limited to, parking requirements, water use and capacity.
(o)
The use of any outdoor sound amplification device is
prohibited.
(p)
Second floor outdoor dining areas shall be located so as not
to obstruct sidewalks and parking areas, and placement shall
be limited to areas bordering Main Street, Center Street to
the extent located within the DTZ District, the first 250 feet of
Prospect as it intersects with North Main Street, and the first
250 feet of Park Avenue as it intersects with South Main Street.
(q)
The Town's design guideline must be utilized to the fullest
extent to ensure architectural design compatibility with both
the existing building and the architectural theme of the
existing downtown buildings.
(r)
Child-care facilities in single-user buildings with a designated
outdoor play yard in the Industrial District. Subject and in addition
to the requirements of the Industrial District: [Added 8-1-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-5]
There shall be no shared parking with other buildings or
facilities.
(a)
The child-care facility must be the single occupant of the entire
building and shall not be located in flex space multiuser
buildings.
(b)
There shall be an adequately sized play area, fully fenced and
enclosed.
(c)
(28)
Mixed-use development in a CC District (MXU-CC), subject to the
following: [Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
(29)
§ 112-62 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-62
107:485
§ 112-63. Permits issued by Board.
Use of building permitted by Board shall be established within 12 months.
No order of the Board permitting a use of a building or premises shall be
valid for a period longer than 12 months, unless such use is established
within such period; provided, however, that where such permitted use is
dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall
continue in force and effect if a zoning certificate for said erection or
alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is
started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such
certificate.
§ 112-64. Appeals to court.
§ 112-64.1. Restrictions on applications following disapproval by
the Board of Appeals. [Added 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
If an application for variance or special exception is disapproved by the
Board, thereafter the Board shall take no further action on another
application for the same or a substantially similar proposal, on the same
premises, until two years have passed from the date of such disapproval.
MXU-CC shall facilitate the integrated and orderly
development of commercial, office, and residential uses on
vacant tracts of Community Commercial (CC) zoned land in
locations where high-quality mixed-use developments can
occur in harmony with surrounding land uses.
(a)
Minimum tract size. The vacant tract must be a minimum of 10
acres in order to be considered for MXU-CC.
(b)
Minimum use percentage guidelines. A MXU-CC special
exception shall be conditioned upon the minimum use
percentage guidelines set forth in § 112-39.1D and as
determined by the Planning Commission pursuant thereto.
(c)
A MXU-CC special exception shall be conditioned on the
requirements and process set forth in § 112-39.1 and § 98-61.
(d)
Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Appeals, or by any reclassification by the Town Council,
or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of Mount
Airy may appeal the same to the circuit court of the county. Such appeal
shall be taken according to the Maryland Rules as set forth in Chapter
1100, Subtitle B.
A.
An appeal, from any decision of the circuit court reviewing a decision
of the Board of Appeals may be taken to the Court of Special Appeals of
Maryland during the period and in the manner prescribed by the rules
of the court of appeals.
B.
§ 112-62 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-64.1
107:486
ARTICLE IX
Amendments
§ 112-65. Modification of regulations.
The Town Council may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition,
amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal by ordinance the boundaries
of districts, regulations, or restrictions herein established.
§ 112-66. Procedure.
§ 112-67. Approval of Planning Commission.
No amendment shall be considered or acted upon by the Town Council
unless it is first submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission
(except, however, failure of the Planning Commission to report within 60
days shall be deemed approval), or is disapproved by the Planning
Commission, and it shall be considered approved if it receives a majority
vote of the entire Town Council.
A public hearing shall be held by the Town Council before adoption
of any proposed amendment, supplement or change. Public notice of
the time and place of such hearing, together with a summary of the
proposed amendment, shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Mount Airy once each week for two
successive weeks, with the first such publication of notice appearing at
least 14 days before the hearing. A complete record of the hearing and
the votes of all members of the Town Council shall be kept.
A.
A fee of $300 for a zoning text amendment and a like fee for a Zoning
Map61 amendment shall be paid to the Town at the time the application
is filed. Charges will include the costs of the Town's employees and
consultants. When the application is concluded by the Town Council,
the charges will be assessed, and if less than the fee imposed, a refund
will be given to the applicant, and if greater, the applicant will be
billed for the difference. Fifteen percent will be added to the total
charges for the Town's administrative costs and overhead. The rates for
charges shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Town
Council. Charges will be billed monthly if in excess of the fee imposed
as set forth above. If any charges are not paid within 60 days of billing,
the Town will withhold further review, approvals and/or issuance of any
required permits until paid in full, together with interest at the rate of
1% per month or fraction thereof from the date of billing to the date of
payment.
B.
61.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Town offices.
§ 112-65 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-68
107:487
§ 112-68. Restriction upon acceptance of application for
reclassification.
Any application for a reclassification shall not be accepted for filing by the
Mount Airy Town Council if the application is for the reclassification of the
whole or any part of the land, the reclassification of which has been opposed
or denied by the Town Council on the merits within 12 months from the date
of the Town Council's decision.
§ 112-69. Findings for reclassification.
Where the purpose and effect of the amendment is to change the zoning
classification, the Mount Airy Town Council shall make findings of fact in
each specific case including but not limited to the following: population
change, availability of public facilities, present and future transportation
patterns, compatibility with existing and proposed development for the
area, the recommendation from the Mount Airy Planning Commission, the
relationship of such proposed amendment to the Mount Airy Master Plan;
and may grant the amendment based upon the finding that there was a
substantial change in the character of the neighborhood where the property
is located or that there was a mistake made in the existing zoning
classification.
§ 112-68 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-69
107:488
ARTICLE X
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 112-70. Word usage.
Words used in the present tense include the future. All words in the singular
include the plural and all words in the plural include the singular. The
word ”shall” is mandatory and not directory. The ”used” shall be deemed to
include ”designed, intended, or arranged to be used.”
§ 112-71. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A separate living unit created from existing
internal space within a single-family residence and containing both a
separate kitchen and a separate bath.[Added 10-6-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-4]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or separate structure
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure and
located on the same lot with such principal use or structure. Truck bodies,
trailers, and containers shall not be permitted as accessory structures.
AGRICULTURE — The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, fish culture, animal and poultry husbandry; provided that the
above uses shall not include the business of garbage feeding of hogs,
fur farms or the raising of animals for use in medical or other tests or
experiments.
AMEND OR AMENDMENT — Any repeal, modification, or addition of a
regulation; any new regulation; any change in the number, shape, boundary,
or area of a zone, or any repeal or abolition of any map, part thereof, or
addition thereto.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Any facility for the use or operation of four or
more coin-operated amusement devices and game machines.
ANIMAL KENNEL — Any building or buildings used, designed, or arranged
for the boarding, breeding, or care of dogs, cats, pets, fowl, or other
domestic animals for profit, but not to include those animals raised for
agricultural purposes.
AUTOMOBILE GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or portion of a
main building designed, arranged, or used for the housing of private motor
vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR AND SERVICE STATION — Building, lot, or both, in
or upon which the business of general motor vehicle repair and service is
conducted, but excluding junk and/or auto wrecking business.
BANNER — A temporary sign intended to be hung with or without a frame,
possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to
§ 112-70 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-71
107:489
paper, plastic or fabric of any kind.[Added 1-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-6]
BASEMENT/CELLAR — That portion of a building below the first floor
joists.
BILLBOARD — (See ”sign”) A structure on which is portrayed information
which directs attention to a business commodity, service or entertainment
not necessarily related to the other uses permitted on the premises upon
which the structure is located.
BOARD — The Mount Airy Board of Appeals.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A dwelling in which, for compensation, lodging or
meals, or both, are furnished to not more than nine guests. A boardinghouse
shall not be deemed a home occupation.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area on a lot that is defined by the front, rear
and side yard setback lines, and within which principal structures may be
erected or placed.
BUILDING — A structure having one or more stories and a roof, designed
primarily for the permanent shelter, support or enclosure of persons,
animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the level of
the average grade around the building to the highest point of roof surface
of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard floor; and to the mean height
level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
CAFETERIA — An establishment operated as an accessory use only offering
for sale an assortment of hot meals in a buffet or self-service style where
the food is paid for after selection by the customer and intended mainly to
be consumed in the restaurant.[Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A day nursery, child boarding home, day camp,
summer camp, foster home, or other place for the reception, board or care
for compensation of a child or children under 16 years of age.
CLUBS, FRATERNAL, RELIGIOUS AND SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS —
An association or organization, whether incorporated or unincorporated,
operated for civic, social, cultural, religious, literary, fraternal, political,
or recreational activities and operated on a nonprofit or not-for-profit
basis.[Amended 10-2-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8; 11-5-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-11]
COFFEE-ROASTING OPERATION — A facility in which unprocessed, green
coffee may be sorted, roasted and processed or packaged for use and
consumption.[Added 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-19]
COMMISSION — The Mount Airy Planning Commission.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment that provides
prepackaged and prepared food products and frequently or recurrently
needed small personal items that fulfill the day-to-day needs of residents
§ 112-71 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-71
107:490
or users of the immediate service area.[Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
2015-22]
COUNCIL — The Town Council of Mount Airy.
DELICATESSEN — An establishment offering for sale mainly a made-toorder
sandwich and salad menu served in a prepaid, over-the-counter style
generally for consumption off the premises but may have a limited number
of freestanding tables and chairs.[Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
DISTRICT, ZONING — An area within which certain uses of land and
buildings are permitted and certain others are prohibited; yards and other
open space are required; lot areas, building height limits, and other
requirements are established; all of the foregoing being identical for the
district in which they apply.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A building containing one dwelling unit which
is entirely separated from any other building or structure by space on all
sides.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — One dwelling unit within a building or group
of buildings containing three or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — One dwelling unit within a building that
contains two dwelling units which adjoin each other along a common lot line
and which are separated by a party wall without openings.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing complete
independent living facilities for a single family including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION, PRIVATE AND COMMERCIAL — Every
private or commercial school or institution which offers a program of
instruction, or any program of trade, technical, or artistic instruction. This
does not include any educational institution of the Carroll or Frederick
County Board of Education. No private educational institution shall be
deemed a home occupation.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE AREA — Land comprised of wetlands and
wetland buffers, streams and stream buffers, one-hundred-year floodplain,
and steep slopes as those terms are further defined in Chapter 98,
Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Approval.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or by municipal or other parties, of
underground or overhead electrical, gas, communication, steam, water,
or sewer transmission, distribution, collection, supply or disposal lines,
and other similar accessories and equipment used in connection with and
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for protection of
public health, safety or general welfare. This does not include buildings,
yards or stations used for storage, repair or processing of equipment or
material and not for transforming, boosting, switching or pumping purposes
when such facilities are constructed on the ground.
§ 112-71 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-71
107:491
FAMILY — An individual, or two or more persons related by blood or
marriage, or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants)
not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping
group in a dwelling unit.
FAMILY APARTMENT — A separate living unit within a single-family
residence and containing both a separate kitchen and a separate bath
which is occupied by one or more persons having a parent-child, childparent
or in-law relationship with at least one of the record owners of the
property.[Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2]
FLOODPLAIN, ANNUAL — That floodplain being defined by soil types
within the County Soil Survey Report published by the U.S. Soil
Conservation Service, such being principally a natural water retention area
of generally wet land.
FLOODPLAIN, HISTORICAL — That floodplain being defined as the onehundred-
year floodplain, such being that area which at some point in time
during a one-hundred-year period has or could be inundated by water due
to flood conditions.
FLOOR AREA OF BUILDING, TOTAL — The total number of square feet of
floor area in a building, excluding uncovered steps, and uncovered porches;
but including the total floor area of accessory buildings on the same lot. All
horizontal measurements shall be made between exterior walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of the total floor area of the buildings on
a lot to the net area of the lot.
FRONTAGE — The length of the front property line of the lot, lots, or tract
of land abutting a public street, road, or highway, or rural right-of-way.
GASOLINE STATION — Any area of land, including buildings, and other
structures thereon that are used to dispense motor vehicle fuels, oils and
accessories at retail, where repair service is incidental, and no storage or
parking space is offered for rent.
GROSS DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE — The total acreage of a property to be
developed after subtracting the portion of beds of adjoining streets which
lie within the developer's title.
HOMES ASSOCIATION — An incorporated, nonprofit organization
operating under recorded land agreements through which each lot and/or
homeowner in a planned unit or other described land area is automatically
a member and each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a
proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such
as maintaining a common property, and the charge if unpaid becomes a lien
against the property. When required or used, the owner(s) or developer(s)
must establish a homes association in accordance with the requirements
and procedures approved by the Town Planning Commission.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted entirely within a dwelling
by a member or members of the immediate family. Boardinghouses and
rooming houses, tourist homes and private educational institutions shall not
be deemed home occupations.
§ 112-71 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-71
107:492
HOSPITAL — Any institution receiving in-patients and rendering medical,
surgical and/or obstetrical care. This shall include general hospitals and
institutions, such as sanitariums and sanatoriums including those wherein
feebleminded and mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, senile psychotics
or drug addicts are treated or cared for.
HOTEL — Any building containing 10 or more guest rooms, where, for
compensation, lodging, meals, or both are provided for 10 or more guests,
excluding a fraternity or sorority house, school or college dormitory, tourist
home, motel or apartment hotel as defined herein.
HOTEL WITH CONFERENCE CENTER — A building or group of buildings
cumulatively containing 10 or more guest rooms, where, for compensation,
lodging is provided for 10 or more guests, excluding a fraternity or sorority
house, school or college dormitory, tourist home, or motel, and is
distinguished from a hotel as defined above in that it may include an
apartment hotel and shall also include meeting rooms and conference
facilities and may contain one or more eating establishments as a
subordinate use, provided that such establishment is located within the
principal structure.[Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
INDUSTRIAL CENTER — A tract of land for three or more principal
industrial buildings developed according to a plan for occupancy by a group
of industries and equipped with streets and necessary utilities.
INSTITUTION — A private, nonprofit organization which is not organized
or operated for the purpose of carrying on a trade or business, which
provides all or any of the following: religious, social, physical, recreational,
and benevolent services.
JUNKYARD — Any land or building used for the abandonment, storage,
keeping, collecting, or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metal, other scrap
or discarded materials, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling,
storage, or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running
condition, machinery, or parts thereof.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — Manufacturing associated with such specialty
industry groupings as aerospace, computer science, telecommunications,
instrumentation, biomedicine (BSL-2), as defined by the OSHA and the
American Biological Safety Association Alliance, medical, energy,
pharmaceutical, electronics, transportation (parts and accessories),
environmental science, agriculture, economics, biology, and environmental
science. All manufacturing processes must take place indoors, shall not
include the discharge or emission of by-products, dust or foul or obnoxious
odors into the air, water or soil and shall be compliant with the provisions
of the Town Code and other applicable law concerning noise.[Added
2-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2015-22]
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its
accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as required.
LOT AREA, NET — The total horizontal area included within the rear, side
and front lot or proposed street lines of the lot excluding any streets or
§ 112-71 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-71
107:493
highways, whether dedicated or not dedicated to public use, but including
off-street automobile parking areas and areas of easements.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection,
where the interior angle of the intersection does not exceed 135°.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The street line running along the front of the lot
separating it from the street. A corner lot has at least two front lot
lines.[Amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line or lines generally opposite or parallel to the
front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet long or the lot comes to
a point at the rear, said rear lot line is assumed to be a line not less than 10
feet long, lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line, or in the
case of a curved front lot line, parallel to the chord of the arc of said front
lot line.[Amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-5]
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot, fronting on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH, MINIMUM AT FRONT LOT LINE — The least permissible
width of a lot measured horizontally along the front lot line.
MANUFACTURING — The production of merchandise or products, or
component parts thereof, for use or sale by means of assembly, extrusion,
fabrication, chemical or biological processing, formulation and/or use of
raw material, labor, machinery and/or tools.[Added 2-1-2016 by Ord. No.
2015-22]
MASTER PLAN — The Master Plan of Mount Airy which consists of maps,
data, and other descriptive matter, as a guide for the physical development
of the Town or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions
or additions thereto adopted by the Commission and Town Council, or other
public open spaces, public building sites, routes for public utilities, zoning
districts or other similar information.
MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC — Any building or group of buildings
occupied by medical practitioners and related services for the purpose of
providing health services to people on an out-patient basis.
MICROBREWERY, MICROWINERY, MICRODISTILLERY — A facility in
which beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages are brewed, fermented,
or distilled for distribution and consumption, and which possesses the
appropriate license from the State of Maryland, Carroll or Frederick County,
and/or Town of Mount Airy.[Added 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-19]
MOBILE HOME PARK or MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION — Any site, lot,
or parcel of ground maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying
a location or accommodation for two or more mobile homes for living
purposes and including all buildings, structures, vehicles, accessories and
appurtenances used or intended as equipment in such a park.
§ 112-71 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-71
107:494
MOBILE HOMES — Any vehicle or similar portable structure having no
foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirting and so designed or
constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purpose.
MOTEL — Any group of dwelling units combined or separate, used for the
purpose of housing transient guests, each unit of which is provided with its
own toilet, washroom and off-street parking facilities.
NET DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE — The result of subtracting the
environmental resource area and any recreation area dedicated in
accordance with § 98-23 of Chapter 98, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan
Review, from the gross developable acreage.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building or of land lawfully existing
at the time this and/or previous ordinances or amendments thereto became
effective, or existing at the time of the application of such ordinances or
amendments to the building or land by reason of annexation, and which
does not conform with the use regulations of the zone in which it is
located.[Amended 4-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
NURSING HOME — Includes rest homes, convalescent homes and homes
for the aged and shall mean a place devoted primarily to the treatment
and care of any persons suffering from illnesses, diseases, deformities or
injuries, not requiring extensive care, but who do require care in excess of
room and board and who need medical, nursing, convalescent, or chronic
care.
OUTDOOR STORAGE AREA — The keeping of any inventory, goods,
material or merchandise, including raw, semi-finished, and finished
materials for any period of time, and as an accessory to the primary use
of the establishment, typically retail. Storage related to a residential use,
required vehicular areas, nurseries, and the display of automobiles or other
vehicles shall not be considered as such.[Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-7]
PET BOARDING — The regular provision of services that entail the
boarding of pet dogs or cats owned by members of the general public
for a fee. Such a facility or establishment may, in addition to providing
shelter, food and water, offer grooming or other services for pet dogs and/
or cats.[Added 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7]
PET DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility or establishment, or part thereof,
providing socialization, training, or housing of pet dogs or cats owned by
members of the general public for a fee in the absence of the owner and for
less than 24 hours.[Added 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7]
PET DAY-CARE SERVICES — The provision of care of pet dogs or cats
owned by members of the general public for a fee for less than 24 hours
in the absence of the owner for the purposes of socialization, training, or
housing.[Added 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7]
PET GROOMING FACILITY — A facility or establishment specializing in the
hygienic and cosmetic care of pet dogs or cats. Services may include fur
§ 112-71 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-71
107:495
trimming and styling, shampooing, bathing, nail trimming, and other similar
pet grooming services.[Added 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7]
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A structure in which is conducted the primary
use of the lot on which the structure is located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary activity for which a site is used. A principal
use may be either a permitted use, a conditional use, or a legally existing
nonconforming use.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Rooms and/or buildings used for office
purposes by a member of any recognized profession, including doctors,
dentists, lawyers, accountants, engineers, etc., but not including medical or
dental clinics or veterinary clinics.
ROAD — Includes street, highway, avenue, land, marginal access street,
service drive, alley, bridge, viaduct or any segment thereof.
SEASONAL DISPLAY — The temporary and limited display and sales of
seasonal products and goods outside of and immediately adjacent to the
front wall or storefront of a principal building, as part of a permitted
use.[Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-7]
SETBACK AREA — The area between the street right-of-way line or lot line
and setback line within which no principal structures shall be erected or
placed.
SETBACK LINE — The line that is the required minimum distance from the
street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within
which no principal structure shall be erected or placed.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of five or more commercial establishments
with a minimum gross floor area of 15,000 square feet that is planned,
developed, owned and managed as a unit with off-street parking provided
on the property and related in size, type and number of shops to the trade
area that the unit services.
SIGN — Any structure, device, material or thing, illuminated or otherwise,
which displays, or includes any representation used as an announcement,
advertisement, direction, or designation of any person, firm, group,
organization, place, commodity, product, service, business, profession,
§ 112-71 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-71
107:496
enterprise, or industry which is located upon any land, or any building, in
or upon a window or indoors in such a manner as to attract attention from
outside the building.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — See ”billboard.”
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or other activity conducted upon the premises upon
which the sign is located.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL OR INFORMATION — A sign describing the location
of a community or institution of public or quasipublic nature or the opening
of an event of public interest, but not including signs pertaining to real
estate.
SIGN, PERSONAL SERVICE — Nameplates or signs designating home
occupations, accessory uses, such as doctor's office, or similar use, or
advertising exclusively the sale of farm products produced on the premises.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign advertising for sale, lease, rental, or
development of any particular premises or directing attention to the
opening and location of a new subdivision, neighborhood, or community.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A grant of a specific use that would not be
appropriate generally or without restriction and shall be based upon a
finding that certain requirements governing special exceptions as specified
in this chapter exist and that the use conforms to the Town Master Plan and
is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above
it, the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement
shall be counted as a story. A mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story, if
it covers more than 1/3 of the area of the floor next below it or if the vertical
distance between the floor next below it and the floor next above it is 20
feet or more.
STREET — A public or dedicated way, or a public proposed right-of-way,
widening, or extension of an existing street or public way shown on any plan
approved by the Commission.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the structural members of a
building, such as walls, columns, posts, beams, or girders.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction for
occupancy or use including, among others, buildings, stadiums, gospel and
circus tents, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers,
radio and TV broadcasting towers, water tanks, trestles, open sheds, coal
bins, shelters, fences, walls, signs, power line towers, pipelines, railroad
tracks, poles and truck bodies, containers and trailers when used for
storage.
TOWNHOUSE — One of a group of three or more dwelling units which abut
each other along common party walls without openings, and which has its
own entrance directly from the outside.
§ 112-71 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-71
107:497
VARIANCE — A modification by the Board of Appeals only of dimensional,
density, bulk or area requirements of this chapter where such modification
will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the results of any action taken by the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary
hardship, or practical difficulty.[Amended 12-7-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-6]
VEHICLE SALES LOT — A lot arranged, designed, or used for the storage
and display for sale of any motor vehicle or any type of trailer provided
the trailer is unoccupied, and where no repair work is done except minor
incidental repair of automobiles or trailers displayed and sold on the
premises.
VETERINARIAN CLINIC/ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A facility in which
consultative and hospital services are rendered to animals on an inpatient
or outpatient basis, but without a crematorium or incinerator
device.[Amended 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7]
YARD — An open area on the same lot with a principal structure(s) which
lies between such structures(s) and the lot line.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — A person or agency designated by the Mayor
and Town Council, who administers the zoning regulations and acts as
secretary to the Board of Appeals.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — A written statement issued by the Zoning
Administrator, authorizing buildings, structures or uses consistent with the
FRONT YARD — - The area extending across the full width of the lot
lying between the front lot line and the principal structure(s).
A.
REAR YARD — - The area extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the principal structure(s).
B.
SIDE YARD — - The area between the side lot line and the principal
structure, but not including the front yard or rear yard areas.
C.
§ 112-71 MOUNT AIRY CODE § 112-71
107:498
terms of this chapter and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its
provisions.
ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map of the Town of Mount Airy, together with
all amendments thereto subsequently adopted.
§ 112-71 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 112-71
107:499
Appendix
Chapter A115
FINES AND PENALTIES
§ A115-1. Infraction fines and misdemeanor penalties.
Table of Infraction Fines Assessed
Code
Section Subject Amount
13-9 Failure to timely file a
required financial disclosure
statement
A late fee of $2.00 per day up to a
maximum of $250.00
Failure to timely file a
required lobbyist
registration or lobbyist
report
A late fee of $10.00 per day up to
a maximum of $250.00
Lobbying Not exceeding $5,000.00 for each
violation
Ethics Up to $5,000.00 for any violation,
with each day upon which the
violation occurs constituting a
separate offense
19-4 Code violations $50.00 for zoning and subdivision
violations; $25.00 for all others,
except as noted
42-9 Amusement and video
licenses
$100.00 first offense; $200.00
repeat offense
49-2 Failure to place number on
building
In accordance with Ch. 19,
Infractions, Municipal
51-3 Curfew Not more than $25.00
58-3 Discharge of firearms In accordance with Ch. 19,
Infractions, Municipal
64-3 Regulations established by
Director for solid waste
collection and disposal
$25.00
64-4 Permit required to collect or
dispose of solid waste
$400.00
64-5 Residential collection:
separation and placement of
recyclables
$100.00
§ 112-71 MOUNT AIRY CODE § A115-1
107:500
Table of Infraction Fines Assessed
Code
Section Subject Amount
64-6 Nonresidential collection:
separation and placement of
recyclables
$100.00
64-8 Maintenance of premises $100.00
64-10 Responsibility of owners
and occupants to provide
containers for storage of
solid waste
$100.00, except § 64-10G which
shall be $25.00
64-12 Maintenance and transfer of
containers
$100.00
64-13 Interference with containers $400.00
64-14 Matter not to be placed in
containers
$100.00
64-16 Storage and removal $100.00
64-17 Littering $250.00
64-18 Dumping on land of another
or into another container or
upon any public highway
$400.00
64-19 On-site disposal by burial or
burning
$100.00
64-20 Protection of wells, springs
and watercourses
$400.00
64-21 Violations not otherwise
provided for in applicable
sections
$100.00
64-24 Transportation; littering $250.00
70-18 Licensing In accordance with Ch. 19,
Infractions, Municipal
74-1 Operation of motorized
scooters
In accordance with Ch. 19,
Infractions, Municipal
76-10 Nuisances $100.00 for each initial offense;
$300.00 for each repeat offense
79-2 Open burning In accordance with Ch. 19,
Infractions, Municipal
82-3 Fire hydrants $500.00
82-4 Noise $50.00 for first offense; $100.00
for second offense; $250.00 for
third offense; $500.00 for any
further offense
§ A115-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § A115-1
107:501
Table of Infraction Fines Assessed
Code
Section Subject Amount
82-7 Trespassing on public
property
$25.00 first offense; $50.00
repeat offense
82-12 Loitering $50.00; $100.00 for each
additional offense for repeat
offenses occurring within a
period of 1 year
85-27 Property maintenance In accordance with Ch. 19,
Infractions, Municipal
91-36 Sewers $50.00 each offense; each day a
separate offense
92-9 Signs $100.00 for erection on Town
property; as prescribed in Ch.
112, Zoning, for erection on
other property
96-4 Digging up streets In accordance with Ch. 19,
Infractions, Municipal
96-16 Skateboards and
rollerblades
$25.00 for first offense; $50.00
for each subsequent offense
96-17 Streets and sidewalks, all
violations not deemed to be
misdemeanors
In accordance with Ch. 19,
Infractions, Municipal
105-8A Handicapped parking $75.00
105-8B All other parking
restrictions
$50.00
105-8C All other violations of Ch.
105, Vehicles and Traffic,
unless otherwise noted
$25.00
105-20.2 Interference with
immobilization
$100.00
105-23 Snow emergencies $100.00
107-4 Unlicensed vehicles $25.00 for first offense; $50.00
for each subsequent offense;
each day to be separate offense
109-9D, E
or F
Unauthorized interference
with, removal of,
replacement of, or
tampering with a meter or
meter seal; unlawful
connections
$500.00 for each violation
§ A115-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § A115-1
107:502
Table of Infraction Fines Assessed
Code
Section Subject Amount
109-13 Interference with or injury
to property
$500.00 for each violation
109-19 Moratorium on use of water $25.00 for first offense; $50.00
for each subsequent offense;
each day to be separate offense
112-18 Outdoor lighting
requirements and
restrictions
Civil penalty of $100.00
112-22 Zoning $100.00 with each day to
constitute a separate offense;
$200.00 per day commencing the
second day
Table of Misdemeanor Penalties
Code
Section
Subject Amount
1-9 Altering or tampering with
Code
$500.00 and/or 90 days
13-9 Lobbying A fine of up to $10,000.00 or
imprisonment up to one year
41-2 and
41-3
Alcoholic beverages $1,000.00 and/or 6 months
74-2 Motorcycles, snowmobiles
and similar vehicles
$250.00 for first offense;
$500.00 for each repeat offense
96-15 Unauthorized signs or
obstructions
$500.00 and/or 90 days
109-39 Wellhead protection Not more than $1,000
Chapter A116
GAS FRANCHISE
§ A116-1. Grant of franchise.
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company, its successors and assigns (the
company) is hereby authorized and empowered to lay conduit or pipes for
the transmission and distribution of gas under the streets, lanes, alleys,
roads, sidewalks and public rights-of-way, paved or unpaved, within the
present or future limits of the Town of Mount Airy and to connect the same
with any public or private building or structure, lamp or other object and
with the place of supply, said authorization and power being for a period of
50 years from and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ A115-1 GAS FRANCHISE § A116-2
A116:503
§ A116-2. Use of rights-of-way subject to regulations.
The use of said streets, lanes, alleys, roads, sidewalks and public rightsof-
way shall be subject to such reasonable and proper regulations and
conditions as the Town of Mount Airy may from time to time prescribe,
including, by way of example but not by limitation, the right of the Town
to fill up, repave, repair, resurface or relocate any street, lane, alley, road,
sidewalk or public right-of-way under which the said conduit or pipes may
be laid.
§ A116-3. Manner of pipelaying.
Said conduit or pipes shall be so laid as in no way to interfere with the safety
or convenience of persons traveling on or over the said streets, lanes, alleys,
roads, sidewalks and public rights-of-way or the drainage thereof.
§ A116-4. Supervision by Town; restoration of rights-of-way.
The laying of conduit and pipes under the provisions of this ordinance shall
be subject to the supervision of the said Town of Mount Airy, and the said
company shall replace and promptly restore with the same quality and
material that portion of any street, lane, alley, road, sidewalk and public
right-of-way disturbed by it in the construction or maintenance of its gas
system, all to the satisfaction of the said Town of Mount Airy.
§ A116-5. Indemnification of Town.
The said company shall maintain all conduit or pipes, and all other
apparatus laid or constructed under the provisions of this ordinance, in
good and safe order and condition and shall at all times fully indemnify,
protect and save harmless the said Town from and against all actions,
claims, suits, damages or charges and against all loss and reasonably
necessary expenditures arising from the company's actions or negligence
in the laying, construction, maintenance and repairing of the company's
gas system in said Town of Mount Airy or from its negligence or failure to
maintain the said conduit, pipes and apparatus in good and safe order and
condition.
§ A116-6. Grant of franchise nonexclusive.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant unto said Baltimore
Gas and Electric Company any exclusive right or to prevent a grant of
similar privileges to other companies.
§ A116-7. Acceptance of terms by company.
That Baltimore Gas and Electric Company shall, by its proper officers,
within 60 days from the date of the passage of this ordinance, signify in
writing its acceptance of all terms, conditions, regulations and restrictions
contained in this ordinance, in default of which the same shall become null
and void and of no force or effect.
§ A116-2 MOUNT AIRY CODE § A116-7
A116:504
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-1 1-5-2004 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2004-2 4-5-2004 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2004-3 6-7-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 85
2004-4 6-7-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2004-5 4-27-2004 Salaries and
compensation: Council
members; Mayor
amendment
Ch. 34, Art. I
Res. No.
2004-1
6-7-2004 Charter amendment § C2-3
2004-8 10-4-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2004-9 10-4-2004 Purchasing amendment Ch. 26
2005-1 1-3-2005 Traffic and parking
amendment; snow
emergencies amendment
Ch. 105, Arts. IV and VI
2005-3 2-7-2005 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 47
2005-4 6-13-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2005-5 7-11-2005 Fire prevention
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2009-5
2005-6 6-13-2005 Garbage, trash and litter:
collection and disposal
Ch. 64, Art. I
2005-7 6-13-2005 Ethics Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-3
2005-8 7-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment; fines and
penalties amendment
Ch. 105 and A115
2005-10 7-11-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
§ A116-7 GAS FRANCHISE § DL-1
A116:505
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-11 7-11-2005 Motorcycles, snowmobiles
and similar vehicles
amendment
Ch. 74
2005-12 7-11-2005 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 47
2006-1 4-3-2006 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2006-2 6-5-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2006-4 7-10-2006 Parking amendment Ch. 105
2006-6 7-10-2006 Water and Sewer
Commission
Ch. 38
2006-7 7-10-2006 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 47
2006-8 8-14-2006 General provisions:
commissions
Ch. 1, Art. II
2006-10 8-14-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2006-11 10-2-2006 Storm sewer systems Ch. 94A
2006-12 10-2-2006 Floodplain management Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-1
2006-13 10-2-2006;
1-8-2007
(revised)
Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 94
2006-14 10-2-2006;
1-8-2007
(revised)
Water resource
management
Ch. 110
2006-18 12-4-2006 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 47
2006-19 12-4-2006 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 47
2006-20 12-4-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2007-1 7-9-2007 Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-3
2007-2 7-9-2007 Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-3
2007-3 7-9-2007 Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-3
2007-4 7-9-2007 Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-3
§ DL-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § DL-1
A116:506
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-5 7-9-2007 Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-3
2007-6 7-9-2007 Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-3
2007-7 7-9-2007 Ethics amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-3
2007-8 4-2-2007 Purchasing amendment Ch. 26
2007-9 4-2-2007 Purchasing amendment Ch. 26
2007-10 4-2-2007 Purchasing amendment Ch. 26
2007-11 5-7-2007 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 98
2007-12 5-7-2007 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 98
2007-13 5-7-2007 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 98
2007-14 5-7-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2007-15 5-7-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2007-16 6-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2007-17 6-4-2007 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 47
2007-18 6-4-2007 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 47
2007-19 6-4-2007 Public and private sewers
amendment
Ch. 91, Part 1
2007-20 6-4-2007 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2007-21 6-4-2007 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2007-22 6-4-2007 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2007-23 6-4-2007 Special water benefit
charge amendment
Ch. 109, Art. III
2007-24 6-4-2007 Special water benefit
charge amendment
Ch. 109, Art. III
2007-25 6-4-2007 Special water benefit
charge amendment
Ch. 109, Art. III
§ DL-1 GAS FRANCHISE § DL-1
A116:507
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-26 6-4-2007 Special water benefit
charge amendment
Ch. 109, Art. III
2007-27 6-4-2007 Fees Ch. 1, Art. IV
2007-29 7-9-2007 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2007-30 7-9-2007 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2007-31 7-9-2007 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2007-32 7-9-2007 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2007-33 7-9-2007 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2007-34 7-9-2007 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2007-35 7-9-2007 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2007-36 7-9-2007 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 25
2007-38 11-5-2007 Municipal infractions
amendment
Ch. 19
2007-39 11-5-2007 Municipal infractions
amendment
Ch. 19
2007-40 12-3-2007 Local supplement to
homeowners tax credit
Ch. 101, Art. IV
2008-01 3-3-2008 Peace and good order:
noise amendment
Ch. 82, Art. II
2008-03 8-4-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2008-04 10-6-2008 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 98
2009-01 4-6-2009 Taxicabs Ch. 103
2009-3 7-6-2009 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2009-4 8-3-2009 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2009-5 9-14-2009 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 60
2009-6 8-3-2009 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 103
§ DL-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § DL-1
A116:508
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-7 2-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2009-8 10-5-2009 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 85
2009-9 10-5-2009 Debt policy Ch. 53
Res. No.
2010-01
2-1-2010 Charter amendment §§ C3-1, C4-4, C7-3
2010-1 5-3-2010 Taxation: annexed
property amendment
Ch. 101, Art. III
2010-2 5-3-2010 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 98
Res. No.
2010-02
7-12-2010 Charter amendment § C12-3
2010-6 10-4-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2010-9 9-13-2010 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2010-10 9-13-2010 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2010-11 11-1-2010 Garbage, trash and litter:
collection and disposal
amendment
Ch. 64, Art. I
2010-12 9-13-2010 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2010-13 11-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2010-14 4-4-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2011-2 5-2-2011 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2011-3 6-6-2011 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
Res. No.
2011-01
11-7-2011 Charter amendment §§ C4-1; C5-2; C5-6;
C5-7
2011-4 12-5-2011 Annexations amendment Ch. 44
2011-5 8-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2011-6 12-5-2011 General provisions: access
to public records
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III
2011-9 11-7-2011 Elections: ballot
preparation; poll watchers
amendment
Ch. 10, Art. I
§ DL-1 GAS FRANCHISE § DL-1
A116:509
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-1 1-9-2012 Floodplain management Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-10
2012-2 3-5-2012 Purchasing amendment Ch. 26
2012-5 5-7-2012 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2012-6 5-7-2012 Water service amendment Ch. 109, Art. I
2012-7 6-4-2012 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 98; Ch. 112
Res. No.
2012-1
10-1-2012 Charter amendment § C4-4
Res. No.
2012-2
9-10-2012 Charter amendment §§ C4-4; C7-3
2012-9 11-5-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
Res. No.
2013-1
2-4-2013 Charter amendment § C12-1
2013-5 10-7-2013 Public and private sewers
amendment; subdivision of
land and site plan review
amendment; water service
amendment
Ch. 91, Part 1; Ch. 98;
Ch. 109, Art. I
2013-7 5-6-2013 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
Res. No.
2013-2
5-6-2013 Charter amendment §§ C4-4; C7-3
2013-9 6-3-2013 Salaries and
compensation: Council
members; Mayor
amendment
Ch. 34, Art. I
2013-10 7-1-2013 Purchasing amendment Ch. 26
2013-11 8-5-2013 Elections: ballot
preparation; poll watchers
amendment; absentee
ballot voting amendment;
write-in candidates
amendment; challenges
amendment
Ch. 10, Art. I; Ch. 10,
Art. II; Ch. 10, Art. III;
Ch. 10, Art. IV
Res. No.
2013-3
8-5-2013 Charter amendment §§ C5-6; C5-8; C5-10
§ DL-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § DL-1
A116:510
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-13 10-7-2013 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 85
2013-14 10-7-2013 Public and private sewers
amendment
Ch. 91, Part 1
Res. No.
2013-4
10-7-2013 Charter amendment § C2-13
2013-19 1-6-2014 Water service amendment Ch. 109, Art. I
2014-2 4-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2014-10 5-5-2014 Floodplain management Repealed by Ord. No.
2015-10
Res. No.
2014-1
6-2-2014 Charter amendment § C5-12
2014-3 10-6-2014 Ethics Ch. 13
2014-14 9-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
Res. No.
2014-3
11-3-2014 Charter amendment § C5-12
2014-16 12-1-2014 Nuisances amendment Ch. 76
2015-1 3-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2015-4 4-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
trucks; campers;
municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. I
2015-5 6-1-2015 Licenses amendment Ch. 70
2015-7 9-14-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2015-10 9-14-2015 Floodplain management Ch. 61
2015-12 11-2-2015 Planning Commission
amendment; subdivision of
land and site plan review
amendment; water service
amendment
Ch. 25; Ch. 98; Ch. 109,
Art. I
2015-19 11-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2015-22 2-1-2016 Water service amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 109, Art. I; Ch. 112
2016-1 3-7-2016 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
2016-2 2-1-2016 Public and private sewers
amendment
Ch. 91, Part 1
2016-3 3-7-2016 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 85
§ DL-1 GAS FRANCHISE § DL-1
A116:511
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-4 4-24-2016 Parks Ch. 80
2016-6 3-7-2016 Water: water service
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. I
2016-9 5-2-2016 Town Police Ch. 37
Res. No.
2016-3
5-2-2016 Charter amendment § C4-4
2016-12 8-1-2016 Water: water service
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. I
2016-13 10-3-2016 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 41
2016-23 1-9-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2016-26 1-9-2017 Water service amendment;
fines and penalties
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. I; Ch.
A115
2016-27 3-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2017-6 6-5-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2017-7 9-11-2017 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 98; Ch. 112
2018-5 3-5-2018 Sustainable Mount Airy
Commission
Ch. 36A
2018-8 6-4-2018 Sustainable Mount Airy
Commission Amendment
Ch. 36A
2018-17 11-5-2018 Signs Amendment Ch. 92
2018-20 2-4-2019 Elections: Provisional
Ballots; Write-In
Candidates Amendment
Ch. 10, Art. IIA; Ch. 10,
Art. III
2019-1 3-4-2019 Nuisances Amendment;
Property Maintenance
Amendment; Streets and
Sidewalks Amendment
Ch. 76; Ch. 85; Ch. 96
§ DL-1 MOUNT AIRY CODE § DL-1
A116:512