CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF AUBURN, MAINE 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, 2010 
Adopted and Effective February 22, 2011 
____________ 

> 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Auburn, Maine. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1967 Code, as supplemented through March 1, 1998, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1967 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes that tie related sections of the Code together and that refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Ricardo Lewis, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Laurie Smith, Assistant City Manager; MaryLou Magno, City Clerk; Bob Belz, Public Works Director; David M. Galbraith, P.A.C.E. Director; Eric Labelle, Community Services Director; Roland Miller, Economic Development Director; Gary Johnson, Assistant City Engineer; Eric Cousens, Planner/Code Officer; Karen Scammon, Appraiser; Renee Lachapelle, Appaiser; Jason Moen, Deputy Chief of Police; Kevin Mulherin, Police Department Lieutenant; and Stephen Watkins, Police Department Lieutenant; for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Auburn, Maine. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Auburn, Maine. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Auburn, Maine. 2010. 

City Council Resolve    City of Auburn 
Title: AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF AUBURN, MAINE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
Date: February 22, 2011 
Order # 42-02222011-03 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinances, City of Auburn, Maine," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 60, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 12, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine and imprisonment as set forth in Chapter 1 of the Code and in any event not exceeding $1,000.00 unless a greater penalty is permitted or directed by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city board of commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 12, 2009; that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective February 22, 2011. 
Motion for Acceptance of First reading: Councilor Berube Seconded by: Councilor Young Vote: 4 Yea's - 2 Nay's - Councilors Farrell and Herrick. Motion carried 4-2. Action by Council: February 7, 2011 Motion for Acceptance of Second and Final reading: Councilor Samson Seconded by: Councilor Young Vote: 5 Yea's - 2 Nay's - Councilors Gerry and Herrick Motion carried 5-2 Action by Council: February 22, 2011  
Attest: 
      Roberta L. Fogg, City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. Ord. of  3-21-2005 Included 2 10-08192013  9- 3-2013 Included 2 11-09162013 10- 7-2013 Included 2 14-11042013 11-18-2013 Included 2 01-02032014  2-24-2014 Included 2 02-03032014  3-17-2014 Included 3 04-06022014  6-16-2014 Omitted 3 05-08042014  8-18-2014 Included 3 06-08182014  9-22-2014 Included 3 07-09082014 10- 6-2014 Omitted 3 08-09222014 10- 6-2014 Included 3 09-10202014 11- 3-2014 Included 4 10-12012014 12-15-2014 Included 4 01-01202015  2- 9-2015 Included 5 02-01202015  2- 9-2015 Included 5 04-01262015  2- 9-2015 Included 5 05-02022015  2-17-2015 Included 5 06-02022015  2-17-2015 Included 5 07-02022015  2-17-2015 Included 5 08-02022015  2-17-2015 Included 5 09-02022015  2-17-2015 Included 5 10-02172015  3- 2-2015 Included 5 11-04062015  4-21-2015 Included 6 12-06152015  7- 6-2015 Included 6 13-06152015  7- 6-2015 Included 6 14-10052015 10-19-2015 Included 7 01-01042016  1- 4-2016 Included 7 02-02222016  3- 7-2016 Included 8 04-03212016  4- 4-2016 Included 8 04-03072016  5-16-2016 Included 8 05-07112016  8- 1-2016 Included 9 06-08152016  9-12-2016 Omitted 9 07-09122016  9-19-2016 Omitted 9 08-10032016 10-17-2016 Included 9 10-10172016 11- 7-2016 Included 10 11-11072016 11-21-2016 Included 10 01-02062017  2-27-2017 Included 10 02-03062017  3-20-2017 Included 10 03-03062017  3-20-2017 Included 10 011-09072010-07  9- 7-2010 Included 11 04-03202017  4- 3-2017 Omitted 11 05-04032017  4-24-2017 Included 11 06-06052017  6-19-2017 Included 11 07-08072017  8-21-2017 Included 12 08-08072017  9-11-2017 Included 12 09-08122017  9-11-2017 Omitted 12 11-10162017 11- 6-2017 Included 12 12-10162017 11- 6-2017 Included 12 13-11062017 11-20-2017 Included 13 02-06042018  6-18-2018 Omitted 13 03-06182018  6-18-2018 Included 13 04-06182018  7- 2-2018 Omitted 13 05-07162018  8- 6-2018 Included 13 06-10152018 11- 5-2018 Included 14  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    We the people of the City of Auburn, under the constitution and laws of the State of Maine, in order to secure the benefits of local self-government and to provide an open and accountable council-manager government, do adopt this Charter, conferring on the city certain powers, subject to certain restrictions and following certain procedures. By this action we secure the benefits of home rule and affirm the values of representative democracy, professional management, strong political leadership, citizen participation, and intergovernmental cooperation. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter for the City of Auburn, Maine, as approved by the city voters on November 8, 2005. Amendments to the original Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original Charter. The format of the Charter has been conformed to the format of the city's Code of Ordinances. The directory provisions of the various amendments, including severability, repealer, effective date, notices of intent regarding referendum, publishing or distribution of copies, have been omitted. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings and grammatical errors have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 
State Law reference- Home rule, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2101 et seq.; procedure for adoption and revision of municipal home rule charter, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2102; charter amendments, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2104; changes in composition, mode of election and terms of office of municipal legislative body, mayor or manager may not be accomplished by ordinance, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3007. 

ARTICLE I. - GRANT OF POWERS 

Sec. 1.1. - Corporate existence. 
    The City of Auburn ("city") is a municipal corporation under the name of "City of Auburn" and shall have all the rights, immunities, powers, and privileges, and shall be subject to all the duties, liabilities, and obligations provided in this Charter, of a municipal corporation and may enact ordinances, orders, resolves, and regulations not inconsistent with the State of Maine Constitution and laws. 
Sec. 1.2. - Construction. 
    The city's powers under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power granted in this article. 
Sec. 1.3. - Intergovernmental relations. 
    The city may participate by contract or otherwise with any governmental entity of this State or any other state or states in the United States in the performance of any activity which one or more of such entities has the authority to undertake. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2.1. - Powers and duties. 
    All powers granted to the city by this Charter and state law, except as otherwise specified by this Charter, are vested in the city council. The city council shall be the municipal officers of the city for all purposes required by statute or ordinance. 
Sec. 2.2. - Composition and compensation. 
    The city council shall be comprised of the mayor and seven city councilors. Five councilors shall be elected one from each ward by and from the ward's registered voters. Two councilors shall be elected at-large by and from the registered voters of the city. The councilors shall hold office for a term of two years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. A write-in candidate for city council must receive at least 25 valid write-in votes in order to qualify for election to that position. The city council may appoint by rule non-voting student representatives to serve with the city council. 
    The city council shall, not later than June 30, 2006, determine the annual salary of the councilors by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of councilors elected at the next regular election. The councilors shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Sec. 2.3. - Vacancies; forfeiture of office. 
    In case of the death, resignation, or removal from office more than six months prior to the next regular election, an unexpired term of councilor shall be filled by a special election, either citywide or in the ward in which the vacancy occurs, as the case may be, the warrants for which shall be issued by the city council. Whenever the office of councilor becomes vacant within six months prior to the next municipal election, the city council shall appoint a qualified representative at-large or from the ward in which the vacancy occurs, as the case may be, to serve until the person elected to fill the vacancy takes office. 
    A mayor or councilor shall forfeit office if that person: 
a.  Lacks at any time during the term of office any qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law, including residency of the ward from which elected; 
b.  Violates any express prohibition of this Charter; 
c.  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or 
d.  Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the city council, or of any board or authority to which appointed by the mayor under article 3, section 3, without being excused by the city council. 
Sec. 2.4. - Meetings. 
    The City council shall, at the call of the city clerk or deputy city clerk, first meet at Auburn Hall or such other public location within the city within 45 days after the regular municipal election to be sworn to the faithful discharge of their duties by the city clerk or deputy city clerk. The city council shall meet for subsequent meetings at such time and place as set by ordinance or resolution except that it shall meet regularly twice each month. All meetings of the city council, other than "executive sessions," shall be open to the public as required by state statute, and the city council shall promote effective public participation in and public notice of its meetings in the contemporary means of information sharing. Agendas and supporting information for meetings shall be available to the public at the city clerk's office at least two business days prior to the meeting, as well as electronically through the city's website, if available. Special meetings may be called by the mayor, or shall be called by the mayor or city manager on the written request of a majority of the voting members of the city council addressed to the mayor or the city manager. 
Sec. 2.5. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the voting members of the city council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn or compel attendance of absent members. 
Sec. 2.6. - Process. 
A.  Record. The city council shall keep a record of its own proceedings which, except for "executive sessions," shall be available to the public. 
B.  Qualification. The city council shall be judge of the qualification and election of its members and shall determine and enforce this Charter as well as its rules relating to procedure, misconduct, and forfeiture of office. 
C.  Action. The city council shall act only by oral motion or written ordinance, order, or resolve, except that all acts by which the city council appropriates or expends funds shall be by written ordinance, order, or resolve. All ordinances, orders, and resolves, except resolves making appropriations, shall be confined to one subject clearly expressed in its title. Appropriation resolves shall be confined to the subject of appropriations. No ordinance, order for the issue of bonds or notes, or appropriation resolve shall be passed until it has been read on two separate days, except when the requirement of a reading on two separate days has been dispensed by unanimous vote of the councilors present and voting. Every ordinance shall be published in full within five days after its final passage, by posting a copy of the same at the city clerk's office, as well as electronically on the city's website, if available, and shall take effect and be in force five days after the date of passage unless otherwise specifically provided in the ordinance. 
D.  Voting. A roll call vote shall be taken upon both first and second reading of all ordinances and entered on the record of the proceedings of the city council by the city clerk. An ordinance may be read by title only if, in the judgment of the mayor, or in the mayor's absence the presiding officer, it would be unduly burdensome or repetitive to read the full text. A roll call vote shall be taken on the passage of any order or resolve when requested by any councilor. Except as otherwise required by this Charter, action by the city council shall require at least four affirmative votes. Five affirmative votes shall be required to adopt ordinances to take effect immediately upon enactment. 
Sec. 2.7. - Standard codes. 
    The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference in an adopting ordinance, provided that such ordinance shall state the title, date of issuance, and issuing authority of the standard code or amendment which is adopted. 
Sec. 2.8. - Review of Charter and ordinances. 
    The city council shall provide for the review of the city's Charter and ordinances in their entirety at least once every 15 years. 
Sec. 2.9. - Offices incompatible. 
    Except where authorized by law, no councilor shall hold any other elected public office during the term for which the councilor was elected. No councilor shall hold any other city office or employment during the term for which the councilor was elected. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city council from selecting any councilor to represent the city on the governing board of any regional or other intergovernmental agency. 
    No former councilor shall hold any compensated appointive city office or city employment until at least one year after expiration of that councilor's elective term. 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR 

Sec. 3.1. - Eligibility, election, and tenure of office. 
    The mayor shall be elected by and from the registered voters of the city. The mayor's term of office shall be two years or until a successor is elected and qualified, except when elected to fill a vacancy, he or she shall hold office only for the unexpired term or until a successor is elected and qualified. Any write-in candidate for mayor whose name does not appear on the printed ballot must receive at least 100 valid write-in votes in order to qualify for election. 
    The city council shall, not later than June 30, 2006, determine by ordinance the annual salary of the mayor, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until the date of the commencement of the term of the mayor elected at the next regular election. The mayor shall receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of mayoral duties. 
Sec. 3.2. - Vacancy. 
    In case of the death, resignation, or removal from office more than six months prior to the next regular election, the unexpired term of mayor shall be filled by a special election, the warrants for which shall be issued by the city council. Whenever the office of mayor becomes vacant within six months prior to the next municipal election, or whenever the mayor, for any reason, is unable to attend to the duties of his or her office, the city council shall appoint one of its members as presiding officer to perform the duties of mayor. 
Sec. 3.3. - Powers and duties. 
    The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council, but shall have no veto and no vote except in the case of a tie. The mayor shall communicate to the city council such information and recommend such measures as the business and interests of the city require. The mayor shall be the official head of the city for ceremonial purposes and all purposes of martial law. The mayor shall perform such other duties as the city council may request or as conferred by the state law not inconsistent with the office or this Charter. The mayor may create committees and appoint persons to serve on such committees. The mayor shall coordinate the actions of such boards, committees, and commissions as they may exist to promote the effective administration of the city's interests. Except as otherwise directed by state statute, this Charter, city ordinance, or interlocal agreement, the mayor may appoint councilors to serve, either in his or her stead or independently, on all boards, committees, commissions, and quasi-municipal corporations when required. 
Sec. 3.4. - Offices incompatible. 
    Except where authorized by law, no mayor shall hold any other elected public office during the term for which the mayor was elected. No mayor shall hold any other city office or employment during the term for which the mayor was elected. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the mayor to represent the city on the governing board of any regional or other intergovernmental agency. No former mayor shall hold any compensated appointive city office or City employment until at least one year after expiration of the mayor's elective term. 
ARTICLE IV. - SCHOOL COMMITTEE 

Sec. 4.1. - Powers and duties. 
    The school committee shall have all powers and shall perform all duties necessary for care and management of the city's public schools pursuant to state law, which grants these powers and responsibilities to the school committee, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. the school committee shall accomplish its duties within the financial limitations established by the city council in its annual appropriation resolve and such supplemental appropriations voted by the city council, together with such other revenues it may receive from the federal or state governments, as well as gifts, grants, and payments from other sources. The school committee shall be judge of the qualification and election of its members, except as otherwise provided by state law, and shall determine and enforce this Charter as well as its rules relating to procedure, misconduct, and forfeiture of office. 
Sec. 4.2. - Composition and compensation. 
    The school committee shall consist of the mayor, or a city councilor selected by the mayor, and seven other members. Five members shall be elected, one from each ward by and from its registered voters. Two members shall be elected at-large by and from the city's registered voters. members shall hold office for a term of two years or until their successors are elected and qualified except that any candidate whose name does not appear on the printed ballot must receive at least 25 valid write-in votes in order to qualify for election to that position. The school committee may appoint by rule non-voting student representatives to serve with the school committee. 
    Upon recommendation from the school committee, the city council shall, not later than June 30, 2006, determine the annual salary of the school committee members by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of the school committee members elected at the next regular election. the school committee members shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
Sec. 4.3. - Vacancies; forfeitures of office. 
    In case of the death, resignation, or removal from office more than six months prior to the next regular election, an unexpired term of member shall be filled by a special election, either citywide or in the ward in which the vacancy occurs, as the case may be, the warrants for which shall be issued by the city council. Whenever the office of member becomes vacant within six months prior to the next municipal election, the school committee shall appoint a qualified representative at-large or from the ward in which the vacancy occurs, as the case may be, to serve until the person elected to fill the vacancy takes office. 
    A member shall forfeit office if that member: 
a.  Lacks at any time during term of office any qualification for that office prescribed by this Charter or law, including residency of the ward from which elected; 
b.  Violates any express prohibition of this Charter; 
c.  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or 
d.  Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the school committee without having been excused by the school committee. 
Sec. 4.4. - Meetings. 
    The school committee shall, at the call of the city clerk or deputy city clerk, first meet at Auburn Hall or such other public location within the city within 45 days after the regular municipal election to be sworn by the city clerk or deputy city clerk to the faithful discharge of their duties, and to elect a chairperson who shall be a voting member. The school committee shall meet for subsequent meetings at such time and place as it determines by rule. Meetings of the school committee other than executive sessions shall be open to the public as required by state statute, and the school committee shall promote public participation in and public notice of its meetings in the contemporary means of information sharing. Agendas and supporting information for meetings shall be available to the public at the superintendent of schools' office at least two business days prior to the meeting as well as electronically through the city's website, if available. 
Sec. 4.5. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the voting members of the school committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn or compel attendance of absent members. 
Sec. 4.6. - Record. 
    The school committee shall keep a record of its own proceedings which, except for executive sessions, shall be available to the public. 
Sec. 4.7. - Voting. 
    A roll call vote shall be taken on the passage of any order or resolve when requested by any member. Any action by the school committee shall require at least four affirmative votes; however, in the event of a tie the measure fails. Five affirmative votes shall be required to hire or fire the superintendent of schools. 
Sec. 4.8. - Offices incompatible. 
    Except where authorized by law, no member shall hold any other elected public office during the term for which the member was elected. No member shall hold any other city office or employment during the term for which the member was elected. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a member from representing the city on the governing board of any regional or other intergovernmental agency. 
    No former member shall hold any compensated appointive city office or city employment until at least one year after expiration of the member's elective term. 
Sec. 4.9. - Superintendent of schools. 
    The school committee shall choose a superintendent of schools solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The superintendent of schools need not be a resident of the city at the time of appointment, but shall be a resident of the city during tenure of office unless otherwise approved by the school committee. 
ARTICLE V. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.1. - Date of elections and procedures. 
    On the Tuesday following the first Monday in November in odd-numbered years, registered voters of each ward shall ballot for a mayor, a councilor, and a school committee member from that ward as well as two councilors and two school committee members at-large. The terms of all councilors and school committee members shall begin and end simultaneously. All votes cast for the several officers shall be counted, declared, and recorded in public ward meetings, by causing the names of the persons voted for and the number of votes given for each to be written on the ward record. The city clerk shall, as soon as convenient, examine the copies of the records of the several wards and notify in writing the persons who have been elected mayor, councilor, and school committee members. If no person has been elected to an office, or if the person elected refuses to accept the office, the city clerk shall issue warrants for another election. The city clerk shall declare the person receiving the highest number of votes for an office elected to such office. 
Sec. 5.2. - Wardens and ward clerks. 
    The city clerk shall nominate wardens and ward clerks who shall be confirmed by the city council. Wardens and ward clerks shall be residents of the city and shall hold office for two years from the first Monday in December following the regular municipal election or until a replacement has been confirmed. Wardens and ward clerks shall swear their faithful performance of duties to the city clerk or deputy city clerk. 
Sec. 5.3. - Nominations for elective offices. 
    Nomination of each candidate for elective office shall be by petition, available from the city clerk at least 120 days prior to the election. Petitions for mayor shall be signed by not less than 100 registered voters. Petitions for councilor and school committee shall be signed by at least 25 registered voters of the candidate's ward, except that at-large candidates' petitions may have signatures from registered voters from any ward. 
Sec. 5.4. - Nomination petition. 
    Nomination petitions shall be provided by the city clerk with whom they shall be filed not later than 75 days prior to the election. 
Sec. 5.5. - List of candidates. 
    The city clerk shall, at least 65 days prior to the election, certify and make available to the public, in print and electronically, the names and residences of candidates who have filed nomination petitions. 
Sec. 5.6. - Ballots. 
    The city clerk shall provide specimen ballots and official ballots for use in all city elections. Specimen ballots shall be marked "specimen" and shall be on a paper of a color different from the official ballots. The city clerk shall make specimen ballots available to the public in print and electronically. No ballot shall show party designation. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 6.1. - Appointment. 
    The city council shall appoint a city manager by an affirmative vote of at least five councilors. The city manager shall appoint an assistant city manager who shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 6.2. - Salary. 
    The city council shall set by order the salary of the city manager. 
Sec. 6.3. - Qualification. 
    The city council shall choose a city manager solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The city manager need not be a resident of the city at the time of appointment, but shall be a resident of the city during tenure of office unless otherwise approved by the city council. 
Sec. 6.4. - Powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be administrative head of the city government and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all departments other than the department of education. Powers and duties of the city manager shall be as follows: 
a.  Appoint and suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this Charter except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter, or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this Charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer, subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
b.  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city except as otherwise provided by this Charter, ordinance or law; 
c.  Attend city council meetings. The city manager shall have the right to take part in discussion but shall not vote; 
d.  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the city council subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
e.  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the city council, and implement the final budget approved by the city council to achieve the goals of the city; 
f.  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
g.  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning operations; 
h.  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city; 
i.  Make recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city and facilitate the work of the city council in developing policy; 
j.  Provide staff support services for the mayor and councilors; 
k.  Assist the city council to develop long-term goals for the city and strategies to implement these goals; 
l.  Encourage and provide staff support for regional and intergovernmental cooperation; 
m.  Promote partnerships among the city council, staff, and citizens in developing public policy and building a sense of community; and 
n.  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 6.5. - Removal. 
    The city council may remove the city manager from office only as follows: 
a.  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of at least five members a preliminary resolution which must state the particular reasons for removal and which may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. The mayor or presiding officer shall promptly deliver a copy of the resolution to the city manager. If the city manager is not available to personally receive a copy, the mayor or presiding officer shall mail a copy to the city manager by certified mail, return receipt requested, restricted delivery. 
b.  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered, unclaimed, or refused, the city manager may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing, which shall be held at a city council meeting not earlier than 15 days, nor later than 30 days, after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city council a written statement not later than five days before the hearing. 
d.[c.]  After the hearing, if requested by the city manager, the city council may adopt, by affirmative vote of at least five councilors, a final resolution of removal, which may be effective immediately. If no hearing is requested, the city council may adopt, by affirmative vote of at least five councilors, a final resolution of removal at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to or unclaimed or refused by the city manager. 
    The city manager shall continue to receive his/her salary until the effective date of the final resolution of removal. 
Sec. 6.6. - Vacancy. 
    During a vacancy in the city manager's office or during the absence or disability of the city manager, the assistant city manager shall perform the duties of city manager unless otherwise directed by majority vote of the city council. 
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES, AND AGENCIES 

Sec. 7.1. - General provisions. 
A.  Creation of departments. The city council may establish city departments, offices, or agencies in addition to those created by this Charter and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices, and agencies. no function assigned by this Charter to a particular department, office, or agency may be discontinued or, unless this Charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other. 
B.  Direction by city manager. All departments, offices, and agencies under the direction and supervision of the city manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager. The mayor and councilors shall direct administrative functions of the city solely through the city manager. 
Sec. 7.2. - Personnel system. 
A.  Merit principle. All appointments and promotions of city officers and employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by a valid and reliable examination or other evidence of competence. 
B.  Merit system. Consistent with all federal and state laws, the city council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment, regulation, and maintenance of a merit system governing personnel policies necessary to effective administration of the employees of the city's departments, offices, and agencies. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 8.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on the last day of June. 
Sec. 8.2. - Submission of budget and budget message. 
    On or before the first day of May of each year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message. 
Sec. 8.3. - Budget message. 
    The city manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs, linking those programs to organizational goals and community priorities. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year and the impact of those policies on future years. It shall describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the city's debt position, including factors affecting the ability to raise resources through debt issues, and include such other material as the city manager deems desirable. 
Sec. 8.4. - Budget. 
    The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or this Charter, shall be in such form as the city manager deems desirable or the city council may require for effective management and an understanding of the relationship between the budget and the city's strategic goals. The budget shall begin with a clear general summary of its contents; shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. It shall indicate in separate sections: 
a.  The proposed goals and expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by department or by other organization unit, and program, purpose, or activity, method of financing such expenditures, and methods to measure outcomes and performance related to the goals; 
b.  Proposed longer-term goals and capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by department or by other organization unit when practicable, the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure, and methods to measure outcomes and performance related to the goals; and 
c.  The proposed goals, anticipated income and expense, profit and loss for the ensuing year for each utility or other enterprise fund or internal service fund operated by the city, and methods to measure outcomes and performance related to the goals. For any fund, the total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated income plus carried forward fund balance exclusive of reserves. 
Sec. 8.5. - City council action on budget. 
A.  Notice and hearing. The city council shall provide public notice of the budget process in the contemporary means of information sharing, including the city's website, if any, for: 
1.  The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public; and 
2.  The time and place of the public hearing, not less than two weeks after the city manager submits the budget to the city council. 
B.  Amendment before adoption. After the public hearing, the city council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for an estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than total estimated income. 
C.  Adoption. The city council shall, after at least one public hearing held at the time the city council considers its first reading of the annual appropriation resolve, adopt the budget on or before the last day of the last month of the fiscal year currently ending. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the budget proposed by the city manager shall go into effect. 
Sec. 8.6. - Appropriation and revenue resolve. 
[A.]  Prior to the beginning of the fiscal year the city council shall adopt an annual appropriation resolve making appropriations by department, fund, service, strategy, or other organizational unit and authorizing an allocation for each program or activity. 
[B.]  Before any new revenues may be collected to fund the budget, including taxes and changes in existing fees, the city council shall authorize such revenues by an annual revenue resolve. 
Sec. 8.7. - Amendments after adoption. 
A.  Supplemental appropriations. If during or before the fiscal year the city manager certifies that there are available for appropriation municipal revenues, including those of the department of education, in excess of those estimated in the budget, the city council by resolve may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
B.  Emergency appropriations. To address a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the city council may make emergency appropriations. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues or a sufficient fund balance to meet such appropriations, the city council may by such emergency resolve authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid or refinanced as long-term debt not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made. 
C.  Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the city manager that the revenues or fund balances available will be insufficient to finance the expenditures for which appropriations have been authorized, the city manager shall report to the city council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by the city manager, and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The city council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or reduce any deficit, and for that purpose it may by resolve reduce or eliminate one or more appropriations. 
D.  Transfer of appropriations. At any time during or before the fiscal year, the city council may by resolution transfer part or all of the unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, fund, service, strategy, or organizational unit to the appropriation for other departments or organizational units or for a new appropriation. The city manager may transfer funds among programs within a department, fund, service, strategy, or organizational unit and shall report such transfers to the city council in writing in a timely manner. 
E.  Limitation; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, except to the extent that the debt is refinanced and less debt service is required, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
Sec. 8.8. - Administration and fiduciary oversight of the budget. 
    The city council shall provide by ordinance, order, or resolve the procedures for administration and fiduciary oversight of the budget. 
Sec. 8.9. - Capital program. 
A.  Submission. The city manager and superintendent of schools shall jointly prepare and submit to a joint meeting of the city council and school committee a multi-year capital program no later than one month before the final date for submission of the budget. 
B.  Contents. The capital program shall include: 
1.  A clear general summary of its contents; 
2.  Identification of the long-term goals of the community; 
3.  A list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each; 
4.  Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement or other capital expenditures; 
5.  Method of financing upon which each capital expenditure is to be reliant; 
6.  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired; 
7.  A commentary on how the plan addresses the sustainability of the community and the region of which it is a part; and 
8.  Methods to measure outcomes and performance of the capital plan related to the long-term goals of the community. 
The above shall be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
Sec. 8.10. - Action on capital program. 
A.  Notice and hearing. The city council and school committee shall publish the general summary of the capital program and a notice stating: 
1.  The times and places where copies of the capital program are available for inspection by the public; and 
2.  The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, for joint public hearing(s) on the capital program. 
B.  Adoption. The city council by resolution shall adopt the capital program with or without amendment after the public hearing and on or before the last day of the last month of the current fiscal year. 
Sec. 8.11. - Independent audit. 
[A.]  The city council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. An independent certified public accountant or firm of such accountants shall make such audits. Such audits shall be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards (GAAS) and generally accepted governmental auditing standards (GAGAS). 
[B.]  The city council and school committee shall designate, respectively, two councilors and two school committee members who shall mutually select a fifth person to serve as an audit committee. This committee shall: 
a.  Lead the process of selecting an independent auditor, pursuant to section 8.16 of this Charter; 
b.  Direct the work of the independent auditor as to the scope of the annual audit and any matters of concern with respect to internal controls; 
c.  Receive the report of the independent auditor and present that report to a joint meeting of the city council and school committee with any recommendations from the committee; and 
d.  Review the implementation of the procurement policy and report to the city council and school committee as to the strengths and weaknesses of the policy. 
[C.]  Upon recommendation of the audit committee, the city council shall designate such accountant or firm annually, or for a period not exceeding three years, but the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be made no later than 180 days after the beginning of such fiscal year. The standard for independence is that the auditor must be capable of exercising objective and impartial judgment on all issues encompassed within the audit engagement. 
Sec. 8.12. - Emergency reserve fund. 
[A.]  The city council shall provide in the appropriation resolve for an emergency reserve fund from which transfers may be made by vote of the city council to meet emergencies and other unforeseen events. At the end of each fiscal year, remaining monies in the emergency reserve fund which have not been committed shall pass to the undesignated general fund balance. 
[B.]  The emergency reserve fund shall be annually funded in an amount equal to at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the total amount to be appropriated for all purposes of the current fiscal year. 
Sec. 8.13. - Bonds issued. 
[A.]  The city may issue bonds pledging the credit of the city in the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of state law. Prior to any vote to issue bonds, the city council shall provide public notice, in the contemporary means of information sharing, of the general summary of the proposal for such bond issue, stating: 
a.  The times and places where copies of the bond proposal are available for inspection by the public; and 
b.  The time and place, not less than two weeks after such notice, for a public hearing on the bond proposal. 
A.  Roads, utilities and vehicles. After public notice and hearing the city council, by an affirmative vote of five councilors, may approve issuance of bonds for roads, sidewalks, sewers, water service, vehicles and emergencies. 
B.  Refinanced bonds. After public notice and hearing the city council, by an affirmative vote of five councilors, may approve issuance of bonds to refinance existing city bonds. 
C.  Buildings and structures. 
1.  Except for the bond proposals described in sections A and B, above, the city council, after public notice and hearing, may approve, by an affirmative vote of five councilors, issuance of bonds when the cost of any one project is less than nine percent of the annual appropriation resolve most recently voted by the city council. 
2.  When the cost of any one such project exceeds nine percent of said annual appropriation resolve, the city council by a majority vote may place such bond proposal on the ballot for citywide election. Such bond proposal must be approved by a majority of those voters who vote in that citywide election. 
[B.]  Every order for the issue of bonds shall provide for a tax levy, or other means of repayment, for each year to meet the annual installment of principal and such interest as may accrue in each respective year. 
Sec. 8.14. - Temporary loans. 
    The city may borrow money in anticipation of receipts from taxes during any fiscal year, but the aggregate amount of such loans shall not at any time exceed 80 percent of the revenue from taxes received during the preceding fiscal year. 
Sec. 8.15. - Bonds required. 
    The city council shall require bonds, with sufficient sureties, from all persons entrusted with the collection, custody, or disbursements of public funds. 
Sec. 8.16. - Procurement. 
[A.]  The city council shall by rule adopt, within one year from the adoption of this Charter, a procurement policy for the city's purchase of materials and services for all the city's departments, including the department of education. This procurement process shall assure an understandable, comprehensive, fair process for such purchases based on state statute, state rules and regulations, and the city's experience and expertise in this area. 
[B.]  The city council and school committee shall designate, respectively, two councilors and two school committee members, who shall mutually select a fifth person, to serve as a procurement policy committee. This committee shall: 
a.  Lead the process to develop a city procurement policy; and 
b.  Report to a joint meeting of the city council and school committee with a recommendation from the committee for a rule to implement the goals stated in this section. 
ARTICLE IX. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL 

Sec. 9.1. - General authority. 
A.  Initiative. The registered voters of the city shall have the power to propose ordinances, orders, and resolves to the city council and, if the city council fails to adopt the matter proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance, order, or resolve relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes, or salaries of city officers or employees. An initiative which fails to win a majority vote in a citywide election may not be the subject of another initiative for at least six months after the citywide election in which it failed. 
B.  Referendum. The registered voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the city council of any adopted ordinance, order, or resolve and, if the city council fails to repeal the matter so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance, order, or resolve relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes. A referendum which fails to win a majority vote in a citywide election may not be the subject of another referendum for at least six months after the citywide election in which it failed. 
C.  Recall. The registered voters of the city shall have the power to recall any elected official, but no recall petition shall be filed against any official within six months after the official takes office, nor, in the case of an official subjected to a recall election and not removed, until at least six months after the recall election. 
Sec. 9.2. - Commencement of proceedings. 
[A.]  Any five registered voters may commence initiative, referendum, or recall proceedings by filing with the city clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute a petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition, filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses, and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, as well as setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance, order, or resolve or citing the ordinance, or other matter sought to be reconsidered, or the elected official proposed to be recalled, together with a statement not to exceed 200 words, of the reasons for the recall. Grounds for the recall should relate to and affect the administration of the official's office and be of a substantial nature directly affecting the rights and interest of the public. Promptly after receipt of a recall petition, the city clerk shall serve, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, restricted delivery, a copy of the affidavit on the elected official sought to be recalled. Within ten days of the copy's delivery, refusal, or being unclaimed, the elected official sought to be recalled may file a statement with the city clerk not to exceed 200 words in response. 
[B.]  Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the city clerk shall issue appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee. 
Sec. 9.3. - Petitions. 
A.  Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent of the number of registered voters as of the date on which the petitioners' committee filed its affidavit. Recall petitions must be signed by at least 15 percent of the number of registered voters as of the date on which the petitioners' committee filed its affidavit. 
B.  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached during their circulation the full text of the ordinance, order, or resolve proposed or sought to be reconsidered or the name of the elected official proposed to be recalled and the reasons for that action. Petitions for recall shall be limited to the recall of one individual and shall contain the statement of grounds for the recall and the response of the official sought to be recalled, if any. If no response was filed, the petition shall state that fact. 
C.  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit signed by the circulator stating the number of signatures as well as that the circulator: 
(a.)  Is a resident of the city; 
(b.)  Personally circulated the paper; 
(c.)  Had all the signatures signed in the circulator's presence; 
(d.)  Believes the signatures are the genuine signature of the persons; and 
(e.)  That each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or to be reconsidered or the name of the elected official proposed to be recalled and the statements of both the official and the petitioners' committee. 
D.  Time for filing. Referendum affidavits must be filed within 30 days after adoption by the city council of the ordinance, order, or resolve sought to be reconsidered. petitions for initiative, referendum and recall must be filed with the city clerk within 90 days of the city clerk's issuance of petitions, otherwise the petitions expire. 
Sec. 9.4. - Procedure after filing. 
A.  Certificate of city clerk; amendment. Within 20 days after the petition is filed, the city clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by certified mail, return receipt requested, restricted delivery. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once, if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the city clerk within five days after receiving the copy of the certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections B and C of section [9.]3 above. Within five days after the supplementary petition is filed, the city clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by certified mail, return receipt requested, restricted delivery, as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request city council review under subsection B of this section within the time required, the city clerk shall promptly present the certificate to the city council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
B.  City council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it, or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request for review by the city council. The city council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it. The city council's determination shall be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. The official proposed to be recalled shall not participate in any proceedings regarding the petition or the election. 
C.  Court review; new petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
Sec. 9.5. - Referendum petitions; suspension of effect. 
    When a referendum petition is filed with the city clerk, the ordinance, order, or resolve sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
a.  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; or 
b.  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or 
c.  The city council repeals the ordinance, order, or resolve; or 
d.  Thirty days have elapsed after a vote of the city on the ordinance, order, or resolve. 
Sec. 9.6. - Action on petitions. 
A.  Action by city council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been fully determined sufficient, the city council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance, order, or resolve in the manner provided in article 2 or reconsider the referred ordinance, order, or resolve by voting its repeal. If the city council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance, order, or resolve without any change in substance within 60 days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance, order, or resolve within 30 days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred matter to the voters of the city. 
B.  Submission to voters. The vote of the city on a proposed or referred ordinance, order, or resolve shall be held not less than 120 days and not later than six months from the date of the final city council vote thereon. In the case of a recall petition, the election shall be held not later than six months after the petition is finally determined to be sufficient. If no regular city election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the city council shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election except that the city council may, in its discretion, provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred matter shall be available for view at the polls. 
C.  Withdrawal of petition. An initiative, referendum, or recall petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the 15th day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the city, by filing with the city clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least four members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
Sec. 9.7. - Results of election. 
A.  Initiative. If a majority of the registered voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance, order, or resolve vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances, orders, or resolves of the same kind adopted by the city council. If conflicting ordinances, orders, or resolves are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
B.  Referendum. If a majority of the registered voters voting on a referred ordinance, order, or resolve vote for repeal, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
C.  Recall. If a majority of the registered voters voting on a recall petition vote in favor of the petition, the office of the recalled official shall become vacant upon certification of the election results. If the election results or procedure is legally challenged by the recalled official, that person's right to serve in that office shall be suspended and the city shall not compensate that official pending the resolution of the legal proceeding. 
ARTICLE X. - TRANSITION AND SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 10.1. - Officers and employees. 
A.  Rights and privileges preserved. Nothing in this Charter except as otherwise specifically provided shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are city officers or employees at the time of its adoption. 
B.  Continuance of office or employment. Except as specifically provided by this Charter, if at the time this Charter takes full effect, a city administrative officer or employee holds any office or position which is or can be abolished by or under this Charter, he or she shall continue in such office or position until the taking effect of some specific provision under this Charter directing that he or she vacate the office or position. Specifically, until the city council approves by ordinance the compensation for mayor, councilors and school committee members, the annual compensation for mayor shall be $4,000.00, for councilor, $1,800.00 and school committee member $600.00. 
C.  Personnel system. An employee holding a city position at the time this Charter takes full effect who was serving in that same or a comparable position at the time of its adoption shall not be subject to competitive tests as a condition of continuance in the same position but in all other respects shall be subject to the city's personnel system. 
[Sec. 10.2. - Reserved.] 
Sec. 10.3. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
Sec. 10.4. - Definition of terms. 
    As used in this Charter, terms shall be defined and construed by their meaning established by state statute, if any; otherwise, terms shall be defined and construed by their customary usage or plain dictionary meaning. In all cases, the term "days" shall refer to calendar days, not business days. 
Sec. 10.5. - Conflicts of interest; ethics. 
    The city's policy is that the proper operation of government requires that public officials be independent, impartial, and responsible to the citizens; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. The city council shall maintain a comprehensive conflicts of interest or ethics ordinance to further the policy set forth in this section and to promote the objective of protecting the integrity of city government against actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest without creating unnecessary barriers to public service. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home rule, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2101 et seq.; codification of ordinances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3004; ordinances to be on file with municipal clerk and accessible to the public, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3005; proof of ordinances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3006; form of adopting ordinance, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3004(1). 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Auburn, Maine," and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the shortened form "Auburn Code". 
(Code 1967, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Revision, codification and publication of municipal ordinances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3004. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
    Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
    Charter. The terms "Charter" and "the Charter" refer to the Charter of the City of Auburn, Maine, as printed in part I of this Code. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Auburn, Maine. 
State Law reference- Municipality defined, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2001. 
    City attorney. The term "city attorney" means the attorney employed by the city from time to time to act on its behalf. 
    City council and council. The terms "council" and "city council" mean the city council of the City of Auburn, Maine. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Auburn, Maine, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Compact or built-up section. The compact or built-up section of the city means a section of the highway where structures are nearer than 200 feet apart for a distance of one-quarter mile. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall be counted. 
State Law reference- Similar provision regarding statutory time periods, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(12); time standard applicable in Maine, 1 M.R.S.A. § 151. 
    Corporate limits or city limits. The term "corporate limits" or "city limits" means the legal boundaries of the city. 
    County. The terms "the county" and "this county" mean the County of Androscoggin in the State of Maine. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Fee schedule or schedule of fees and charges. The term "fee schedule" or "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office that lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council. 
    Fiscal year and municipal year. The terms "fiscal year" and "municipal year" refer to the period beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each year. 
State Law reference- Municipal year defined, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2001(12). 
    Gender. Words of the masculine gender may include the feminine. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(7-A). 
    Governing authority or governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the city council of Auburn, Maine. 
    Joint authority. Words giving authority to three or more persons authorize a majority to act, when the enactment does not otherwise determine. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(3). 
    Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(9-A). 
    Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the city. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    M.R.S.A. The abbreviation "M.R.S.A." refers to the latest edition of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated. 
    Municipal official. The term "municipal official" means any elected or appointed member of the city. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2001(10); municipal officers defined, 1 M.R.S.A. § 72(12). 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 1 M.R.S.A. § 72(3). 
    Number. Words of the singular number may include the plural, and words of the plural number may include the singular. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(9). 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation, when affirmation is allowed. Affirmation is allowed when a person required to be sworn is conscientiously scrupulous of taking an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 1 M.R.S.A. § 72(14). 
    Official website and website. The terms "official website" and "website" mean the official website maintained by the city for purposes of making information available to the public and is located at the following address: http://www.auburnmaine.org. 
    Officials, boards, commissions. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards or commissions by title only, e.g., "city council," "city clerk," "mayor," "city manager," etc., such references shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards and commissions of the City of Auburn. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(2). 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, societies, clubs, firms, partnerships, bodies politic, and foreign and domestic corporations, as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 1 M.R.S.A. § 72(15), 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2001(14). 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Reasonable time or reasonable notice. The term "reasonable time" or "reasonable notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city's governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(9-A). 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The terms "the state" and "this state" mean the State of Maine. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 1 M.R.S.A. § 72(21). 
    Street. The term "street" embraces streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city, and includes all areas thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public use. 
    Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 1 M.R.S.A. § 72(28). 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.14) 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 1 M.R.S.A. § 72(30). 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines, history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, and the chapter, article and division headings are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, chapter, article or division, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, chapters, articles or divisions, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.5) 
State Law reference- Similar provision regarding statute titles, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(10); similar provision regarding internal references to statutes, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(11). 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, when numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed or typed for inclusion in the Code, shall, as numbered and printed or typed, or omitted in the case of repeal, be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. Such amendments may be in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Auburn, Maine, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Auburn, Maine, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______ which section shall read as follows:...." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, when necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference- Similar nonsubstantive changes permitted in revision of statutes, 1 M.R.S.A. § 93. 
Sec. 1-6. - Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
    Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city. 
(2)  Any ordinance containing any administrative provisions of the council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Any ordinance setting fees or charges for city services, inspections, etc. 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor. 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance making any appropriation. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(10)  Any ordinance adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers, employees or agents, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(12)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning map amendments or rezoning. 
(13)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the effective date of this Code. 
State Law reference- Continuation of certain ordinances and vested rights upon codification, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3004. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Unauthorized alteration of Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
State Law reference- Tampering with public records or information prohibited, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 456. 
Sec. 1-10. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
    A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the city council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the city clerk for examination by all persons. 
State Law reference- Ordinances to be on file with municipal clerk and available to members of the public at reasonable cost, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3005. 
Sec. 1-11. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
    Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the city clerk, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, subsection or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, subsections and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.15) 
State Law reference- Similar provision regarding statutes, 1 M.R.S.A. § 71(8). 
Sec. 1-13. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)  If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
State Law reference- Conflicting statutory enactments, 1 M.R.S.A. § 91(1). 
Sec. 1-14. - Service of notices. 
(a)  Manner of service. Unless otherwise provided, notice required to be given by this Code shall be served: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the notice at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  By mailing the notice by registered mail to such owner at his last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises five days prior to the date set therein for compliance. 
(b)  Interference with official notice. No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer unless permission is given to remove the notice. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.6) 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty; continuing violations; additional remedies. 
(a)  Every person who shall be guilty of a violation of any provision of any ordinance to which a particular penalty is not stated shall forfeit and pay a sum of not more than $1,000.00 to be recovered to the use of the city on complaint or by other appropriate action before the district court; however, unless otherwise stated violations of the provisions of this Code shall be enforced in accordance with the citation system. 
(b)  The imposition of a penalty for violation of any ordinance shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Such violation shall be remedied within a reasonable time, and each ten days the violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The application of a penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. The imposition of penalties for violation of any ordinance shall not preclude the city solicitor from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, removal, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any premises. 
(Code 1967, §§ 1-2.7, 1-2.8) 
State Law reference- Penalty may not be adopted by reference, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003. 
Sec. 1-16. - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, concealing. 
    Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
State Law reference- Criminal liability for conduct of another, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 57. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities and counties, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 1 et seq.; general powers of cities, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2004; town manager plan of municipal government, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2631; municipal authority generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
    The following design shall be the device of the city seal, and the inscription thereon shall be as follows: 
"City of Auburn" 
1869 
"Vestigia Nulla Retrorsum" 

Translation: 
    "No Steps Backward" 
(Code 1967, § 1-1.1) 
State Law reference- Authority for adoption of seal, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2002; misuse of municipal seal, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2006. 
Sec. 2-2. - Ward boundaries. 
(a)  Ward 1. The boundaries of ward 1 shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the southeast corner of census Block 1004 of Tract 010200 in the Androscoggin River; then southwest along the boundary of Block 1004 and then Block 1000 of Tract 010200 until it intersects with Turner Street; then northeasterly along the centerline of Turner Street until it intersects with Parker Street; then southwest along the centerline of Parker Street to the intersection of Summer Street; then northwest along the centerline of Summer Street to the intersection of Youngs Corner Road; northwesterly, southwesterly, and westerly along the centerline of Youngs Corner Road to the intersection of Jackson Hill Road; westerly and northwesterly along the centerline of Jackson Hill Road to the Auburn/Minot municipal boundary; then northerly along the Auburn/Minot municipal boundary to the intersection with the Auburn/Turner municipal boundary; then southeasterly along the Auburn/Turner municipal boundary to the Androscoggin River and the Auburn/Greene municipal boundary; then southerly along the Androscoggin River and the Auburn/Greene and Auburn/Lewiston municipal boundaries to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Ward 2. The boundaries of ward 2 shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of Parker Street and Summer Street northwest along the centerline of Summer Street to the intersection of Youngs Corner Road; then northwesterly, southwesterly, and westerly along the centerline of Youngs Corner Road to the Jackson Hill Road; then westerly and northwesterly along the centerline of Jackson Hill Road to the Auburn/Minot municipal boundary; then southerly along the Auburn/Minot municipal boundary to the centerline of Garfield Road; then southeasterly along the centerline of Garfield Road to the intersection of Sunrise Lane; then westerly and northwesterly along the centerline Sunrise Lane to the easterly terminus of Sunrise Lane; then northeasterly, southeasterly and southwesterly along the boundary of Block 2017 of Tract 010800; then westerly and southerly along the boundary of Block 2018 of Tract 010800 and Block 2020 of Tract 010800 and Block 2028 of Tract 010800 to the intersection of Kendall Road; then westerly along the centerline of Kendall Road to the Intersection of Stevens Mill Road; then Southerly along the centerline of Stevens Mill Road to the intersection with Minot Avenue; then easterly along the Centerline of Minot Ave to the Southeast corner of Block 1021 of Tract 010400; then northwesterly along the boundary of Block 1021 of Tract 010400 to the intersection with Court Street then northeasterly along the centerline of Court Street to the intersection of Russell Avenue; then southeasterly along the centerline of Russell Avenue to the intersection of Goodrich Avenue; Then northeasterly along Goodrich Avenue to the intersection with Hillside Avenue; then southeasterly along the centerline of Hillside Avenue to the intersection of Merrill Street; then northeasterly along the centerline of Merrill Street. to the intersection of Western Avenue; then northwesterly along Western Avenue to the Intersection of Auburn Heights; then northeasterly and northwesterly along the centerline of Auburn Heights to the intersection of Harris Street; then northwesterly along the centerline of Harris Street to the intersection of Court Street; then westerly on Court street to the intersection of James Street; then northerly along the centerline of James Street to the intersection of Grant Street; then easterly along the centerline of Grant Street to the intersection of Goff Street; then northerly along the centerline of Goff Street to the intersection of Pine Street; then easterly along the centerline of Pine Street to the intersection of Willow Street; then northeasterly along the centerline of Willow Street to the intersection of Webster Street; then southeasterly along the centerline of Webster Street to the intersection of Chestnut Street; then northeasterly along the centerline of Chestnut Street to the intersection of Parker Street; then northeasterly along the centerline of Parker Street to the point of beginning. 
(c)  Ward 3. The boundaries of ward 3 shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of Parker Street and Turner Street southeasterly and southerly along the centerline of Turner to the intersection of Pleasant Street; then southerly along the centerline of Pleasant Street to the intersection of Court Street; then westerly along the centerline of Court Street to the intersection of Minot Avenue; then southerly and southwesterly along the centerline of Minot Avenue to the intersection of Poland Road; then southwesterly along the centerline of Poland Road to the intersection of Rodman Road; then northwesterly along the centerline of Rodman Road to the intersection of Manley Road; then Southwesterly along the centerline of Manley road to the intersection of Hotel Road; then southwesterly along the centerline of Hotel Road to the intersection of Block 2026 of Tract 010700; then westerly along Block 2026 of Tract 010700 to the Auburn/Poland municipal boundary; then westerly and northwesterly to the intersection of Garfield Road; then southeasterly along the centerline of Garfield Road to the intersection of Sunrise Lane; then westerly and northwesterly along the centerline Sunrise Lane to the easterly terminus of Sunrise Lane; then northeasterly, southeasterly and southwesterly along the boundary of Block 2017 of Tract 010800; then westerly and southerly along the boundary of Block 2018 of Tract 010800 and Block 2020 of Tract 010800 and Block 2028 of Tract 010800 to the intersection of Kendall Road; then westerly along the centerline of Kendall Road to the Intersection of Stevens Mill Road; then Southerly along the centerline of Stevens Mill Road to the intersection of Minot Avenue; then easterly along the Centerline of Minot Ave to the southeast corner of Block 1021 of Tract 010400; then northwesterly along the boundary of Block 1021 of Tract 010400 to the intersection with Court Street then northeasterly along the centerline of Court Street to the intersection of Russell Avenue; then southeasterly along the centerline of Russell Avenue to the intersection of Goodrich Avenue; Then northeasterly along Goodrich Avenue to the intersection with Hillside Avenue; then southeasterly along the centerline of Hillside Avenue to the intersection of Merrill Street; then Northeasterly along the centerline of Merrill Street to the intersection of Western Avenue; then northwesterly along Western Avenue to the Intersection of Auburn Heights; then northeasterly and northwesterly along the centerline of Auburn Heights to the intersection of Harris Street; then northwesterly along the centerline of Harris Street to the intersection of Court Street; then westerly on Court street to the intersection of James Street; then northerly along the centerline of James Street to the intersection of Grant Street; then easterly along the centerline of Grant Street to the intersection of Goff Street; then northerly along the centerline of Goff Street to the intersection of Pine Street; then easterly along the centerline of Pine Street to the intersection of Willow Street; then northeasterly along the centerline of Willow Street to the intersection of Webster Street; then southeasterly along the centerline of Webster Street to the intersection of Chestnut Street; then northeasterly along the centerline of Chestnut Street to the intersection of Parker Street; then northeasterly along the centerline of Parker Street to the point of beginning. 
(d)  Ward 4. The boundaries of ward 4 shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the Androscoggin River at the northeast corner of Block 1000 of Tract 010100 westerly along the northern boundary of Block 1000 of Tract 010100 to the intersection of Block 1001 of 010100; then westerly along the boundary of Block 1001 of Tract 010100 to the intersection of Turner Street; then southerly along Turner Street to the intersection of Pleasant Street; then southerly along the centerline of Pleasant Street to the intersection of Court Street; then westerly along the centerline of Court Street to the intersection of Minot Avenue; then southerly and southwesterly along the centerline of Minot Avenue to the intersection of Poland Road; then southwesterly along the centerline of Poland Road to the intersection of Rodman Road; then northwesterly along the centerline of Rodman Road to the intersection of Manley Road; then Southwesterly along the centerline of Manley road to the intersection of Hotel Road; then southwesterly along the centerline of Hotel Road to the intersection of Block 2026 of Tract 010700; then westerly along Block 2026 of Tract 010700 to the Auburn/Poland municipal boundary; then southwesterly along the Auburn/Poland municipal boundary to the Auburn/New Gloucester municipal boundary; then southeasterly along the Auburn/New Gloucester municipal boundary to Trapp Road; then easterly and northeasterly along the centerline of Trapp Road to the intersection of Pownal Road; then northerly along the centerline of Pownal Road to the intersection of Danville Corner Road; then northwesterly and westerly along the centerline of Danville Corner Road to the intersection of Block 2043 of Tract 010700; then northwesterly along the boundary of Block 2043 of Tract 010700 to the intersection of Hackett Road; then northwesterly along the centerline of Hackett Road to the intersection of the northwest corner of Block 2040 of Tract 010700; then north and northeasterly along the boundary of Block 2040 of Tract 010700 to the intersection of Block 1008 of Tract 010700; then northeasterly along the boundary of Block 1008 of Tract 010700; then northeasterly along the thread of the Little Androscoggin River to its confluence with the Androscoggin River and the Auburn/Lewiston municipal boundary; then northerly along the Androscoggin River and the Auburn/Lewiston municipal boundary to the point of beginning. 
(e)  Ward 5. The boundaries of ward 5 shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the confluence of the Androscoggin River and the Little Androscoggin River on the Auburn/Lewiston municipal boundary; then southerly along the Androscoggin River and the Auburn/Lewiston municipal boundary to the intersection of the Auburn/Durham municipal boundary; then southwesterly, northwesterly, and southwesterly along the Auburn/Durham municipal boundary to the Auburn/New Gloucester municipal boundary, then northwesterly along the Auburn/New Gloucester municipal boundary to the intersection of Trapp Road; then easterly and northeasterly along the centerline of Trapp Road to the intersection of Pownal Road; then northerly along the centerline of Pownal Road to the intersection of Danville Corner Road; then northwesterly and northerly along the centerline of Danville Corner Road to the intersection of Block 2043 of Tract 010700; then northwesterly along the boundary of Block 2043 of Tract 010700 to the intersection of Hackett Road; then northwesterly along the centerline of Hackett Road to the intersection of Block 2040 of Tract 010700; then north and northeasterly along the boundary of Block 2040 of Tract 010700 to the intersection of Block 1008 of Tract 010700; then northeasterly along the boundary of Block 1008 of Tract 010700; then northeasterly along the thread of the Little Androscoggin River to its confluence with the Androscoggin River to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-2.1-2-2.5; Ord. of 3-1-2004, §§ 2.1-2.5; Ord. No. 02-03032014, 3-17-2014) 
State Law reference- Voting districts, 21-A M.R.S.A. § 631. 
Sec. 2-3. - Official map. 
    An official map showing the ward boundaries shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. If changes in the ward boundaries are made, a new or amended map shall be filed which will reflect the amendments. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.6; Ord. of 3-1-2004, § 2.6) 
State Law reference- Identification of town boundary lines, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2851. 
Secs. 2-4-2-24. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-25. - Salaries. 
    The mayor shall receive and annual salary of $4,000.00, payable quarterly. Each of the other members of the city council shall receive an annual salary of $1,800.00, payable monthly. 
(Ord. No. 04-04162013, § 2-25, 5-6-2013) 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Town manager plan of municipal government, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2631. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26-2-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal meetings and elections generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2501 et seq.; town meetings and elections, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2521 et seq.; public records and proceedings generally, 1 M.R.S.A. § 401 et seq. 

Sec. 2-52. - Actions. 
    The council shall act only by an oral motion, ordinance, order or resolve. All ordinances, orders, and resolves, except those pertaining to appropriations, shall be confined to one subject that is clearly stated in the title. When the city council expresses anything by way of command, the form of expression shall be "ordered." When it expresses opinions, principles, facts or propositions, the form shall be "resolved," with the exception of the appropriation resolve. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.1) 
Sec. 2-53. - Attendance. 
    Every member shall attend all meetings of the council, unless prevented by illness or absence from the city, or unless excused by a vote of the council. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.2) 
Sec. 2-54. - Duties of city clerk; journal of proceedings. 
(a)  The city clerk shall: 
(1)  Give notice of city council meetings; 
(2)  Attend all meetings of the council and keep the journal of its proceedings; 
(3)  Authenticate by his signature and record in full all ordinances and resolutions; and 
(4)  Perform such other duties as shall be required by law or as ordered by the council. 
(b)  The recorded tapes of the meetings of the city council and a summary of council actions prepared by the city clerk shall constitute the official journal of its proceedings. In case of the temporary absence of the city clerk, the city council may appoint a clerk pro tempore, with all the powers, duties and obligations of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.3) 
State Law reference- Municipal clerks generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2651 et seq. 
Sec. 2-55. - Presiding officer in absence of mayor. 
    In the temporary absence or disability of the mayor, any member of the city council may call the council to order at any duly called meeting to elect a chair pro tempore from among its number, and he shall exercise all the powers of the mayor during such temporary absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.4) 
Sec. 2-56. - Conduct of meeting by mayor. 
    The mayor shall: 
(1)  Take the chair at the time appointed for a council meeting, call the members to order, and, if a quorum is present, proceed to business. 
(2)  Preserve order, and decide all questions of order subject to any appeal to the council on motion regularly seconded. 
(3)  Declare all votes; but if a vote is doubted he shall make a return of the members voting for and against the question, without debate, and declare the result. 
(4)  Propound all questions in the order in which they were moved, unless the subsequent motion shall have precedence in its nature, except that in naming of sums or fixing of times, the largest sums and longest times shall be put first. 
(5)  Name the member entitled to speak when more than one member addresses the chair at the same time. 
(6)  Consider a motion to adjourn as always in order except on immediate repetition. 
(7)  Present all petitions and other papers addressed to the council, or cause them to be presented, and they shall lie on the table and be taken up in the order in which they were presented, unless the council shall otherwise direct. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.5) 
Sec. 2-57. - Agenda. 
    The agenda for each meeting of the city council shall be prepared by the city clerk. Such agenda shall be distributed by the city clerk to the city manager, the mayor and each member of the council at least two business days prior to the meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.6) 
Sec. 2-58. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
    The dates and time of the regular meetings of the city council shall be the first and third Mondays of each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. If a regular meeting night falls on a legal holiday or the night before a legal holiday, then the stated meeting shall be held on the following Monday at the same time and place unless the city council shall, at the meeting held next prior to the meeting falling on the holiday or the night before the holiday, fix a different alternate meeting date. The place of such meetings shall be the city council chamber in the city building, hereby designated to be the regular meeting place, unless the council designates another meeting place. All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public, and may be continued to another location. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.7; Ord. of 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 01-01042016, 1-4-2016) 
Sec. 2-59. - Order of business. 
    At every meeting of the city council, the order of business shall be as follows: 
(1)  Consent agenda. All items listed with an asterisk (*) are considered to be routine by the city council and will be enacted by one motion. There will be no separate discussion of these items unless a councilmember or citizen so requests, in which event the item will be removed from the consent agenda and considered in its normal sequence on the agenda. 
(2)  Minutes not previously read and approved, of all preceding meetings. 
(3)  Communications and recognition. 
(4)  Open session. 
(5)  Unfinished business. 
(6)  New business. 
(7)  Reports of the mayor. 
(8)  Reports of the city councilors. 
(9)  Reports of the city manager. 
(10)  Open session. 
(11)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.16; Ord. of 3-16-1998; Ord. of 1-16-2007; Ord. of 1-28-2008(01); Ord. No. 02-01202015, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-60. - Enacting clause of ordinances. 
    The enacting clause of ordinances shall be "Be it ordained by the Auburn City Council, that:...." 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.17) 
State Law reference- Ordinance authority of municipalities, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2801; procedure for enactment of ordinances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2802. 
Sec. 2-61. - Ordinances to be in writing; recording. 
    All ordinances shall be written out, without interlineations or erasure, before their passage. The city clerk, or someone under his direction, after their passage, shall cause them to be recorded in a book kept for that purpose, with proper margins and index, which book shall be preserved in the office of the city clerk and shall be subject to the inspection of any citizen. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.18) 
Sec. 2-62. - Applicability of Robert's Rules of Order. 
    In all cases where the parliamentary proceedings for council meetings are not determined in this article, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall be taken as authority to decide the course of proceedings. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.19) 
Sec. 2-63. - Suspension of rules. 
    The city council rules and order of business shall be observed in all cases unless suspended temporarily for a special purpose by a vote of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.20) 
Sec. 2-64. - Violation of rules. 
    If any member of the council, in speaking or otherwise, transgresses the rules of the city council, the presiding officer shall, or any member may, call him to order, in which case the member so called to order shall immediately sit down unless permitted by the mayor to explain, and the city council shall decide the question without debate. If the decision be in favor of the member so called to order, he shall be at liberty to proceed; if otherwise, he shall not proceed without leave of the council to proceed in order. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.21) 
Sec. 2-65. - Subject matter and decorum when addressing council. 
    Every member of the council, while speaking: 
(1)  Shall confine himself to the subject under debate; 
(2)  Shall refrain from personalities; and 
(3)  Shall not refer to any other member of the council except in a respectful manner. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.22) 
Sec. 2-66. - Recognition of members desiring to speak. 
    A councilmember about to speak shall respectfully address the chair, and shall not commence to speak until recognized by the presiding officer. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3.23) 
Secs. 2-67-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal officials generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2601 et seq.; appointment and term of officials, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2601; appointment of code enforcement officers, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2601-A; vacancy in municipal office, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2602; deputy officials, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2603; prohibited appointments, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2606; neglect of official duty, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2607. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-91-2-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2605. 

Sec. 2-109. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Financial involvement means any existing (or current efforts toward achieving) ownership or investment interest, contract right, significant customer relationship, or employment relationship of or with a public official or a person with whom the public official has a personal relationship. 
    Municipal board means the city council, the school committee, the planning board, the board of zoning appeals, the civil service commission and the board of assessment review. 
    Participation in a matter means action by a public official to vote, decide, deliberate, influence or direct others in regard to matters currently before or anticipated as coming before a municipal board, or which involve the operation of municipal government or the school system. 
    Personal relationship means any family, affectional or social relationship that is characterized by one or more of the following: 
(1)  Persons who are husband and wife, or parent and child. 
(2)  Persons who share a physical intimacy with each other. 
(3)  Persons who acknowledge an ongoing romantic relationship with each other. 
(4)  Persons who live together in the same residence. 
(5)  Persons who intermingle their financial assets without an accounting of separate ownership interests. 
    Public official means: 
(1)  Any person holding an elected or appointed position with a municipal board; 
(2)  The city manager; 
(3)  The assistant city manager; 
(4)  Directors of municipal and school system departments; 
(5)  The city purchasing agent/deputy finance director; 
(6)  The superintendent of schools; 
(7)  The assistant superintendent of schools; and 
(8)  School principals. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4.2) 
Sec. 2-110. - Policy; purpose and intent of division; adoption of additional standards. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the citizens, that public office not be used for personal gain, and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its municipal government. The purpose and intent of this division is to promote the objective of protecting the integrity of the government of the city against actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest without creating unnecessary barriers to public service. 
(b)  This division shall not prevent the city council, the school committee, the city manager or the superintendent of schools from adopting additional procedures and employment standards intended to prevent the exercise or appearance of improper influence or bias in the conduct of government business. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4.1) 
Sec. 2-111. - Ethics panel established; membership; powers and duties. 
(a)  Established; membership. There shall be established an ethics panel consisting of three regular voting members and two alternate members. Two regular voting members and one alternate member of the ethics panel shall be appointed by the mayor with approval of a majority of the members of the city council, and one regular voting member and one alternate member of the ethics panel shall be appointed by the chair of the school committee with approval of a majority of the members of the school committee. A regular voting member or alternate member of the ethics panel may not hold any other city or school department office or position or be a member of any board or commission to which the city council or school committee has appointing authority. 
(b)  Term of members; chair. The regular voting members of the ethics panel shall be appointed to staggered three-year terms. When the first appointments are made, one member shall be appointed by the mayor to a three-year term, one member shall be appointed by the chair of the school committee to a two-year term, and one member shall be appointed by the mayor to a one-year term. The mayor annually shall appoint one of the regular voting members to serve as chair of the ethics panel. Alternate members shall be appointed to three-year terms. 
(c)  Role of alternate members. Alternate members of the ethics panel may participate and vote in ethics panel proceedings if a regular voting member is incapable or unavailable to serve in regard to a particular referral or is disqualified from participation because of a conflict of interest. The alternate member designated shall be selected by the chair of the ethics panel. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The ethics panel shall have the authority to issue advisory opinions on questions relating to conflicts of interest and the incompatibility of employment positions. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4.3) 
Sec. 2-112. - Conflicts of interest generally. 
(a)  Standard of conduct. A public official shall refrain from participation in a matter when there exists an actual, potential or reasonably perceived conflict of interest arising from a personal relationship or a financial involvement that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the public official cannot act in his official capacity without self-interest or bias. 
(b)  Referral of matters to ethics panel. When a public official does not voluntarily refrain from participation in a matter and there is a question as to the existence of a conflict of interest under the standard set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the matter may be referred to the ethics panel for its advisory opinion as follows: 
(1)  A public official may refer to the ethics panel the question of whether he has an actual, potential or reasonably perceived conflict of interest; 
(2)  Two or more members of the city council, the school committee or other municipal board may refer to the ethics panel the question of whether another member of that body, or a public official who serves under the authority of that body, has an actual, potential or reasonably perceived conflict of interest; or 
(3)  A registered voter within the city may request an advisory opinion from the ethics panel regarding whether an elected or appointed public official who serves on a municipal board has an actual, potential or reasonably perceived conflict of interest. Such request shall be made on forms available from the city clerk and shall be endorsed by the signatures of 25 registered voters within the city. 
(c)  Ethics panel determination. The ethics panel shall determine whether the public official should refrain from participation in a matter because of the actual, potential or reasonably perceived existence of a conflict of interest arising from a personal relationship or a financial involvement that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the public official cannot act in his official capacity without self-interest or bias. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4.4) 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2605. 
Sec. 2-113. - Conduct relative to municipal contracts. 
    No municipal officer, employee or agent shall solicit or accept any gratuity or favor or anything of monetary value from any contractor or potential contractor with the city relative to the procurement of any supplies, equipment, construction or other services with municipal, state or federal grant funds. In addition to any other penalties which may be provided by law, any municipal officer, employee or agent who violates this section shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, including, in the case of an officer, removal from office; in the case of an employee, suspension or discharge from employment; and in the case of an agent, termination of such agency. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.1) 
Sec. 2-114. - Incompatible employment positions. 
(a)  Standard of conduct. 
(1)  Generally. A public official, other than the city manager or the superintendent of schools, who is a municipal or school department employee shall not hold a supervisory position, or be senior in the chain of command, to an individual with whom he has a personal relationship or a financial involvement (other than the municipal or school system employment relationship), unless: 
a.  The relationship is disclosed by the public official to the city manager or superintendent of schools, whoever is the appropriate senior administrative officer; 
b.  The city manager or superintendent of schools approves a management plan that is designed to prevent favoritism or any other improper influence in connection with the employment relationship and that provides ongoing oversight by a person not subordinate to either of the individuals who have the personal relationship or financial involvement; and 
c.  The city manager or superintendent of schools reports to the city council or the school committee, whichever is the appropriate legislative body, the existence of the potential incompatibility of employment positions and the establishment of a management plan to address the potential incompatibility. 
(2)  City manager and superintendent of schools. Neither the city manager nor the superintendent of schools shall hold a supervisory position, or be senior in the chain of command, to an individual with whom he has a personal relationship or financial involvement (other than the municipal or school system employment relationship), unless: 
a.  The relationship is disclosed to the city council or school committee, whichever is the appropriate legislative body, by the city manager or superintendent of schools; and 
b.  The legislative body establishes a management plan that is designed to prevent favoritism or any other improper influence in connection with the employment relationship and that provides ongoing oversight by a person not subordinate to the city manager or superintendent of schools. 
(b)  Referral of matters to ethics panel. The city manager, the superintendent of schools, or a majority of the members of the city council or the school committee may request an advisory opinion from the ethics panel relating to the incompatibility of employment positions and the formulation of a management plan. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4.5) 
Sec. 2-115. - Procedure for determinations by ethics panel. 
(a)  Referral of cases; notice of referral. 
(1)  A referral to the ethics panel shall be in writing and shall describe with particularity the factual basis of the referral. 
(2)  The ethics panel promptly shall give notice of the referral to the chair of the municipal board concerned and the public official whose personal relationship or financial involvement is the subject of the referral. 
(b)  Fact-finding. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a referral, the ethics panel shall determine the facts necessary to render an advisory opinion. The facts may be agreed upon and set forth in the referral. If additional fact-gathering is necessary, the ethics panel, or a person designated by it, may conduct informal interviews and solicit additional information. The ethics panel shall determine the facts through a formal hearing process only if so requested either by the public official who is the subject of a referral or by the public officials who submitted a referral. 
(2)  In regard to its gathering of facts relating to the existence and nature of a personal relationship, the ethics panel shall be limited to the voluntary statements and other information provided by the public official whose relationship is at issue. 
(c)  Deliberation. Upon conclusion of its fact-finding, the ethics panel shall deliberate over the question referred to the panel. Any person may submit written comments to the ethics panel setting forth his position regarding the question under consideration. 
(d)  Issuance of advisory opinion. Upon conclusion of fact-finding and deliberation, the ethics panel shall issue a written advisory opinion that includes findings of fact, application of the standards set forth in this division, and recommendations. The ethics panel shall furnish a copy of its advisory opinion to the chair of the municipal board concerned and the public official whose personal relationship or financial involvement is the subject of the opinion. 
(e)  Time limits. The ethics panel shall attempt to issue its advisory opinion within two weeks of its receipt of a referral. The ethics panel may decline to consider referrals regarding conflict of interest questions relating to the final vote of a municipal board that occurred prior to the referral. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4.6) 
Sec. 2-116. - Effect of recommendations of ethics panel. 
    The opinion and recommendations of the ethics panel shall be advisory only. The members of a municipal board may vote to adopt the recommendation of the ethics panel as it relates to the participation in a matter by a public official. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4.7) 
Secs. 2-117-2-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY MANAGER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- City manager plan of municipal government, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2631 et seq.; qualifications of city manager, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2632; term, compensation, removal and suspension of city managers, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2633; absence or disability of city manager, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2634; board of selectmen to act as body and administrative service to be performed through city manager, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2635; powers and duties of city manager, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2636. 

Sec. 2-146. - Powers. 
    The city manager shall exercise administrative control over all administrative officers, agencies and departments of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1.1) 
Sec. 2-147. - Duties. 
    The city manager shall perform or cause to be performed all duties that by law may be required of him, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Furnish technical advice to the city council. 
(2)  Prepare and publish an annual report of the activities of the various departments, including receipts and expenditures. 
(3)  Request special city council meetings when he believes the meetings are necessary. 
(4)  Establish such rules, as he is permitted to by the Charter and city ordinances, that may be necessary for the proper operation of the administrative service of the city government. 
(5)  Make annually a report to the council of the operation and cost of the city government during the past fiscal year and present a proposed budget for the next fiscal year to the council. 
(6)  Appoint or fire, remove or discharge all officers and employees of the city not otherwise provided for by the Charter. 
(7)  Establish terms and conditions of employment in accordance with the Charter and ordinances. 
(8)  Sign on behalf of the city, without further authorization, deeds to tax-acquired property in all cases in which the city is reconveying the property to the delinquent taxpayer in consideration for payment of outstanding obligations to the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1.2) 
Sec. 2-148. - Administrative manual. 
(a)  Generally. The manager is hereby authorized to issue such administrative regulations, consistent with the Charter and city ordinances, as he deems necessary to provide for the adequate functioning of all departments. All regulations so issued shall comprise the administrative manual, which shall be distributed to all members of the city council, the mayor, all department heads and administrative officers, and such others as the manager may determine to be necessary or desirable, and shall be available in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
(b)  Amendments. Once the administrative manual has been published, the manager shall not thereafter amend the manual without first notifying employees of the changes and of their right to request a public hearing. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.1) 
Secs. 2-149-2-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY CLERK[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal clerks generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2651 et seq.; municipal clerk bond, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2651; clerk's fee schedule, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2652; clerk's expenses, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2653; assistant clerks, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2654; prohibition of commingling funds, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2655. 

Sec. 2-180. - Duties. 
    The city clerk shall perform all duties prescribed by ordinance, the Charter and state statute, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Serve as clerk of the city council and perform such other duties for the city council as it may require, and transmit to the city council all papers requiring its consideration. The clerk shall certify and be responsible for the filing, indexing and safekeeping of all tapes, minutes and related documents the city council has acted upon. 
(2)  Perform all duties in regard to elections required by the Charter and 21-A M.R.S.A. § 1 et seq., and secure and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in connection with elections. 
(3)  Publish legal notices as required by city ordinance, the Charter and/or state statutes. 
(4)  Be responsible for the issuance of commercial licenses for the city as prescribed in city ordinances and state statutes. 
(5)  Be responsible for indexing and maintaining all vital statistic records relating to births, marriages and deaths. 
(6)  Be the custodian of the official city seal. 
(Code 1967, § 17-1.1; Ord. No. 01-01172012, 2-6-2012) 
Secs. 2-181-2-198. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TREASURER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal treasurer generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5601 et seq.; treasurer's bond, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5601; powers and duties of treasurer, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5603; payments from municipal treasury, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5604. 

Sec. 2-199. - Duties of treasurer. 
    The treasurer shall: 
(1)  Perform all duties required of him by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5603, and any additional duties required of him by the city manager. 
(2)  Cause all books, deeds, papers, vouchers and documents in his care, belonging to the city, to be deposited and kept in a fireproof safe or vault therefor provided. 
(3)  Deliver over to his successor all papers, books, documents and property belonging to the city. 
(Code 1967, § 19-1.2) 
Secs. 2-200-2-221. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TAX COLLECTOR 

Sec. 2-222. - Appointment of tax collector. 
    The tax collector shall be appointed by the city manager with the confirmation of city council as provided by the Charter. 
(Code 1967, § 8-1.1) 
Sec. 2-223. - Duties of tax collector. 
    The tax collector shall perform all duties required of him by law, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Keep such records as may be required of him by the city council and the city manager, including a cash book showing receipts. 
(2)  Keep all necessary records of money passing through his department according to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(3)  Furnish a statement, in a timely manner, of all collections and receipts to the finance director. 
(4)  Issue bills to the persons assessed a tax immediately upon receiving the warrants from the assessors of taxes. 
(5)  Charge interest on all delinquent taxes at the rate set and in accordance with the terms established by the city council in the annual tax commitment order. 
(Code 1967, § 8-1.2) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of tax collectors, 36 M.R.S.A. § 751 et seq. 
Secs. 2-224-2-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - TAX ASSESSOR[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of municipal tax assessors, 36 M.R.S.A. § 701 et seq. 

Sec. 2-255. - Appointment; term. 
    The tax assessor shall be appointed by the city council on the recommendation of the city manager. The tax assessor shall be appointed for a two-year term. 
(Code 1967, §§ 5-1.1, 5-1.2) 
Sec. 2-256. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The tax assessor shall be the administrative head of the assessing operations in the finance department and shall, with the approval of the city manager, have power to appoint such assistants as he may require and as shall from time to time be authorized by the city council. The tax assessor will be a direct report to the finance director. 
(b)  The tax assessor shall have those powers and perform those duties established by state statute for assessors and boards of assessors. 
(Code 1967, § 5-1.3; Ord. No. 08-02022015, 2-17-2015) 
Secs. 2-257-2-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - HEALTH OFFICER[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Local health officers, 22 M.R.S.A. § 451 et seq. 

Sec. 2-276. - Duties. 
    The health officer shall enforce all state statutes, city ordinances, and rules and regulations of the state department of agriculture, food and rural resources and the state division of health and welfare which pertain to health and sanitation, specifically including the rules relating to catering establishments, preparing foods for vending machines, dispensing foods other than in original sealed packages, eating and lodging places and lodging places, and shall perform any other duties assigned to the health officer by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 12-1.2) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of local health officers, 22 M.R.S.A. § 454-A. 
Sec. 2-277. - Sanitarian. 
(a)  The city manager, upon recommendation of the health officer, may appoint one or more certified sanitarians. 
(b)  The sanitarian shall perform all duties required of milk and dairy inspectors and any other duties required of him by ordinance or by the health officer. 
(Code 1967, § 12-1.4) 
State Law reference- Qualifications of municipal sanitarians, 22 M.R.S.A. § 2499. 
Secs. 2-278-2-302. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide for municipal functions other than other than offices and departments required by statute, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2003. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-303. - Established. 
    The city has such departments as are established from time to time by the city council or by the city manager, with advice and consent of the city council. A list of current city departments is available on the city's official website. 
Sec. 2-304. - Department heads generally. 
    Each department head shall be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, each such department head shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit annual reports of the activities of their respective department to the city manager; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city manager; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the city manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
Sec. 2-305. - Intradepartmental cooperation. 
    Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
Sec. 2-306. - Record preservation. 
    Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation of all public records under his jurisdiction and shall provide a system of filing and indexing the records. No public records, reports, correspondence or other data relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed or removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval of the manager and council. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.10) 
Sec. 2-307. - Reports by department and agency heads. 
    All department, agency and office heads shall make an annual report and such other reports as may be required by the city council or the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.12) 
Secs. 2-308-2-332. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-333. - Composition. 
    The public works department shall be composed of the following divisions: 
(1)  Engineering. 
(2)  Highway. 
(3)  Solid waste. 
(4)  Fleet management. 
(5)  Traffic. 
Sec. 2-334. - Public works director. 
(a)  Appointment. The head of the public works department shall be the public works director, who shall be appointed by the city manager as provided by the Charter. 
(b)  Duties. He shall perform all the duties required of him by law, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Perform all duties given him by the city manager. 
(2)  Supervise and direct the employees of the public works department and recommend to the city manager the hiring and discharging of the employees thereof. 
(3)  Keep all streets in the city safe and convenient for travelers. 
(4)  Make himself acquainted with the lines and bounds of streets and place monuments thereon when necessary. 
(5)  Superintend the construction, repairing and maintaining of all streets and roads. 
(6)  Remove obstructions from the streets and give notice to the city manager or proper city official of all nuisances, obstructions or encroachments which he is unable to correct. 
(7)  Direct and be responsible for the proper care of all city-owned equipment in the division or under his care and supervision. 
(8)  Supervise the collection of waste and recyclables that are collected by the city. 
(Code 1967, §§ 13-1.1, 13-1.2) 
Sec. 2-335. - Duties of city engineer. 
    The city engineer shall perform all duties as prescribed by law, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Perform any duties assigned him by the public works director or city manager. 
(2)  Act as consultant on public improvements, where the advice of a civil engineer would be of service. 
(3)  Have charge and control, under the direction of the public works director, of all street right-of-way plans and of all construction plans other than those submitted to the building inspector with applications for building permits. 
(4)  Keep all plans under his charge properly classified and indexed. 
(5)  Have charge of all plans of the streets that belong to the city. 
(6)  Make, or supervise the making of, all surveys, measurements, levels, plans and profiles of the streets and other engineering services required by public works director or the city manager. 
(7)  Act as engineer for any department requiring the services of a civil engineer except as may be otherwise specified by the public works director or city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 10-1.2) 
State Law reference- Engineers generally, 32 M.R.S.A. § 1251 et seq.; qualifications of municipal engineers with regard to public works, 32 M.R.S.A. § 1254. 
Secs. 2-336-2-358. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finances generally, 30- A M.R.S.A. § 5651 et seq.; municipal accounts and audits, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5821 et seq. 

Sec. 2-359. - Established. 
    The finance department responsibilities shall consist of accounting, assessing, collections and purchasing. 
(Code 1967, § 6-1.1; Ord. No. 09-02022015, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 2-360. - Appointment of officers; supervision of department. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint the finance director/auditor, tax collector and treasurer as provided by the Charter. 
(b)  The auditor shall also be known as the finance director and will be the administrator of the finance department. 
(Code 1967, § 6-1.2) 
State Law reference- Municipal accounts and audits, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5821 et seq. 
Sec. 2-361. - Duties. 
    The finance department shall be responsible for all fiscal administration, related municipal records and reports, and purchasing functions as provided for by state law and by the Charter. 
(Code 1967, § 6-1.3) 
Secs. 2-362-2-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-381. - Established. 
    The city has such boards, commissions, committees, agencies, and other subunits of its governing authority as are established from time to time by the city Charter or the city council. The school committee is established in the city Charter, and information regarding other city boards, commissions, committees, agencies, and similar bodies is available in this article and on the city's official website. 
Sec. 2-382. - Salaries of school committee members. 
    Elected school committee members shall receive a salary at the rate of $25.00 per meeting for up to 26 meetings per year. The mayor or his designee is a full member of the school committee and, therefore, entitled to compensation in the same manner as all other school committee members. 
(Ord. 04-04162013, § 2-382, 5-6-2013) 
Secs. 2-383-2-429. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Board of assessment review, 36 M.R.S.A. § 471-A. 

Sec. 2-430. - Membership; compensation of members. 
    A board of assessment review shall be appointed by the city council, consisting of five members, to serve without compensation. The city council shall also appoint three alternate members. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2.1) 
Sec. 2-431. - Term of members. 
    The initial terms of office of the members of the board of assessment review shall be staggered terms. The city council shall annually appoint one member to serve on the board for a five-year term. The initial terms of the alternate members of the board shall be staggered. Their successors shall be appointed for five-year terms. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2.2) 
Sec. 2-432. - Appeals procedure. 
    When written application is made by a taxpayer for a review of a refusal by the tax assessor to grant a request for an abatement, the board of assessment review shall, within 14 days of the receipt of such request, set a date for hearing, of which the applicant shall receive at least seven days' written notice. In its conduct of the hearing the board shall act as an impartial panel to receive evidence from the appellant and the assessor, advocating for neither party in rendering a decision. The board shall conform that decision to all applicable statutes. At such hearing, the applicant shall have the right to be heard in person, to present witnesses, to examine the tax assessor and any witnesses presented by him, and to be represented by counsel. Upon the evidence presented, the board shall determine whether or not the applicant was over-assessed and may grant such reasonable abatement of his assessment as it determines to be proper. The board shall give notice to the applicant of its decision and of the reasons therefor at the hearing or within a reasonable time thereafter. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2.3) 
Sec. 2-433. - Quorum. 
    The board of assessment review shall take no official action unless at least three members are present; provided, however, that a lesser number may adjourn the proceedings to a later time. When a regular member of the board is unable to participate in an appeal, the chair shall designate one of the alternate members to replace him. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2.4) 
Sec. 2-434. - Rules and regulations for conduct of hearings. 
    The board of assessment review may establish such rules and regulations governing the conduct of hearings before it as it may deem necessary consistent with this Code and with state law. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2.5) 
Sec. 2-435. - Legal counsel. 
    The board of assessment review may have legal counsel present during any appeal hearing to advise on points of law and to assist the board in drafting its final decision. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2.6) 
Secs. 2-436-2-453. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-454. - Established; membership. 
(a)  There shall be a parks and recreation advisory board, which shall be composed of eight members. All except the ex officio member of the board shall be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Serving as the ex officio member shall be the director of parks and recreation, who shall also serve as secretary to the board. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall preclude the creation of standing subcommittees. 
(Code 1967, § 18-3.1; Ord. No. 05-07162018, 8-6-2018) 
Sec. 2-455. - Term of members. 
    All appointed members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall serve staggered two-year terms from the date of their appointment and thereafter until their successors are appointed beginning with the effective date of this Code. Members of the board may be appointed to succeed themselves. 
(Code 1967, § 18-3.3) 
Sec. 2-456. - Officers; rules of procedure; vacancies. 
    The parks and recreation advisory board shall elect a chair, a vice-chair and such other officers as it may require. The board shall develop such rules to govern its meetings and operations as it deems advisable. Upon the death, incapacity or removal from the city of any member, or if any member shall be absent without excuse for three consecutive meetings, the secretary of the board shall advise the city council that a vacancy exists and request the appointment of a replacement. 
(Code 1967, § 18-3.4) 
Sec. 2-457. - Duties. 
    The purpose of the parks and recreation advisory board shall be: 
(1)  The review of existing programs of the parks and recreation department and the planning of revised, supplementary or new programs to meet the present and future needs of the city. 
(2)  The coordination of existing programs and facilities of the recreation department with those of volunteer and charitable organizations and those of other governmental units. 
(3)  Developing recommendations for more efficient use of present facilities and personnel. 
(4)  Improving communication regarding the recreational needs of the city between the people and the recreation department, the city council, and other city departments. 
(5)  The investigation of federal, state and private programs for financial assistance and the development of recommendations regarding participation in such programs by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 18-3.2) 
Secs. 2-458-2-465. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLANNING BOARD 

Sec. 2-466. - Membership: appointment, removal, terms, vacancies. 
(a)  There shall be a planning board of seven regular and two associate members. Members of the planning board shall be residents of the city and shall not be officers or employees of the city. Persons appointed by the city council to serve on other boards, agencies, panels, and or commissions shall not serve concurrently on the planning board. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  Regular members of the planning board shall be appointed by the city council for terms of three years. Such terms shall be staggered so that the term of not more than three members shall expire in any calendar year. Incumbent members of the planning board shall serve for the balance of their terms and thereafter until their successors are appointed. 
(c)  The city council shall appoint two associate members for a term of three years each. Such terms shall be staggered so that the terms of not more than one associate member, expires in any calendar year. Associate members may participate in deliberations of the planning board but shall not vote unless temporarily acting on behalf of a regular member who is absent or has been recused. 
(d)  Permanent vacancies on the planning board shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of the former member. 
(e)  Any member of the planning board may be removed for cause by the city council at any time; provided, however, that before removal such members shall be given an opportunity to be heard in his own defense at a public hearing before the city council. 
(f)  The planning board may appoint a high school student advisory representative who is a high s chool student residing in Auburn for a one year term. The student advisory representative may participate in deliberations of the planning board but shall not be entitled to vote. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-467. - Chairperson and vice-chairperson. 
    The members of the planning board shall annually elect one of the board members as chairperson to preside at all meetings and hearings, and another of their number as vice-chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall act as chairperson and shall have all the powers of the chairperson. If no chairperson or vice-chairperson is present or able to preside over an agenda item, the attending members may elect an acting chairperson. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-468. - Staff secretary: minutes, public records. 
(a)  The director of planning and development shall designate a member of their staff who shall serve as staff secretary of the planning board and attend all of its proceedings. 
(b)  The staff secretary shall provide for the keeping of minutes of the proceedings of the planning board, noting the vote of each member on every question, or the member's absence or failure to vote, and shall maintain the permanent records and decisions of all planning board meetings, hearings, and proceedings and all correspondence of the planning board. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-469. - Quorum and necessary vote. 
(a)  As to any matter requiring a public hearing, no business shall be transacted by the planning board without a quorum, consisting of four members, being present. The concurring vote of at least four members shall be necessary to authorize any action by the board. 
(b)  If less than a quorum is present, the hearing shall be rescheduled. The staff secretary shall notify in writing all members of the date of the reschedule hearing and shall notify such other interested parties as may be directed in the vote to reschedule. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-470. - Meetings, hearings and procedures. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the planning board shall be held at the call of the chairperson or as provided by rule of the board. Special meetings may be called by any four members of the planning board, or at the request of the city council. Testimony at any hearing may be required by the planning board to be given under oath. 
(b)  The planning board shall adopt its own rules for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with this chapter and with state law. Such rules shall be filed with the staff secretary of the planning board and with the city clerk. Any rule so adopted that relates solely to the conduct of hearings, and that is not required by the city council, this chapter or state law, may be waived by the chairperson upon good cause being shown. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-471. - Workshop or informational meetings. 
    Informal meetings or workshops of the planning board or any of its committees may be held at the call of any of its members or the director of planning and development, as the case may be, for the presentation of information. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-472. - Record and decisions. 
(a)  The minutes of the staff secretary, and any transcript of the proceedings, and all exhibits, papers, applications and requests filed in any proceeding before the planning board and the decision of the board shall constitute the record. 
(b)  Every final decision of the planning board and every recommendation of the planning board to the city council shall include written findings of fact, and shall specify the reason or reasons for such decision or recommendation. 
(c)  The staff secretary shall mail notice of any decision of the board to the applicant or any designated interested parties within five business days of such decision. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-473. - Conflicts. 
    No member of the planning board shall participate in the hearing or disposition of any matter in which he or she has an interest. Any question of whether a member has a conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify the member shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present, except the member whose possible conflict is being examined. Where such vote results in a tie, the subject member shall be disqualified. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-474. - Appeals. 
    An appeal from any final decision of the planning board as to any matter over which it has final authority may be taken by any party or by any authorized officer or agent of the city to the superior court. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-475. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
    In addition to the jurisdiction conferred on it by other provisions of state law and the ordinances of the city and in accordance therewith, the planning board shall have the following jurisdiction and authority: 
(1)  To prepare and recommend to the city council a comprehensive plan. 
(2)  To prepare and recommend to the city council changes in and amendments to the comprehensive plan as necessary. 
(3)  To aid and assist the city council and departments and agencies of the city in implementing general plans and in planning, developing and completing specific planning related projects. 
(4)  To hear, review, and approve or deny applications for subdivision approval as provided in this Code. 
(5)  To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the city council on applications for zoning changes and amendments to, or revisions of, the city's zoning regulations, and to initiate recommendations for zoning changes and amendments to or revisions of the city's zoning regulations as necessary. 
(6)  To review and offer its recommendations to the city council on public planning related projects. 
(7)  To offer its recommendations to the city council with regard to the compatibility of the city manager's proposed capital improvements program with the comprehensive plan. 
(8)  To make such investigations and compile maps and reports, and recommendations in connection therewith, relating to the planning and development of the city as it deems desirable. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 2-476. - Committees. 
    The chairperson of the planning board may from time to time assign the members of the board to such regular and special committees as may be established by the board. Such committees shall have no final authority but shall assist the board in the conduct of its business by making recommendations to it concerning such specific items as may be assigned to them for study and report. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1979; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. A, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 01-01202015, att., 2-9-2015) 
DIVISION 5. - CONSERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-477. - Commission established. 
    A conservation commission is hereby established pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3261-3263 to consist of seven members appointed by the city council, all of whom shall be residents of the city. The terms of office shall be three years except that initial appointments after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this division derives shall be such that the terms of no more than three members shall expire in any single year. For that purpose, the city council shall initially appoint three members for terms of one year, two members for terms of two years, and two members for terms of three years, such that the terms of approximately one-third of the members shall expire each year. There shall be one ex-officio member of the board consisting of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 07-02022015, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 2-478. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the conservation commission shall be to serve as a research, advisory and advocacy group on environmental and conservation issues relating to the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-02022015, § 2, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 2-479. - Qualifications. 
    All members of the commission shall be selected upon the basis of their knowledge of or interest in conservation, environmental science or related fields. 
(Ord. No. 07-02022015, § 3, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 2-480. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission: 
(1)  Shall keep records of its meetings and activities and make an annual report to the city council; 
(2)  Shall conduct research, in conjunction with the planning board, into local land areas, which shall be initiated by majority votes of both the commission and the planning board; 
(3)  Shall seek to coordinate the activities of conservation bodies organized for similar purposes; 
(4)  Shall keep an index of all open areas within the city, whether publicly or privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, for the purpose of obtaining information relating to the proper protection, development or use of those open areas. The commission may recommend to the city council or to any board of the city or to any body politic or public agency of the state a program for the better protection, development or use of such open areas, which may include the acquisition of conservation easements; 
(5)  May advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which it considers necessary, if municipal appropriations provide financial resources to do so; 
(6)  Shall assist staff in the preparation of park and trail plans, the identification of new sites to be added to the park system, recommendations on designation of open space areas, and grant assistance; 
(7)  Shall coordinate applications for grants from the federal or state governments, or private sources, to improve conservation assets for the city including parks, trail and the community forest. 
(8)  Shall undertake any other conservation or environmental activity referred to it by the city council. 
(9)  May recommend to the city council the acceptance of gifts in the municipality's name for any of the commission's purposes. 
(10)  Shall develop a plan for and provide advice to city staff and agencies regarding the management of the community forest including the anticipated impact of proposed development; 
(11)  Shall raise community awareness regarding the importance of the community forest; 
(12)  May raise funds to establish a community forest trust fund; 
(13)  Shall adopt by-laws to govern the internal affairs of the commission; and 
(14)  May perform such other functions as are permitted by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-02022015, § 4, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 2-481. - Officers, meetings and records. 
(a)  The members shall elect from their membership a chairperson, treasurer, a vice-chairperson and a secretary. Officers shall serve two-year terms. 
(b)  All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public, and notice, if required by law, should be provided to the public about such meetings. 
(c)  Minutes shall be kept of all meetings. 
(Ord. No. 07-02022015, § 5, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 2-482. - Committees. 
(a)  Establishment: The chairperson may appoint special committees for purposes and terms approved by the conservation commission. 
(b)  Lewiston-Auburn Community Forest Board: The Lewiston-Auburn Community Forest Board will be a standing subcommittee of the Auburn Conservation Commission. The purpose of the community forest board is to plan for and provide advice to city staff and the conservation commission regarding the management of the community forest. The conservation commission shall designate two members to serve on the Lewiston-Auburn Community Forest Board. The Lewiston-Auburn Community Forest Board shall develop and implement a community forest program that enhances, preserves, protects, and maintains the community forest. Primary activities are to: 
(1)  Advocate for the community forest; 
(2)  Develop a plan for and provide advice on the management of the public sector portion of the community forest; 
(3)  Educate the communities about the community forest and how to care for it; 
(4)  Raise funds, including grants, and establish a community forest trust; 
(5)  Develop and advise on policy changes for approval by the city councils; 
(6)  Advise and consult on community forest issues and projects; 
(7)  Communicate and coordinate with city staff, planning boards, and other community programs to avoid duplications of efforts and to combine resources to meet goals. 
(Ord. No. 07-02022015, § 6, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 2-482.1. - Limits of authority. 
    Nothing contained within this section shall supersede the provisions of the Charter or contrary provisions of the Code. No powers and duties which may be exercised by conservation commissions under state statute which are not explicitly provided in this article may be exercised by the commission created herein. 
(Ord. No. 07-02022015, § 7, 2-17-2015) 
DIVISION 6. - COMPLETE STREETS COMMITTEE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference- Complete streets policy, § 46-3. 

Sec. 2-482.2. - Purpose and mission. 
    The purpose of the complete streets committee is to: 
(a)  Promote and advise the development of public infrastructure which supports a multi-modal transportation system for all users, not strictly motor vehicles, and includes the best design practices for enhancing safety as well as community and economic development; 
(b)  Develop and recommend policies to the respective governing bodies and planning agencies that address and support all modes of transportation in Lewiston and Auburn; 
(c)  Advise the respective public works and engineering departments on how all modes of travel can be accommodated in street, highway, trail, and open space projects. 
(Ord. No. 02-03062017, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-482.3. - Appointment and membership. 
(a)  The committee shall consist of nine members as follows: four residents of the City of Auburn, four residents of the City of Lewiston, and one representative of an organization directly involved in issues of public health and wellness. A city councilor may be appointed as a resident. 
(b)  The residents of each community shall be appointed in accordance with the standard procedures employed by each community for such appointments. The representative of an organization directly involved in issues of public health shall be appointed by majority vote of the members of the full committee. 
(c)  The initial term for resident members shall be three years, as shall the term of the representative of a public health organization. These terms shall run from the first day of January of the year in which the appointment is made. At the time the initial appointments are made, the appointing authority shall assign each resident member to a term with one member appointed to a one year term; one to a two-year term; and one to a three-year term. Members shall remain in office until their successors are appointed. 
(d)  Vacancies shall be filled following the same process employed for the initial appointment of members. 
(e)  A vacancy shall be declared if any member of the committee fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the committee without being excused by the committee chair. 
(Ord. No. 02-03062017, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-482.4. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The complete streets committee shall: 
(a)  Follow the city's complete streets policy, oversee its implementation, and review the policy every two years to recommend changes as appropriate; 
(b)  Serve as the primary resource representing Lewiston and Auburn in the update of Regional and Statewide plans dealing with transportation issues involving motorized vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, public transportation, and other non-automobile related transportation issues; 
(c)  Develop and recommend policies and ordinances for passage by the city councils in support of alternative modes of transportation; 
(d)  Review and comment on existing transportation projects including regionally approved projects, municipally initiated projects, and improvements originating from traffic movement permits associated with development projects; and 
(e)  Participate with appropriate city and state departments, committees, and metropolitan planning organizations in planning coordinated multi-modal transportation systems in L-A and the surrounding region, such as rail, bus, and air. 
(Ord. No. 02-03062017, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-482.5. - Organization. 
(a)  The committee shall have the following officers: chair, vice-chair, and secretary, each of whom shall be selected by a majority of the members of the committee at its first meeting in January of each year. The chair shall preside over all meetings of the board, shall supervise the affairs of the board, and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to the office by the committee. The vice-chair shall assist the chair in carrying out the latter's duties and shall preside at meetings in the chair's absence. The secretary shall be responsible for preparing and distributing committee agendas and minutes and ensuring that the legal posting requirements are met. 
(b)  A quorum necessary to conduct an official meeting shall consist of at least six members and at least six concurring votes shall be necessary to constitute an action on any matter. 
(c)  The committee shall meet at least quarterly and may meet more frequently at the call of the chair. 
(d)  Unless otherwise prescribed by this division or by bylaws established by the committee, the committee shall operate in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Ord. No. 02-03062017, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 2-482.6. - Staff support. 
    The city manager/administrator of each community shall designate a planning or public works staff member to serve as a liaison to the committee. 
(Ord. No. 02-03062017, 3-20-2017) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal financial reports required, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2801; municipal finances generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5651 et seq.; determination of municipal year, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5651; municipal debt generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5701; municipal expenditures, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5721 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-483. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 in each year. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.18) 
State Law reference- Determination of municipal year, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5651. 
Sec. 2-484. - Claims or demands against city. 
    Every city officer having knowledge of any fact concerning any claim or suit for or against the city shall report such fact forthwith to the city manager. It shall be the duty of every employee of the city to report at once to his superior any fact which may come to his notice concerning any accident for which the city may be liable. No member of the city council shall act as attorney, agent or representative of any person in making or prosecuting before the city council or the city department, office or agency any claim or demand against the city. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.17) 
State Law reference- Procedure regarding claims against municipalities, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 6111. 
Sec. 2-485. - Council action on budget increase. 
(a)  Budget tax commitment cap. Beginning with the fiscal year 2016 budget, the city council will not approve any increase in the tax commitment, City and School combined which exceeds the consumer price index (urban) as compiled for the 12-month period ending as of December 31 prior the start of the succeeding fiscal year. 
(b)  Exception. When deemed necessary by the city council, this provision may be waived by a super majority vote of the city council with five affirmative council votes. 
(c)  Appropriation resolve. The tax due date and the interest rate on delinquent taxes will be included in the appropriation resolve. 
(Ord. of 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 10-12012014, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 2-486. - Institutional cooperation with City of Lewiston. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of the city to cooperate with the City of Lewiston in planning and executing programs of joint action whenever such cooperation will reduce costs or improve service to the citizens of Lewiston and the city. 
(b)  Duties of city manager; joint capital expenditure plan. The city manager shall meet three times a year with the Lewiston City Manager to review existing cooperation and develop proposals for new areas of cooperation between the two cities. In addition, the city manager shall be responsible, in cooperation with the Lewiston City Manager, to prepare and submit a five-year joint capital expenditure plan for the two cities to the city councils by March 1 of each year. The joint capital expenditure plan shall include all public improvements and leases the city manager and city manager deem significant enough in value to merit inclusion in the plan. Specific areas that would result in cost savings or greater efficiencies through cooperation will be highlighted. 
(c)  Joint standing committee. There shall be a joint standing committee consisting of four city councilors, two each from the city council and the Lewiston City Council, appointed by the respective mayors. The committee shall meet three times a year or more as determined by the mayors or the city managers. 
(d)  Joint city council meetings. The city council and Lewiston City Council may meet in joint session three times a year to consider recommendations brought forward by the city managers and/or the joint standing committee regarding cooperation between the cities and, in the first quarter of each year, to act upon the recommendations with respect to the joint capital expenditure plan. The mayors of the two cities shall alternate as chair of these meetings. 
(Code 1967, §§ 1-5.1-1-5.4) 
Sec. 2-487. - Bond authorization. 
    All bond authorization orders shall include a date on which the authorization is automatically cancelled if the bonds have not been issued. 
(Ord. No. 11-04062015, 4-21-2015 
Secs. 2-488-2-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Public improvements generally, 5 M.R.S.A. § 1741 et seq.; municipal capital improvement and capital equipment accounts, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5801. 

Sec. 2-511. - Preparation. 
    The city manager shall, each year, after consultation with the various department heads, prepare a five-year capital improvements program, including capital improvements proposed for the school department by the superintendent of schools. No less than 30 days prior to the submission by the city manager of the annual city budget, he shall refer the proposed capital improvements program to the planning board for its review to ensure compatibility with the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2.1) 
Sec. 2-512. - Contents. 
    The capital improvements program shall include: 
(1)  A clear summary of its contents. 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the next five fiscal years, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity of each such proposed project. 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedule for each such proposed project. 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of maintaining existing facilities and infrastructure. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2.2) 
Sec. 2-513. - Updating. 
    The information required regarding each such capital project shall be revised and updated each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of being constructed or required. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2.3) 
Sec. 2-514. - Public notice and hearing. 
    The council shall publish its capital improvements program on its website and make it available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2.4; Ord. No. 01-02032014, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 2-515. - Council action. 
    The city council shall by resolution adopt the capital improvements program with or without an amendment after a public hearing on, or before, the date at which the annual city budget is adopted. At the time that the capital improvements program is adopted, the city council shall identify the sources of funding for all capital projects and infrastructure repairs. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2.5) 
Secs. 2-516-2-538. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-539. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Types of "covered accounts" the city has are vehicle, boat and snowmobile registrations, real estate and personal property taxes, commercial licenses, marriage licenses, birth and death certificates (vital records), general billing and vouchers, voter registration records and loans for purchase of real estate and home improvements. 
    Creditor means any person or entity who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and utility companies and telecommunications companies. For the purposes of this article, the city is a creditor. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Department head means any department head who works at the discretion of the city council or the city council, any elected official, and any individual appointed to manage a department on a permanent or temporary basis. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using the identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to the city by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 USC 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the city of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the city provided to request the consumer report and the address in the agency's file for the consumer. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, and bank account information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, drivers' license information and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-540. - Purpose; alternate designation article. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of this article is also to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  This article may be referred to as the city's identity theft prevention program or ITPP. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-541. - Findings. 
    The city council has found the following: 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, solid waste, and stormwater. 
(2)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and making payments for property taxes and other services have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(3)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. 
(4)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account; and 
d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-542. - Covered account-Process of establishing. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account with the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer in the form of a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account with written confirmation of being the authorized agent for the entity. The applicant shall also provide any other information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created. The information shall be entered directly into the city's records system and held in a secure storage area with access limited to those city personnel with the need to know. 
(b)  For each customer account for which the city may now or hereafter provide individual customer access to the customer's account information, such account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-543. - Same-Password required for access to information. 
    Access to any customer account that includes personal identifying information shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. Passwords shall be changed by the head of the department providing the service for which the covered account is created, or by such other city employee authorized to carry out the provisions of this article, on a regular basis. The password shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-544. - Report of unauthorized access. 
    Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the appropriate department head and the password changed immediately. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-545. - Customer information confidential; report of requests for access. 
    Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand that specifically asks for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the applicable department head or other person authorized by the city council to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-546. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-547. - Sources and types of red flags. 
    All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts. Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report, or a notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
c.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as a recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries, an unusual number of recently established credit relationships, a material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships, or an account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor, such as instances in which the address does not match any address in the consumer report or the social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the social security administration's death master file. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns as in instances where the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account, such as instances where there is nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments or a material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice. Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-548. - Procedure regarding existing covered accounts. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. 
(b)  If, in his discretion, the employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, the employee shall immediately report such red flags to his department head. 
(c)  If, in his discretion, the employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to his department head, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. 
(d)  If the department head in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the department head: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  If, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account, change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account or close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer for the covered account in question and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action as determined by the department head to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-549. - Procedure regarding new covered accounts. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, the employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. 
(b)  If, in his discretion, the employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, the employee shall immediately report such red flags to his department head. 
(c)  If, in his discretion, the employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to his department head, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. 
(d)  If the department head in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the department head: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action as determined by the department head to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-550. - Updating the program. 
    The city manager shall annually review this article and, if deemed necessary, make changes with regard to any needed amendments, including amendments of the designation of red flags, in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; (2) Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-551. - Program administration. 
(a)  The city manager is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation, including, but not limited to reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with making material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city council, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. 
(b)  Department heads shall report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The department head reports will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(1)  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(2)  Service provider arrangements; 
(3)  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
(4)  Recommendations for material amendments of this article. 
(c)  The city's department heads are responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-552. - Outside service providers. 
    In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the applicable department head shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with the policies and procedures in this article, as agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-553. - Annual report to city council. 
    An annual report will be submitted to the city council on such annual date as is established by the city council. The report will include a summary of department head reports and recommendations for any amendment to this chapter. The annual report will be prepared by the clerk or such other person as may be designated by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-554. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
    In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the city service or account sought by the consumer shall verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer or compare the information in the consumer report with: 
(1)  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 USC 5318(l); 
(2)  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
(3)  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-555. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-556. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
    The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through verifying the address with the consumer, reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address, verifying the address through third-party sources, or using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Secs. 2-557-2-574. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-575. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Property means property as determined by the city's fixed assets policy. 
Sec. 2-576. - Property lists. 
(a)  Each city official responsible for city property shall annually provide to the finance director a complete list of property for which he is responsible. 
(b)  When any official terminates his duties, he shall check his property list with his successor in office or with the city manager and obtain a release from property liability prior to receiving his final salary payment due. 
(c)  Each official shall promptly reimburse the city for the fair and reasonable value of any property for which he is responsible and for which he is unable to account if such loss is due to his carelessness or negligence. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.9) 
Sec. 2-577. - Use of city property. 
    The city council hereby establishes the general policy that no city property, supplies or equipment of any kind shall be loaned or rented to any person or used for private purposes. The city manager is authorized to make exception to this restriction when in his opinion the circumstances especially so warrant, in which case he shall specify the terms. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.9) 
Sec. 2-578. - City-owned automobiles. 
(a)  Identification. With the exception of certain police department vehicles and any other vehicle excluded by the city council, all city-owned automobiles shall bear, on the exterior part thereof, the printed words: "City of Auburn, Maine." 
(b)  Private use. No automobile owned by the city shall be used by any person for any private use. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.2) 
Secs. 2-579-2-604. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITATION SYSTEM OF CODE ENFORCEMENT[17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference- Enforcement of civil violations, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 17. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-605. - Applicability; enforcement officials. 
(a)  This article shall apply to enforcement proceedings under the following: 
(1)  Chapter 12, article III, the building code. 
(2)  Section 18-1, pertaining to prohibited activities in Lake Auburn watershed. 
(3)  Chapter 18, article II, pertaining to soil disturbance and fill standards. 
(4)  Chapter 18, article III, pertaining to post-construction stormwater management. 
(5)  Chapter 20, article III, the fire code. 
(6)  Chapter 12, article III, division 2, the electrical code. 
(7)  Chapter 12, article IV, the housing code. 
(8)  Chapter 44, pertaining to solid waste. 
(9)  Chapter 46, pertaining to streets, sidewalks and other public places. 
(10)  Chapter 60, pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  The inspectors under the various codes are referred to in this article collectively as enforcement officials. 
(Code 1967, § 33-1.1) 
Sec. 2-606. - Effect of article on other ordinances. 
    This article does not supersede or repeal other enforcement procedures or preclude the initiation of other enforcement proceedings under state law or other municipal ordinances except to the extent that enforcement proceedings are inconsistent with this article. 
(Code 1967, § 33-2.10) 
Sec. 2-607. - Investigation of violation. 
    Upon receipt of information indicating the likelihood of a violation subject to this article, the enforcement official or his duly authorized agent shall investigate the facts and may make an inspection of the premises when legally authorized to do so. 
(Code 1967, § 33-1.2) 
Sec. 2-608. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the investigation reveals that a code violation has occurred, the enforcement official shall give written notice of such violation to the person having control of the land, building, structure or sign involved in the violation, referred to in this section as "the violation," and demand that the violation be corrected. 
(b)  Notice of the violation may be delivered in hand to the violator or left for him with a person of suitable age and discretion living in the same household or mailed to him by certified mail to his last known address. 
(c)  Such notice shall describe the violation, including a reference to the ordinance section violated, specify a reasonable period as to each violation within which corrective action must be completed, and state the potential consequences if the violation is not corrected. The notice shall also advise the property owner of his right to appeal to the appropriate authority if he disagrees with the enforcement official's determination that he is violating the ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 33-1.3) 
Sec. 2-609. - Civil proceedings. 
    If appropriate action to correct the violation has not been taken within the period established in this article, the enforcement official or the city solicitor may initiate appropriate court proceedings to prevent, correct or abate the violation. Such court proceedings may include the initiation of a land use complaint pursuant to rule 80K of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Code 1967, § 33-1.4) 
Sec. 2-610. - Penalties. 
    The following penalties shall apply to citations issued pursuant to this division: 
First citation ..... $105.00 
Second citation ..... $210.00 
Third citation ..... $420.00 
Fourth and subsequent citations ..... $840.00 
(Ord. of 5-3-2010) 
Secs. 2-611-2-636. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-637. - Issuance of citation. 
    If appropriate action to correct the violation has not been taken within the period established by the enforcement official pursuant to this article, he may, as an alternative to initiating court action, issue a citation to the violator. 
(Code 1967, § 33-2.1) 
Sec. 2-638. - Contents of citation. 
(a)  The citation provided for in this division shall be in writing, describe the nature of the violations, including the ordinance sections violated, and state the dates by which the violations were to have been corrected, that a civil penalty of $50.00 has been imposed for the violation, the date by which the penalty must be paid and to whom, and the consequences of failing to pay within the period stated. 
(b)  The number of days allowed by the enforcement official within which corrective action must be taken shall be reasonable given the notice period previously given to the violator, the nature of the violation to be corrected, and the time which the code enforcement official estimates will be required to perform the corrective work. 
(c)  The citation shall also advise the violator of his right to request an extension of time to correct the violation as provided in this division. The citation shall state that an additional civil penalty of $100.00 will be imposed and that further citations may be issued if the violation has not been corrected within the time specified. 
(Code 1967, § 33-2.2) 
Sec. 2-639. - Time limits for corrective action. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Immediate risk or nuisance means a condition or circumstance which poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of individuals or their property. 
    Long term risk or nuisance means a condition or circumstance which does not pose an immediate threat to the health or safety of individuals or their property, but could cause a hazard or create a physical or aesthetic nuisance if not corrected. 
    Short term risk or nuisance means a condition or circumstance which, while posing a serious threat to the health or safety of individuals or their property, is not likely to occur so soon as to be an immediate danger. 
(b)  Time periods which corrective action taken. The following time periods within which corrective action must be taken shall be presumed to be reasonable for purposes of this article: 
Description of risk Corrective action time period Immediate risk or nuisance Zero hours to 24 hours Short-term risk or nuisance 24 hours to one week Long-term risk or nuisance One week to 30 days  
(Code 1967, § 33-2.3) 
Sec. 2-640. - Service of citation. 
(a)  Citations issued pursuant to this division may be delivered in hand to the violator or left for him with a person of suitable age and discretion living in the same household. If the violator is a corporation, citations way be served on an authorized official, or, if none is available, upon any employee of the corporation. 
(b)  Citations may also be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the return receipt is not signed, the citation shall be presumed to have been served if also sent by ordinary mail which has not been returned by the postal service. 
(Code 1967, § 33-2.4) 
Sec. 2-641. - Amount of penalty. 
(a)  The penalties for violations punishable by citations under this division shall be as follows: 
First citation ..... $105.00 
Second citation ..... $210.00 
Third citation ..... $420.00 
Fourth and subsequent citations ..... $840.00 
(b)  The fines imposed shall be cumulative. 
(Code 1967, § 33-2.5; Ord. of 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 2-642. - Further citations. 
    If the corrective action required has not been taken within the time specified in the first citation issued under this division, the code enforcement official may issue a second citation. The second citation shall contain the same information set forth in the first citation regarding the nature of the violation, but may do so by reference to the first citation in the discretion of the code enforcement official. It shall also state that, in addition to the previous civil penalties, a civil penalty of $200.00 will be imposed and that further citations may be issued if the violation has not been corrected within the specified time. The time limit indicated may be the same as the time allowed in the first citation or may be altered if there has been a change in circumstances. The same procedure may be repeated by the issuance of a third citation punishable by a civil penalty of $500.00 if the corrective action has not been taken within the time specified. 
(Code 1967, § 33-2.6) 
Sec. 2-643. - Interest on unpaid penalties. 
    All civil penalties imposed by citation under this division shall be due within five days after the date the corrective action specified was to be taken. Interest computed at the rate of 18 percent per annum shall be added to all unpaid civil penalties beginning five days after the date that the civil penalty became due. The code enforcement official or the city solicitor may initiate appropriate proceedings to collect any civil penalties which are not promptly paid, together with all outstanding interest. 
(Code 1967, § 33-2.7) 
Sec. 2-644. - Extension of time to correct violation. 
    In any case in which the violator asserts that there is good cause for extending the period during which the violation can be corrected under this division, he may request such an extension from the enforcement official in writing, setting forth the reasons for the request. The filing of such an application shall not suspend the running of the time limit specified. The enforcement official shall act upon the request within two working days of its being presented. The decision of the enforcement official shall be final. 
(Code 1967, § 33-2.8) 
Secs. 2-645-2-661. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - REVIEW AND APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference- Maine Administrative Procedure Act, 5 M.R.S.A. § 8001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-662. - Appeals. 
(a)  Administrative appeals from decisions of the building inspector or the code enforcement officer in granting or denying a permit may be taken in accordance with the provisions of section 60-1151. 
(b)  Appeals from determinations of the code enforcement officer that violations of the fire prevention code or the life safety code have occurred may be taken to the fire chief. Appeals from the determinations of other code enforcement officials and from decisions of the fire chief shall be taken to superior court. 
(c)  All other appeals shall be taken to the city manager. Any such appeal must be taken within 48 hours after the action being appealed. The filing of an appeal shall suspend the running of the time period specified in the citation within which corrective action must be taken until the appeal is resolved. 
(Code 1967, § 33-2.9) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Agriculture and animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 1 et seq.; rabies prevention and shelters, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3916 et seq.; livestock disease control, 7 M.R.S.A. § 1701 et seq.; uncontrolled dogs, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3911 et seq.; dangerous dogs, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3951; dog licenses, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3921 et seq.; Animal Welfare Act, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3901 et seq.; animal welfare, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011 et seq.; duties of municipality with regard to animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3941 et seq.; mistreatment of animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3971 et seq.; cruelty to animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4011 et seq., 17 M.R.S.A. § 1031; authority for local regulation of animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3950. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words used herein shall be interpreted to read as follows; and any words not herein defined shall be construed in the context used in 7 M.R.S.A. chs. 717 through 745 or 17 M.R.S.A. ch. 42 and by ordinary interpretation, and not as a word of art: 
    Animal means any living creature classified as a member of the animal kingdom including, but not limited to, birds, fish, mammals and reptiles, but specifically excluding human beings. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(2), 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011(2). 
    Animal control facility means any facility owned, approved, or contracted by the city for the purposes of housing, impounding, quarantine, medical treatment, or euthanasia of animals. 
State Law reference- Animal control shelter defined, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(5); animal shelter defined, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011(5-A). 
    Animal control officer (ACO) means the person designated by the city to act as the representative agent for the city in the impoundment of animals and in the controlling of stray animals which come into the custody of the city, including, but not limited to, the appointed animal control officer and the members of the city's police department. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(4). 
    At-large refers to dogs and other domestic animals which are legally in compliance with all local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations, other than a domestic cat, that is on any public right-of-way or publicly owned land unless controlled by a leash of not more than eight feet in length, except as provided for in sections 8-68 and 8-69. A domestic cat shall be considered at-large when not located on the premises owned or controlled by its owner and not otherwise under immediate effective control. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(6). 
    Dangerous animal means any animal: 
(1)  Which demonstrates behavior or possesses the vicious propensity to inflict serious bodily injury or death upon human beings or other animals and constitutes a danger to human life or other animals; 
(2)  Which has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows, or reasonably should know, that the animal is possessed of tendencies to commit unprovoked attacks or to injure human beings or other animals; 
(3)  Certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after observation thereof, as posing a danger to human beings or animals; 
(4)  That, without provocation, assaults an individual or animal; or 
(5)  That commits an unprovoked act that causes a person, acting in a reasonable and nonaggressive manner, to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person or animal. 
State Law reference- Similar definition with regard to dangerous dogs, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(12-D). 
    Dog means both male and female canines. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(12-C), 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011(12-B). 
    Domestic animal means any animal whose physiology has been determined or manipulated through selective breeding, and which does not occur naturally in the wild, and which may be vaccinated against rabies with an approved rabies vaccine, and has an established rabies quarantine observation period. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 7 M.R.S.A. § 1751(2). 
    Exotic animal means any nondomesticated animal, other than livestock, that is native to a foreign country or of foreign origin or character, or was introduced from abroad. The term "exotica animal" will specifically include, but not be limited to, animals such as lions, tigers, jackals, dingoes, leopards, elephants, pandas, camels, antelope, anteaters, kangaroos, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, water buffalo, and species of foreign domestic livestock requiring state and federal permits. 
    Fowl means a bird of any kind, including, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons, emus, ostriches, rheas, turkeys and pheasants. 
    Guard dog means a dog trained and used by law enforcement, private security, or in a protective function where the dog is responsive to control by its owner or handler and used only for protective function. 
    Guide dog means a dog trained to assist a physically challenged person. 
State Law reference- Service dog defined, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(24-A), 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011(24-A). 
    Immediate effective control. 
(1)  The term "immediate effective control" means the confinement of an animal to the premises of its owner by: 
a.  A fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent an animal from escaping therefrom; 
b.  Contained inside a house or other enclosure; or 
c.  Secured on the premises by a leash of sufficient strength to prevent the animal from escaping from said premises and so arranged that the animal will remain upon said premises when the leash is stretched to full length in any direction. 
(2)  An animal shall also be considered under immediate effective control when: 
a.  Used to assist a physically challenged person; or 
b.  The animal is under the immediate control of a person by means of: 
1.  A cage; 
2.  A leash; or 
3.  An effective restraint to control said animal. 
(3)  The term "effective restraint" as used herein includes, but is not limited to, training employing audible or visual commands, remote control devices, or other means to control the animal. 
    Kennel means any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that keeps, boards or trains dogs or cats or other animals, which may legally be present in such facilities, for profit. Kennels must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the city and all state statues and regulations of the state. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(16), 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011(17). 
    Livestock means, but may not be limited to, any horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep or swine. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(18-A). 
    Owner means any person, partnership, corporation or association that harbors, shelters, keeps, controls, manages, possesses or has whole or part interest in any animal. The occupant, owner or head of a household of any premises where an animal remains for 24 hours or more shall be presumed to be the owner of such animal for the purposes of this chapter. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(21), 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011(21). 
    Pet means any animal which may be legally owned in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, normally kept for pleasure rather than utility, excluding livestock, is in the owner's possession and for which it can be reasonably demonstrated that the care of said pet is the responsibility of a given individual. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(22-B). 
    Pet store means any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that buys and sells dogs, cats, or other species of pets for profit. Pet stores or shops must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations and all other applicable laws or rules of the city and the state. 
State Law reference- Pet shop defined, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(23), 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011(23). 
    Public auction means any place or facility where animals are sold to the highest bidder. The term "public auction" does not apply to individual sales of animals by private owners. 
    Public nuisance means: 
(1)  An owner's failure to control, restrain or otherwise allow, either by conduct or condition, any animal to: 
a.  Engage in conduct which establishes such an animal as a dangerous animal; 
b.  Be at-large; 
c.  Cause a disturbance by excessive barking or noise-making near the private residence or business of another or of any government or public facility; 
d.  Produce maggots, flies, odors, or unclean conditions sufficient to annoy or endanger adjacent property owners, residents or other individuals who may be reasonably exposed by such conditions; or 
e.  Chase vehicles or molest, attack or interfere with other persons and animals on public or private property. 
(2)  Any animal normally found in the wild that has entered onto any public or private property and by its presence is a threat to public health and safety or is generally interrupting the tranquility of the location. 
    Public park or playground means any city-owned or -operated public park, playground or schoolground. 
    Restraint means to control an animal by physical means, such as a cage, leash, rope or confinement within an enclosed space or by training or employing audible or visual commands, remote control devices, or other means to control the animal. 
    Stray means an animal that is improperly restrained and that wanders upon a public place, roadway, street, highway, or the property of another person. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3907(25-A). 
    Vaccination means the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine or other medicine that is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species, and which is administered by a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of immunizing the animal against rabies or other diseases. 
    Veterinary hospital means any establishment that is maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis, treatment or surgery of injuries and diseases to animals. 
    Wild animal means any animal not normally considered domesticated and which is now or historically has been found in the wild, or in the wild state, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Reptiles: Venomous reptiles; any type of crocodile or alligator; 
(2)  Fish: Piranha; 
(3)  Birds: Condors, eagles, hawks, falcons, owls; 
(4)  Mammals: Ocelots, lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, wolves, dingoes, coyotes and coyote mixes, jackals, weasels, martens, minks, badgers, skunks, raccoons, pandas, bears, kangaroos, opossums, sloths, anteaters, armadillos, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, porcupines, antelope, deer, fox, elephant, lynx, squirrels, chipmunks; or 
(5)  Any species of animal illegal to own under federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Exemption. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any animal accompanying a physically challenged person who, by reason of his handicap, is physically unable to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-4) 
Secs. 8-3-8-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-23. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of no less than $150.00, unless otherwise specified in this chapter, for each of the first and second violation. The minimum penalty for any subsequent violation of this chapter shall be $500.00, unless otherwise specified in this chapter, for each offense. In no case shall the court assess a fine that is less than those defined in state statute if the chapter minimums are less. Violators of this chapter must pay for all costs associated with any action taken by the animal control officer involving the impoundment, treatment or humane euthanasia by a licensed veterinarian relating to animals of which they are owners. Where financial hardship is demonstrated, a violator of this chapter may perform community service in lieu of the financial penalty if such a program is available through the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-2) 
Sec. 8-24. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall be responsible for enforcement of this chapter except as may be provided herein. Enforcement may be by the filing of a criminal complaint in district or superior court; by civil proceedings to enjoin nuisances; or in any other manner authorized by federal, state or local law, rule or ordinance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person being issued a citation to district court or any civil proceeding to intentionally or knowingly fail to give the animal control officer their true name and address or to intentionally or knowingly fail to appear in accordance with the terms of a citation or civil process issued by the animal control officer. 
(c)  If the individual who is to receive the citation is not present, the animal control officer may send the citation to the alleged offender by certified or registered return receipt mail. If said citation should come back unclaimed, the citation shall be sent regular mail. If this regular mailing is returned as unclaimed, the service shall then be deemed as completed. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-3) 
State Law reference- Animal control officers, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3947. 
Sec. 8-25. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The animal control officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of capturing, impounding or quarantining any animal upon having probable cause to believe that the animal: 
(1)  Has bitten, injured or otherwise attacked a human being or other animal; 
(2)  Has been exposed to rabies or another communicable disease posing a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; or 
(3)  Poses a clear and present danger to human beings or other animals. 
(b)  This authorization is granted due to the emergency created by the potential rabies hazard or danger of injury to persons or other animals, and in recognition of the likelihood that such animals will otherwise escape capture. As a matter of policy, animal control officers shall not enter upon private property to capture or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of said property without probable cause to believe said animal poses a threat or danger to property, human beings or other animals. 
(c)  Should the animal control officer be unable to gain entry or denied entry to a property or premises where a dangerous animal is believed to be present, the animal control officer or any law enforcement agent may seek an ex parte order from the district court or superior court for authorization to take possession of the dangerous animal. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-24) 
Secs. 8-26-8-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Animal control, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3948; Animal Welfare Act, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3901 et seq.; mistreatment of animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3971 et seq.; cruelty to animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4011, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1031. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-54. - Care of animals. 
    Animals shall be provided humane care, treated and transported in a humane manner and not in violation of any federal, state or local law, rule or ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-7) 
State Law reference- Necessary sustenance, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4013; necessary medical attention, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4014; proper shelter, protection from weather and humanely clean conditions, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4015. 
Sec. 8-55. - Adequate food and shelter required. 
    Every person shall provide an animal under his control or ownership with adequate wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from inclement weather, and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. 
State Law reference- Necessary sustenance, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4013, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1035; necessary medical attention, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4014, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1036; proper shelter, protection from weather and humanely clean conditions, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4015, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1037. 
Sec. 8-56. - Odors and unclean condition prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to produce odors or unclean conditions sufficient to create a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-36) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to abate nuisances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3104. 
Sec. 8-57. - Unattended animals in enclosed spaces; animals attacking from vehicle. 
(a)  No person having the charge or custody of an animal, shall place or confine such animal, or allow such animal to be placed or confined, in a motor vehicle, trailer, or other enclosure under such conditions, or for such a period of time, as to endanger the health of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water, or such other circumstances as may cause injury or death to the animal. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if a person parks or leaves any animal in any type of vehicle and does not provide for adequate ventilation or allows the animal to protrude its head out of the vehicle and consequently attack or attempt to attack a passerby. 
(c)  The animal control officer shall have, for the purposes of this section, the authority to order the removal of a vehicle or to remove the animal from any vehicle by any means possible if, in the opinion of the animal control officer, it appears that the animal is in distress or the animal poses a threat or public nuisance to the general public. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-44) 
State Law reference- Removal of animal from unattended motor vehicle, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4019. 
Sec. 8-58. - Cruel or inhuman treatment. 
    No person shall treat an animal in an inhumane or cruel manner as defined by 17 M.R.S.A. ch. 42. 
State Law reference- Animal welfare, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011 et seq.; torment, torture and cruelty defined, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1011(26). 
Sec. 8-59. - Animal fighting; attack training. 
    No person shall knowingly own, harbor, train, sell, or offer for sale any animal: 
(1)  Which is used for the purpose of fighting; or 
(2)  To be trained, tormented, badgered or baited for the purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to attack human beings or animals when not provoked. 
This section shall not apply to guard dogs or dogs used by local, state or federal law enforcement agencies. No person shall cause an animal to fight another animal or a person. 
State Law reference- Animal fighting, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1033. 
Sec. 8-60. - Mutilation. 
(a)  No person shall mutilate any animal, whether such animal is dead or alive. This subsection does not apply to medical or veterinary medical research, medical or veterinary autopsy, or biology class use of animals for educational purposes. 
(b)  No person other than a licensed veterinarian shall dock an animal's tail, crop an animal's ears, or castrate an animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to normal livestock operations occurring within the city. 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4011, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1031. 
Sec. 8-61. - Placement and baiting of animal traps. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, set or bait any trap for the purpose of catching, wounding or killing of any animal, fowl or reptile without permission or assistance of the local, state or federally designated animal control officer. This section, however, does not preclude the use of commercially sold rat and mouse traps, nor does this section preclude the use of Havahart traps for the relocation of animals, fowl or reptiles. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-33) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4011, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1031. 
Sec. 8-62. - Prohibition of animal poisoning. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any substance or article which has in any manner been treated with any poisonous substance in any place accessible to human beings, birds, dogs, cats or other animals with the intent to harm or kill animals. This section, however, does not preclude the use of commercially sold rodent poisons when applied in accordance with the manufacturer's directions for such use. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-34) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 4011, 17 M.R.S.A. § 1031. 
Sec. 8-63. - Dying or coloring certain animals prohibited. 
    No person shall dye or color chicks, ducks, rabbits, reptiles or birds. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3972(1)(A). 
Sec. 8-64. - Effective restraint of animal in transport. 
    A person transporting an animal shall effectively restrain the animal so as to prevent the animal from leaving or being accidentally thrown from a vehicle during normal operation of the vehicle and to prevent infliction of bodily harm to a passerby; provided, however, that the provisions herein shall not prohibit a person from transporting an effectively confined or tethered dog in the open bed of a pickup truck. 
Sec. 8-65. - Report of striking domestic animals or livestock with motor vehicle. 
    A person who is in control of a motor vehicle which strikes a domestic animal or livestock with the corporate limits of the city shall report the accident to the city police department or the animal control officer as soon as practical. 
Sec. 8-66. - Abandonment. 
    No person shall abandon any animal, including the abandonment of an impounded animal at the city contracted or owned animal control facility with the intent to readopt the animal to avoid impoundment fees. 
Sec. 8-67. - Damage by animals to public property. 
(a)  No person shall permit an animal in his possession to damage or destroy public property or private property of others. If the person in possession of the animal at the time the property damage cannot be determined, the owner may be charged under this section if the evidence can reasonably demonstrate the identity of the animal. 
(b)  Whenever any damage is inflicted on any person or property by a dog, the victim or owner may make a complaint to the animal control officer or city police department within the next business day following discovery of the damage. 
(c)  If after reviewing the evidence, the animal control officer or police department are satisfied that a dog committed the damage, they shall estimate values of the injured person or damaged property. The investigation agents will then determine if the dog can be reasonably identified and if so, the owner of said dog will be liable for all related expenses caused by said dog. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-43) 
State Law reference- Damage by animals, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3961 et seq. 
Sec. 8-68. - Animals at-large prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to chase vehicles or molest, attack or interfere with other animals or persons on public property, or be at-large as defined in section 8-1. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an animal to be left unrestrained in a parked motor vehicle so as to allow the animal to project its head from the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-37) 
State Law reference- Dogs at large, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3911. 
Sec. 8-69. - Leash length requirements and exceptions. 
    Only domestic animals are authorized on all city-owned public ways, sidewalks, and all publicly owned property within the city. Any such animal shall be on a leash or other tether, in the control of an individual, of not more than 16 feet in length with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Any domestic animal in a public area must be on a leash or other tether of not more than eight feet in length when signs are posted stating "Maximum Eight-Foot Leash is Required" by the city to accommodate mass gatherings or public events. The authority to post such areas shall lie with the city council. 
(2)  Any domestic animal may be prohibited by the city to accommodate mass gatherings or public events. The authority to post such areas shall lie with the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-38) 
Sec. 8-70. - Parks, cemeteries and playgrounds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, domestic animals may be authorized on all city-owned property but only if under the control of an individual who restrains the animal with a leash or other tether of not more than 16 feet in length and provided that such animals shall be allowed only on the roadways and walkways of cemeteries and not on cemetery lots. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-39) 
Sec. 8-71. - Public nuisances. 
    It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal or bird, which causes annoyance to the peace of any person, either by: 
(1)  Excessively barking, howling or making other sounds common to its species; 
(2)  Failing to keep any female dog in heat confined at all times. Every bitch in violation of this section shall be impounded and the owner, keeper or person harboring such bitch, shall be deemed guilty of an offense; or 
(3)  Knowingly have any animal, requiring a license or some other form of registration by the state, run at-large. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-40) 
State Law reference- Dogs at large, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3911; certain agricultural working dogs exempt from barking dog ordinances, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3950(1); municipal authority to abate nuisances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3104. 
Sec. 8-72. - Disposal of excrement. 
    All manure and other excrement shall be disposed of in such a manner so as to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance or health hazard. With regard to dogs on public or private property, other than the owner's, the owner shall be responsible for the immediate removal of excrement. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-41) 
Sec. 8-73. - Disposal of dead animals. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner to remove and properly dispose of a deceased animal within 24 hours of the animal's death. Proper disposal constitutes bringing such animal to a licensed veterinarian for cremation or proper burial at a pet cemetery. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-16) 
State Law reference- Deposit of dead animal as nuisance, 22 M.R.S.A. § 1562; disposal of offal as littering, 12 M.R.S.A. § 11221. 
Sec. 8-74. - Disposal of dead animals found on public property. 
    It shall be the responsibility of any person to notify the department of public works of the location of the deceased animal so proper removal and disposal may occur. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-17) 
Secs. 8-75-8-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOGS 

Sec. 8-92. - Number of dogs limited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city more than three dogs over four months old in or about any multifamily premises. The keeping or harboring of dogs as aforesaid is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  The payment of the license or licenses on dogs required by state law, as amended, shall not be construed to allow the keeping of more than three dogs, as aforesaid, on any one premises. 
(c)  The limitations in this section shall not apply to any person, group of persons, or corporations engaged in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding of dogs, or operating a veterinary hospital, providing a state kennel license is obtained if applicable. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-9) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to abate nuisances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3104. 
Sec. 8-93. - Licensing. 
    All dogs within the city shall be licensed as required by 7 M.R.S.A. § 3921. Fees for dog licensing shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Secs. 8-94-8-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies prevention and shelters, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3916 et seq. 

Sec. 8-115. - Rabies inoculation. 
    Before the city clerk issues the required licenses for any animal requiring a rabies vaccination as stipulated in state statute, the city clerk shall require the owner to prove immunization against rabies as prescribed by state statute or by state rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-10) 
State Law reference- Rabies vaccinations, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3916. 
Sec. 8-116. - Animal bites and scratch reports; submission to quarantine. 
(a)  Any person who is bitten or scratched by an animal shall report that fact to the animal control officer or the police department within 24 hours. If the person bitten or scratched is a minor under the age of 17, the parent or legal guardian of such minor, if he has knowledge of the incident, shall report that fact to the animal control officer or the city's police department within 24 hours. 
(b)  A person who owns, keeps, harbors or allows an animal to remain on premises under his control shall report to the animal control officer or the police department, within 24 hours, any incident where such animal has bitten or scratched any person. 
(c)  If the animal control officer has determined that there is reasonable evidence of an animal biting or otherwise attacking any person, and such animal has rabies or symptoms thereof, or is suspected by the animal control officer of having rabies, or has been exposed to rabies, upon demand of the animal control officer or his deputies, it shall be surrendered to him and shall be impounded by the animal control officer at a facility, which in his opinion, is properly suited to safely handle the animal for a period of ten days. The animal control officer may, upon written request of the owner, authorize the owner to confine the animal with a chain appropriate to the animal's size, and in a manner where no person will be bitten by the quarantined animal, for a period of ten days. During such owner confinement, the animal shall be subject to examination by the animal control officer or his deputy at any time. 
(d)  Impoundment at any state or city approved facility for rabies quarantine purposes shall be at the expense of the owner of the impounded animal, livestock or wildlife. In the event a harborer of a quarantined animal cannot be identified and located within a reasonable length of time, the victim, at his option (or at the option of the parent or legal guardian in the case of a minor under the age of 18 years), may elect to have the animal examined by a veterinarian, or to have the tissue submitted for laboratory examination; and the costs so incurred shall be borne by the victim. No animal, livestock or wildlife confined for quarantine purposes under the provisions of this section shall be released to any person until all vaccinations required by state statute have been given. 
(e)  If the harborer of an attacking animal refuses to release for quarantine such animal, then it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to obtain a seizure warrant from an appropriate judicial official for seizure and quarantine of the animal in question. 
(f)  The animal control officer may order that all impoundment fees for the quarantine be paid by the person bitten or scratched if: 
(1)  The animal has a rabies vaccination certificate; 
(2)  The animal was on property under the control of animal's owner when the bite or scratch occurred; or 
(3)  The bite or scratch occurred when the animal was acting to defend its owner or his property, or after reasonable provocation. 
(g)  The animal control officer shall use his discretion to determine what provisions of this chapter or state law shall be most appropriate in all matters having to do with the quarantine of any animal. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-11) 
Sec. 8-117. - Contents of required animal bites and scratch reports. 
    When an individual is placed under a duty to report an incident in which an animal has bitten or scratched some person or some animal or to report an animal known or suspected to be rabid, that report to the animal control officer shall include, if the person making the report knows, the following information: 
(1)  The location where the bite or scratch occurred. 
(2)  The location where the animal which committed the act or which is known or suspected to have rabies or have been exposed to rabies can be located. 
(3)  The name and address of any person who was bitten or scratched. 
(4)  The name and address of the person who owns, keeps, harbors, or has control over the premises where the animal committing the act normally can be found. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the persons who own, keep or harbor any other animal exposed to rabies can be found. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-12) 
Sec. 8-118. - Authorization for citywide quarantine. 
(a)  In the event that the animal control officer or the state department of health declares that a potential outbreak of rabies is suspected and the danger to the public safety from rabid animals is reasonably imminent, the city director of public health or his designee, shall be authorized to issue a quarantine proclamation ordering persons owning, keeping, or harboring any animal to muzzle the same or confine it as herein provided for such time as may be specified in such quarantine proclamation. 
(b)  Upon the publication of such proclamation by the director, any person keeping or harboring any animal shall restrain the animal from running at-large. The restraint required by this section may be accomplished by muzzling and leashing the animal, provided that the leashed and muzzled animal must at all times be in the immediate and direct control of a responsible adult. All animals found at-large during the time specified in the proclamation by the director may be destroyed by the animal control officer or any law enforcement officer if said agents are unable, with reasonable effort, to apprehend such animal for impoundment. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-13) 
Secs. 8-119-8-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 8-150. - Regulations. 
(a)  The animal control officer is hereby authorized to capture and impound any animal upon having probable cause to believe said animal to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or state law which authorizes or requires the animal's capture and impoundment, and in so doing, to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land when deemed necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. As a matter of policy, the animal control officer shall not enter private property to capture or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of said property without probable cause to believe that said animal poses a threat, public nuisance or danger to property, human beings or other animals. 
(b)  Additionally, it is the responsibility of the animal control officer to accept any animal delivered to the animal control officer or the facility under his control (while he or other authorized agents of the city are physically present) pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, except those animals that are voluntarily released by their owners. For an animal to be voluntarily released, the owner must sign an owner release form provided by the animal control officer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or attempt to prevent, an animal control officer or those acting in their capacities as law enforcement agents, from capturing or impounding any animal which may be legally impounded or otherwise interfering with the animal control officer, his designees, or any law enforcement agents while carrying out their lawful duties. 
(d)  Prior to the release from impound, the authorized owner must obtain an impound release form from the animal control officer or an official within the police department. Impoundment and daily boarding fees shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-14) 
Sec. 8-151. - Duties of the animal control officer. 
(a)  It is the duty of the animal control officer to capture and impound, when appropriate, wild or nondomesticated animals in response to citizen complaints of public nuisance or to control feral populations. 
(b)  If, by identification tag, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer will, as soon as practical, notify the owner either in person or by telephone of said impoundment. If the animal is locally owned within the city and telephone contact cannot be made, the animal control officer will leave a notice at the owner's last known and verifiable residence indicating that the animal has been impounded. 
(c)  All impounded animals shall be kept for not less than eight days, unless the animal is reclaimed earlier by the rightful owner under conditions acceptable to the animal control officer. However, no impoundment period is required for an animal voluntarily delivered and released into the custody of the animal control officer by its owner. 
(d)  After the expiration of any required impoundment period, the impounded animal shall be released to the animal control facility or veterinary hospital contracted by, or doing business with, the city. At that time, the animal shall be disposed of by adoption from the facility, by offering it to a local animal humane group for adoption, or by humanely destroying the animal. No record shall be kept by the animal control officer as to the disposition of an individual animal after release is made to the animal control facility/veterinary hospital for the purposes specified in this section. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-15) 
Secs. 8-152-8-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, 7 M.R.S.A. § 3951 et seq. 

Sec. 8-171. - Permit required. 
    No person shall knowingly sell, own, offer for sale, breed, possess, keep, buy or attempt to buy, or train a dangerous animal within the city unless the owner has received the proper permits or authorizations pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-18) 
Sec. 8-172. - Complaints. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a written sworn notarized affidavit by any person, charging that a particular animal is dangerous, the city director of public health shall conduct an administrative hearing within ten days of the receipt of such affidavit, to determine whether such animal is, in fact, dangerous. Unless the matter is resolved by mutual agreement of all parties involved prior to the hearing, said animal shall be impounded until a final disposition is reached. Any written sworn notarized affidavit shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the complainant and witnesses; 
(2)  Date, time and location of the incident; 
(3)  A complete description, to the best of the complainant's ability, of the animal including breed, color, sex, size, etc.; 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of the animal's owner or the premises where the animal is kept, if known; 
(5)  A statement that the animal bit or attacked; and 
(6)  Any other facts that the complainant believes to be relevant to the incident. 
(b)  The following will apply regarding the administrative hearing to determine whether an animal shall be declared dangerous: 
(1)  The suspect animal shall be seized by the animal control officer pursuant to a complaint, impounded and, if necessary, medically examined at the owner's expense if the animal caused injury to a person requiring medical treatment. An animal causing such injury shall be held at an animal control facility chosen by the animal control officer pending the outcome of such hearing and determination as to whether an animal is, in fact, classifiable as dangerous. Such hearing to determine if an animal is dangerous shall be conducted by the city public health officers within ten days after receipt of the complaint or seizure of the animal by the animal control officer. 
(2)  Notice of such hearing shall be provided by the animal control officer to the owner of the animal by certified return receipt mail. The complainant in the matter shall also be notified by certified return receipt mail. At such hearing, all parties shall be given the opportunity to present evidence on the issue of whether or not such animal is to be declared dangerous. 
(c)  Upon conclusion of a dangerous animal hearing, the city director of public health may find that the animal is not dangerous. In such cases, the animal shall be returned to the owner, provided the animal has been properly vaccinated and registered and all applicable fees are paid. 
(d)  Should the animal be classified as a dangerous animal, the owner shall comply with one of the following requirements: 
(1)  Humane destruction of the dangerous animal; or 
(2)  Provide for the keeping of the animal as detailed in sections 8-173 and 8-174. 
(e)  No animal shall be declared a dangerous animal if the threat, injury or damages caused by the animal were the result of a willful trespass upon another's property; or the person injured was tormenting, provoking, abusing or assaulting the animal or its owner, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime at the time of the injury. 
(f)  Findings of the city director of public health pertaining to dangerous animals may be appealed to the superior court in accordance with the provisions outlined in state law. During the pendency of such appeal, the findings of the city director of public health shall be suspended. However, the animal shall continue to be impounded at the owner's expense at the animal control facility selected by the animal control officer for observation and to protect the health and safety of the public until a final disposition is reached. 
(g)  If an animal that has been declared dangerous causes death or serious bodily injury to a person or to another animal, the city director of public health may order that the animal be destroyed in a manner consistent with state law. All related expenses shall be paid by the owner. 
(h)  Where the victim of a dangerous animal, specifically a dog, has incurred medical expenses, veterinary expenses, or any other direct financial loss, the owner of said dangerous dog shall be ordered to pay restitution to the victim in accordance with the criteria set forth in 17-A M.R.S.A. § 1325. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-19) 
Sec. 8-173. - Keeping of dangerous animals. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous animal shall be required to: 
(1)  Register the dangerous animal with the animal control officer; 
(2)  Obtain liability insurance in an amount not less than $300,000.00 covering bodily injury or death of any person or animal, or for damages to any person's or entity's property, resulting from the keeping of such dangerous animal; and 
(3)  Restrain the dangerous animal at all times on a leash in the immediate control of the owner or in a secure pen enclosure as prescribed in section 8-174; 
(4)  Provide to the animal control officer the name and address of the owner, breed, age, sex, color, and any other identifying marks of said animal; the location where the animal is be kept if not at the address of the owner; two color photographs of the dangerous animal; and the aforementioned certificate of liability insurance; 
(5)  Provide proof of the required documents necessary to register the animal, and pay the required registration fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. The animal control officer shall provide to the owner a registration tag designating the animal as dangerous. The owner must place the tag on the animal's collar and must ensure that the animal wears such tag and collar at all times; and 
(6)  Not allow the animal to go outside its pen, cage or enclosure unless the animal is under physical restraint and securely muzzled. No person shall permit a dangerous animal to be kept outside its cage, pen or enclosure on a chain, rope or other type of leash unless the owner is in physical control of the chain, rope or other leash type. Dangerous animals shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. 
(b)  Signs giving notice of the dangerous animal shall be prominently displayed so that all persons entering said property are immediately notified a dangerous animal is being kept at the location. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-20) 
Sec. 8-174. - Enclosures. 
    The pen, cage or enclosure for a dangerous animal must be constructed from materials of sufficient strength to prevent the animal's escape, and must have secure sides, a secure top attached to the sides, and a secure bottom which is either attached to the sides or constructed so that the sides of the structure are embedded in the ground no less than two feet. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-21) 
Sec. 8-175. - Authority to seize animals. 
    In the event that any animal is declared to be a dangerous animal or where a wild or exotic animal is found in violation of any provision of this chapter or state law, such animal may be seized immediately and impounded by the animal control officer. Where said animal is found at large and is presenting a clear and present danger of imminent bodily injury or death to the animal control officer, other human beings or animals, the animal may be destroyed and the owner notified if the owner can be reasonably established. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-22) 
Sec. 8-176. - Penalties. 
    The minimum financial penalty for a violation of this section is $500.00 for the first offense; $700.00 for the second offense; and $1,000.00 for any subsequent offense. This penalty shall not be waived by the court. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-23) 
Secs. 8-177-8-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NONDOMESTIC ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 8-206-8-233. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 8-234. - Prohibited. 
    Any species of wild or exotic animal, not normally considered domesticated, that poses a potentially serious threat to public health, safety or welfare, or is protected by international, federal, or state regulations, or any other wild animal, including birds of prey capable of or inclined to do serious bodily harm to humans or other animals or fowl, shall not be kept within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-25) 
Sec. 8-235. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions in section 8-234 shall not apply to the keeping of wild or exotic animals if the owner or possessor: 
(1)  Is a governmental agency or entity; 
(2)  Holds a circus, carnival or zoo license from the state; 
(3)  Is a licensed individual, or a member of a nonprofit animal rehabilitation organization holding a permit from the state department of wildlife and inland fisheries; or 
(4)  Is an accredited research or educational institution. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-26) 
Secs. 8-236-8-263. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 8-264. - Keeping of livestock generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping of livestock on premises owned by him or under his control, except in compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Livestock shall only be kept on lots or tracts of land zoned or designated for rural or agricultural purposes by the city. 
(2)  Livestock shall not be kept on lots and tracts of land less than one acre in area. 
(3)  The provisions of article III of this chapter, pertaining to animal care and control, relative to animal care in general, shall specifically apply to the keeping of livestock. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-27) 
Sec. 8-265. - Adequate fences and barriers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on their premises any livestock without providing adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from escaping or damaging neighboring flowers, trees, shrubbery or other property located on adjacent property. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-28) 
Sec. 8-266. - Places prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon any public schoolground, public park or municipal/schoolgrounds within the city other than public rights-of-way or areas designated for such purposes; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the riding or showing of horses or other livestock in conjunction with city authorized parades, carnivals or other school or civic sponsored programs or events which are in compliance with all city, state and federal law, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-29) 
Sec. 8-267. - Impounding of livestock. 
    The provisions of section 8-150 herein, relative to impounding of animals in general, shall specifically apply to the impounding of livestock. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-30) 
Secs. 8-268-8-297. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OTHER ANIMALS 

Sec. 8-298. - Fowl, including laying hens; rabbits and guinea pigs. 
(a)  Generally. Fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs must be kept indoors, or if outdoors, in a secure pen or enclosure. Litter and droppings from these animals must be collected and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of section 8-72, disposal of excrement in general, shall specifically apply to the disposal of excrement of fowl, rabbits, and guinea pigs; provided, however, that the provisions of this section and section 8-72 shall not apply to ducks or other waterfowl inhabiting natural or manmade watercourses or bodies of water. 
(b)  Keeping of laying hens for personal use. 
(1)  Definition. Laying hens, as used in this section, means female chickens kept for the production of eggs. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize and to provide standards for the keeping of laying hens in the rear or side yard of a single-family detached residence or school. It is intended to enable residents to keep laying hens on a non-commercial basis throughout the city while limiting the potentially adverse impacts on surrounding neighbors. 
(3)  Personal use only. The keeping of laying hens pursuant to this chapter is for non-commercial, personal use only. Non-commercial keeping of hens shall be defined as no sales on the premises. 
(4)  Exemption for allowed agricultural uses. This section shall not apply to allowed agricultural uses. 
(5)  Number of laying hens allowed. The maximum number of laying hens allowed is based on the total lot size the resident uses to house the poultry: 
a.  On lots less than .49 acres in area a maximum of six laying hens shall be allowed, 
b.  On .5 acre or larger lots, 12 laying hens per acre prorated based on actual lot size up to a total maximum of 36 laying hens per single-family detached residence. 
(6)  Roosters prohibited. The keeping of roosters is expressly prohibited. 
(7)  Enclosure. Laying hens require an enclosure or fenced area. Each keeper of laying hens is required to have an enclosed area to house and control the hens. If such enclosure is permanently affixed to the ground it shall meet all city zoning requirements for accessory structures, including those for setbacks and location. Hens shall be kept only in the rear or side yard and must kept on the property of the owner. Free ranging is allowed if the animals remain on the owner's lot or if the impacted abutters have given the owner permission to allow the animals to be on their property. 
(8)  Nuisance prohibited; odor and noise restrictions. The keeping of laying hens authorized under this section shall not create a nuisance and shall be conducted in a manner that does not disturb the use or enjoyment of adjacent properties. Odor generated shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries, and noise generated shall not disturb people of reasonable sensitivity at the property boundaries. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-31; Ord. 12-09062011-04, 9-19-2011) 
Sec. 8-299. - Same-Bees. 
    All persons within the property of the city shall adhere to the statutes of the state as described in 7 M.R.S.A. chs. 521 through 531, as well as: 
(1)  No person shall have no more than two colonies on one-quarter acre or less; 
(2)  No person shall have no more than four colonies on one-quarter to one-half acre; 
(3)  No person shall have no more than six colonies on one-half to one acre; 
(4)  No person shall have no more than eight colonies on a tract of land greater than one acre; 
(5)  All colonies' hives shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any inhabited dwelling other than that of the person keeping such bees; and 
(6)  There is adequate source of water available at all times to the bees on the owner's property. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(2), § 14-32) 
State Law reference- Honeybee industry, 7 M.R.S.A. § 2701 et seq. 
Sec. 8-300. - Laying hens for personal use. 
    The purpose of this section is to authorize and to provide standards for the keeping of laying hens in the rear or side yard of a single-family detached residence or school. Laying hens means female chickens kept for the production of eggs. It is intended to enable residents to keep laying hens on a non-commercial basis, throughout the city while limiting the potentially adverse impacts on surrounding neighbors. This section shall not apply to allowed agricultural uses. 
(1)  Number of laying hens allowed. The maximum number of laying hens allowed is based on the total lot size the resident(s) uses to house the poultry: 
a.  On lots less than .49 acres in area a maximum of six laying hens shall be allowed, 
b.  On .5 acre or larger lots, 12 laying hens per acre prorated based on actual lot size for a total maximum of 36 laying hens per single-family detached residence. 
c.  The keeping of roosters is expressly prohibited. 
(2)  Laying hens require an enclosure and/or fenced area. Each keeper of laying hens is required to have an enclosed area to house and control said hens. If such enclosure is permanently affixed to the ground it shall meet all requirements for accessory structures set out in Chapter 60 - Zoning Ordinance, including those for setbacks and location. Hens shall be kept only in the rear or side yard and must kept on the property of the owner. Free ranging is allowed if the animals remain on the hen owner's lot or if the impacted abutter(s) have given the owner permission to allow the animals to be on their property. 
(3)  Personal use only. The keeping of laying hens pursuant to this chapter is for non-commercial, personal use only. Non-commercial keeping of hens shall be defined as no sales on the premises. 
(4)  Nuisance prohibited. The keeping of laying hens authorized under this chapter shall not create a nuisance as defined by chapter 8-56. The keeping of hens shall be conducted in a manner that does not disturb the use or enjoyment of adjacent properties. Odor generated shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries, and noise generated shall not disturb people of reasonable sensitivity at the property boundaries. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2011) 
Chapter 10 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Aeronautics, 6 M.R.S.A. § 1 et seq.; Airport Authority Enabling Act, 6 M.R.S.A. § 171 et seq.; Airport Zoning Act, 6 M.R.S.A. § 241 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT 

Sec. 10-19. - Penalty. 
    Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-15. 
(Code 1967, § 28-1.6) 
Sec. 10-20. - Applicability of federal rules. 
    All applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations regarding airports and their operation, including, but not limited to, federal field rules, are applicable to the city airport. 
(Code 1967, § 28-1.1) 
Sec. 10-21. - Parking of aircraft. 
    No aircraft shall be parked on airport property except in the hangar or except in certain designated areas to be designated by the manager of the airport unless attended by a pilot, and no aircraft shall be intentionally stopped, parked or allowed to remain in any place or position which may endanger the lives or property of others on the airport. 
(Code 1967, § 28-1.2) 
Sec. 10-22. - Operation or parking of vehicles prohibited in certain areas. 
    No ground-based vehicle shall be driven or parked in or upon areas designated as restricted or dangerous by the airport manager unless the vehicle is being used in the regular operation of the airport or for delivery of mail. 
(Code 1967, § 28-1.3) 
Sec. 10-23. - Loitering; smoking. 
    No person shall loiter in or around the airport facilities. No person shall be allowed to smoke inside the main hangar or airport facilities. 
(Code 1967, § 28-1.4) 
Sec. 10-24. - Operation of aircraft. 
    No person shall operate an aircraft at the airport so as to interfere with or endanger the operation of other aircraft at the airport or in the airspace surrounding the airport. 
(Code 1967, § 28-1.5) 
Chapter 12 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Maine Model Building Code, 10 M.R.S.A. § 9701 et seq.; Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code, 10 M.R.S.A. § 9721 et seq.; building codes and standards, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2371 et seq.; municipal inspection of buildings, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2351 et seq.; municipal regulation of construction and improvements generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4101 et seq.; building permits, 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 4101, 4103; buildings and structures as nuisances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4102; regulation and inspection of electrical installations, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4151 et seq.; regulation and inspection of plumbing, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 12-19. - Citation system of enforcement permitted. 
    Violations of this chapter may be processed in accordance with the citation system established in chapter 2, article VIII. 
(Code 1967, § 9-2.13) 
Sec. 12-20. - Planning and permitting services department. 
(a)  Established. There shall be a planning and permitting services department consisting of a planning/development division and an inspections division. 
(b)  Appointment of director. The head of the planning and permitting services department shall be the director of planning and permitting, who shall be appointed by the city manager as provided by the Charter. 
(c)  Duties. The planning and permitting services department shall be responsible for supervising and coordinating planning and inspection services performed for the city. 
(Code 1967, §§ 16-1.1-16-1.3) 
Sec. 12-21. - Building code official. 
(a)  Duties. The building code official shall receive applications required by the building code, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with. He shall enforce by proper authority or, when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on such matters. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
(b)  Inspections. Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by the building code official or his duly appointed designee. The building code official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the building code shall be issued on such reports unless the reports are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of such service. 
(c)  Records. The building code official shall keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file copies of pertinent construction related documents as outlined in the adopted building code and in accordance with applicable state statutes. All records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building code official without his written consent. 
(d)  Reports. The building code official shall submit reports to the director of planning and permitting services once each month, or more often if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated. 
(e)  Additional assigned duties. The building code official shall perform any other duties required of him by the planning and permitting services department or its director. 
(Code 1967, § 7-1.4) 
State Law reference- Building permits, 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 4101, 4103. 
Sec. 12-22. - Plumbing inspector; alternate. 
(a)  Appointment. The city council shall appoint a plumbing inspector upon recommendation by the city manager. The plumbing inspector shall be a certified plumbing inspector as approved by the state planning office. 
(b)  Duties. The plumbing inspector shall issue plumbing permits, inspect all plumbing work as required by law, and perform such other duties as are required by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4221(3). 
(c)  Authority to require submission of plans and specifications. Before issuing the permit, he may require the applicant to present plans and specifications from which he can reasonably determine whether or not the work can be done in a safe and sanitary manner. 
(d)  Alternate plumbing inspector. Upon the recommendation of the city manager, the city council shall appoint an alternate plumbing inspector who shall be a certified plumbing inspector as approved by the state planning office. The alternate plumbing inspector shall inspect the plumbing work of the plumbing inspector and shall perform the duties of the plumbing inspector in the event of his resignation or death and during his absence or incapacity and at such other times as may be deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, §§ 16-2.1-16-2.4; Ord. of 4-26-2004(02), §§ 2.1, 2.4) 
State Law reference- Local plumbing inspectors, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4221 et seq.; plumbing regulations and permit fees, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4211. 
Sec. 12-23. - City electrician. 
(a)  Duties generally. The city electrician shall have the care of all the electrical equipment and fire alarms belonging to the city and shall make all necessary repairs thereon, in order that such appliances and alarms may at all times be in efficient working order. 
(b)  Custody of fire alarm box keys. No person, except the city electrician and his assistants and the fire chief, shall have a key to the fire alarm boxes of the city. 
(c)  Supervision of overhead wires and cables. The city electrician shall supervise every wire or cable over or under streets or buildings. he shall notify the person owning or operating any such wire or cable whenever such person's attachments, insulation, supports or equipment are unsuitable or unsafe and shall have such removed, at the expense of the owner thereof; and he shall see that all laws and regulations relating to his duties, and to the location, erection, maintenance, insulation and removal of wires or cables, over or under streets or buildings are strictly complied with and enforced. 
(d)  Report on application for installation of poles and wires. The city electrician or his designee shall, when so required by the city council or city manager, examine every application for the erection of any wire, or poles or posts for the support thereof, in or over any street or public place for such wires; and shall report to it or him any facts which in his opinion bear upon the question of granting or refusing to grant such application. 
(e)  Authority to shut off electrical current. The city electrician shall have authority, whenever in his opinion the public safety requires it, to direct any person using or operating any wires to shut off the electric current therefrom for such period of time as he may deem necessary. He shall have authority in case of any emergency to have the current shut off in such wires that he knows or believes to be dangerous to life or property. 
(f)  Sole judge of property and installation. The city electrician or his designee shall be deemed the sole judge of what constitutes proper insulation and the safe installation of electric conductors and appliances, and is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations as he may deem reasonably necessary to make conductors and appliances as safe as reasonably possible. 
(Code 1967, §§ 9-1.2, 1.3, 1.6-1.8, 9-3.2) 
State Law reference- Regulation and inspection of electrical installations, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4151 et seq.; local electrical inspectors, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4171; standards, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4161 et seq. 
Sec. 12-24. - Fees. 
    All fees required by this chapter, including the codes adopted herein, shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule; provided, however that: 
(1)  Construction projects that consist of all work being done within the footprint of the structure, including additional stories above, will be priced under the fee schedule as alterations. 
(2)  Construction projects that consist of the footprint of the structure being enlarged will be priced under the fee schedule as new construction. 
(3)  The code official shall have the authority to set the permit fee for any project, or part of a project, not covered in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1967, § 16-2.5) 
Secs. 12-25-12-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING AND TECHNICAL CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-52-12-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 12-76. - Adoption of uniform building code. 
    Pursuant to 10 M.R.S.A. § 9724, the city hereby adopts the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code as defined in 10 M.R.S.A. § 9721 and as promulgated from time to time by the Technical Building Codes and Standards Board under authority of 10 M.R.S.A. § 9722, as limited by the provisions of 10 M.R.S.A. § 9725. 
State Law reference- Uniform code defined, 10 M.R.S.A. § 9721; enforcement of uniform code required, 10 M.R.S.A. § 9724; certain fire and building related codes and standards unaffected by uniform code, 10 M.R.S.A. § 9725. 
Secs. 12-77-12-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 12-96. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
    The city hereby adopts a certain electrical code known as the National Electrical Code recommended by the National Fire Protection Association and being particularly the 2014 edition. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.4; Ord. of 1-9-2002; Ord. of 1-24-2005; Ord. of 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 06-08182014, 9-22-2014) 
State Law reference- Adoption of technical codes by reference, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003. 
Sec. 12-97. - General standards for wiring and equipment. 
    All wires and equipment in the interior of all buildings which are intended for transmission of electricity and to be connected with an outside circuit shall be made and at all times kept safe, and shall be placed, arranged, attached, changed and maintained by the person owning or using the wires and equipment, to the specifications of the city electrician. The wiring shall comply with the requirements of the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.9) 
Sec. 12-98. - Permission to turn on current. 
    Every person proposing to place wires designed to carry a current of electricity shall give notice thereof to the electrical inspector before commencing the work, and shall not turn the current on to the wires that are to be used for electric lighting, heating or power until permission to do so has been given by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1967, § 9-3.1) 
Sec. 12-99. - Repair of supports of overhead wires. 
    Every person owning, leasing or operating wires for the purposes described in this article shall, within 48 hours after notice is served by the city electrician, make such substitution or repairs of posts, supports, crossarms or stays for the safe carrying of such wires as may be required by the city electrician. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.10) 
Sec. 12-100. - Leaving wire on street or sidewalk or hanging from poles; spikes or steps. 
    No person shall permit pieces of wire to be left on the surface of any street or sidewalk, or permit unused coils or loose ends of wire to remain attached to any crossarms or posts more than 24 hours, or permit any spikes or steps to be driven or maintained in any pole so that the spikes or steps shall be lower than nine feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.11) 
Sec. 12-101. - Authority of council regarding location of poles; pole identification. 
(a)  No poles shall be set or maintained in any street, square, lane or alley in the city without the permission of the city council or its designee, and all poles carrying wires shall be designated by stencil with the names of the persons owning or using the poles. 
(b)  The location and height of all poles and wires shall be under the direction and control of the city council or its designee, which may at any time direct such changes to be made therein as the public safety and convenience may require, after interested parties have been given an opportunity to be heard. 
(c)  The location of all telephone and electric light poles located within the city shall not be changed to any other or new position upon the streets of the city unless a permit to do so is first obtained from the city council or its designee. The permit to change the location of poles may be granted upon the condition that any damage to sidewalks shall be replaced with the same type of materials as then existing. 
(d)  Permission given by the city to erect and maintain such poles and wires may be altered or amended in whole or in part at any time after 30 days' notice and an opportunity to be heard have been given to the parties interested, and any of such poles or wires may be removed by the city, or its officers, agents or servants, from time to time or at any time, without notice, in case of fire or other public necessity. 
(e)  All persons exercising any privileges under this section shall adopt and use in their business any devices or safeguards which may be from time to time discovered or invented for the protection of persons and property against injury growing out of the use of electric current for the purposes described in this section, if required so to do by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.12) 
Sec. 12-102. - Placement of overhead wires. 
(a)  All wires, when placed above the surface of the ground, shall be suspended from poles or buildings or other supports, but not trees, and shall be maintained by the persons using such wires. 
(b)  No wire shall be suspended from or attached to any private property for the purpose of conducting electricity or a television or radio signal, unless by special permission of the owner of such private property. 
(c)  No person shall attach or maintain any wire or other structure for the purpose of supporting any line of wires for cable communications or electric light or power circuits to any building without the consent of the city electrician. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.13) 
Sec. 12-103. - Indemnification of city for damage or injury resulting from poles and wires. 
    Every person erecting, maintaining or using poles or wires for the purposes mentioned in this article shall, in case of loss or damage, indemnify and save harmless the city and its officers, agents and servants from and against all lawful claims and demands for injuries to persons or property occasioned by the existence of such poles or wires or the transmission of electric current by means thereof; and the city, and its agents and servants, exercising the rights and powers given in this article, shall not be held liable by such person on account thereof, by reason of any injury or damage caused thereby. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.14) 
Sec. 12-104. - Conditions for placing poles and wires. 
    All wires used for the purposes mentioned in this article shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No permanent rights shall be obtained in the streets or public grounds by reason of such use; 
(2)  Such wires shall be subject to change of location or removal when deemed necessary for the public interest, on order of the council; and 
(3)  In case of emergency, such wires, if necessary, may be cut or removed by order of the city electrician or fire chief without claim upon the city therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.15) 
Sec. 12-105. - Inspection of wiring required. 
    Whenever any building is newly wired for the purpose of electric lighting, heating or power, or whenever change is made in the location or position of wires or electric equipment in any building, before any electric current shall be turned on, such building, wires and outlets shall be inspected by the electrical inspector. No person shall turn any current upon such wires and no person shall use the wires for such purpose until such approval has been obtained. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.16) 
Sec. 12-106. - Annual permit. 
    A fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be charged for an annual permit issued to licensed representatives or maintenance personnel in industrial maintenance, experimental set-ups, and relocations of minor devices and equipment. Inspections of work being performed under such permits shall be made by the city electrician at least annually. Any such permit shall expire on March 31 of each year. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.19; Ord. of 4-26-2004, § 1.19) 
Sec. 12-107. - Fire alarm boxes. 
    The city electrician is directed to charge, on behalf of the city, for his services related to the testing and maintenance of fire alarm boxes the annual sum provided in the city fee schedule plus the cost of all materials required to maintain said fire alarm boxes. 
(Ord. of 4-26-2004, § 1.20) 
Sec. 12-108. - Belated permits. 
    In any case in which electrical work for which a permit is required has been performed without a permit first having been obtained, the owner shall nevertheless obtain a permit but shall pay an additional fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1.22; Ord. of 4-26-2004, § 1.22) 
Sec. 12-109. - Licensing of contractors. 
    No person shall engage in the business of doing any electrical work or electric wiring unless licensed in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(Code 1967, § 9-2.11) 
Sec. 12-110. - Liability for damages. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be construed to relieve such person from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical fixtures, appliances, devices, equipment or wiring for damage or injury to any person or property, nor shall this article be construed to impose on the city any liability by reason of the inspection provided for in this article or by reason of any certificate or license issued under this article. 
(Code 1967, § 9-2.12) 
Secs. 12-111-12-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOUSING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-145. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards for all dwellings and property incident thereto in the city to insure safety, health, and public welfare through the proper construction, maintenance, and use thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(1.1); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-146. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basement means that portion of a building below the first floor joists having at least one-half of its clear ceiling height above the main level of the adjacent ground. 
    Chief of police means the legally designated head of the police department of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Dwelling or dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof arranged or designed to provide living facilities for one or more families. 
    Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit, physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, with facilities which are used or intended to be used for independent living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes. Dwelling units available for rental or occupancy for periods of less than one week shall be considered boarding/lodging units. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the health officer. 
    Fire chief means the legally designated head of the fire department of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes exlcuding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, game rooms, foyers or communicating corridors and permanent built-in closets and storage spaces. 
    Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Infestation means the presence or evidence of the presence within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
    Manufactured housing means a structural unit or units designed for occupancy, and constructed in a manufacturing facility and then transported by the use of its own chassis, or placed on an independent chassis, to a building site, the term includes any type of building which is constructed at a manufacturing facility and then transported to a building site where it is utilized for housing and may be purchased or sold by a dealer in the interim. Manufactured housing shall include newer mobile homes and modular homes as defined in city zoning regulations. 
    Mobile homes, older, means any factory-built home that fails to meet the definition of manufactured housing and more specifically, any mobile home constructed prior to June 15, 1976. These units shall be restrict to location in approved mobile home parks. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel of land under single ownership in rural residence, suburban residence and cluster development districts that has been planned and improved for the placement of not less than three mobile homes for non-transient use. 
    Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than three dwelling units. 
    Occupant means any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person, who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are rented or let or of an area where spaces are rented or let for mobile homes. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Plumbing means all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwasher, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents , and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines. 
    Rooming house means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling, containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to four or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living, and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish means combustible and non-combustible waste materials except garbage, including, without limitation, residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and others. 
    Structural elements means all of the following components of a structure, including but not limited to: foundation, framing, sheathing, siding, roofing material, windows, doors, trim, eaves, porches, stairs, railings, guards; and interior surfaces such as sheetrock, plaster, ceiling tiles, and countertops. 
    Summer camps means seasonal dwelling units intended for and actually used for single-family dwellings only during the months of May, June, July, August, September and October or weekends or other periods of vacations but not to exceed 30 days. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished, installed or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter that is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(b)  Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "lodging house," "rooming unit," or "premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(art. V); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-147. - Compliance required. 
(a)  No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to conform with the requirements of this article until it meets all of the minimum standards of this article as specified herein. 
(b)  It is unlawful to construct, alter, maintain, occupy, let for occupancy, or use a building or structure, or part thereof, in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-A(1.2), 20A(1.3); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-148. - Validity of other laws. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws that prescribe more restrictive limitations. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(1.4); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-149. - Exceptions permitted. 
    In seasonal dwellings, mobile homes, buildings erected prior to the original adoption of this article, or in agriculture and resource protection district as defined by the zoning provisions of the city, or in areas where public water or sewerage systems are not available, the code compliance officer shall upon application grant an exception for the use of buildings for dwelling purposes that do not meet the minimum standards set forth in this article when he determines that: 
(1)  It is not feasible or practicable to comply with such minimum standards; 
(2)  The safety, health, or general welfare of the occupants and the public will not be adversely affected; and 
(3)  The effect of the granting of the exception will not adversely affect adequate light, air, overcrowding, of persons or property, the provision for public utilities, the character of the neighborhood, or traffic conditions as applied to the welfare of the occupants or the general public. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(1.6); Ord Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-150. - Procedure for granting exceptions. 
(a)  The code compliance officer shall issue such exception in writing setting forth the date of granting, the reasons for granting the same, the date it shall expire, and the location of the premises. 
(b)  No such exceptions shall be granted for a period of more than five years. Any exception may be renewed one or more times, upon application to the board of appeals. Each renewal shall not exceed additional periods of five years for such renewal. Each renewal shall contain the requirements of the original exception and in addition thereto the date of issuance of the original exception and the statement that it is a renewal. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(1.7); Ord Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Secs. 12-151-12-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 12-170. - Authority of code compliance officer. 
    The code compliance officer is hereby authorized to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and premises located within this city in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(2.1); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-171. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    For the purpose of making such inspections, the code compliance officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey any or all dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, and premises at any mutually agreeable time but in any case within 20 days of notice to the owners or occupant of the intention to make such an inspection. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(2.2); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-172. - Owner and occupant to give free access. 
(a)  Access of code compliance officer. The owner and occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, lodging house and rooming unit or the person in charge thereof, shall give the code compliance officer free access to such dwellings, dwelling unit, lodging house or rooming unit and premises at any mutually agreeable time for the purpose of such inspection, examination, or survey, but in any case within 20 days of notice to the owner or occupant of the intention to make such an inspection, examination, or survey. 
(b)  Access of owner. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, lodging house and rooming unit shall give the owner, and his agent or employee, access at all reasonable times to any part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, lodging house, rooming unit or premises for the purpose of compliance with the provisinos of this article or any lawful order issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-A(2.3), 20-A(2.4); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Secs. 12-173-12-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 12-195. - Procedure generally. 
(a)  If the code compliance officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, he shall initiate enforcement proceedings in accordance with the citation system established in this Code. Alternatively, he may initiate a land use complaint pursuant to state law, in which case the penalties therein provided shall apply. 
(b)  Any notice issued pursuant to this article shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued; 
(3)  Set a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require; provided, however, that: 
a.  Complaints under this article be deemed properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or by leaving a copy thereof at his dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein; or 
b.  If a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known address or the address as shown on the records in the tax assessor's office of the city of auburn; and 
c.  If service is made personally or by leaving at his dwelling house or usual place of abode a statement signed by the person so serving stating the date of service shall be filed in the office of planning and development. 
(5)  May contain an outline of remedial action that, if taken, will effect compliance with the provision of this article. 
(c)  After service of such notice, the owner or occupant to whom it is directed shall correct the condition constituting the violation within the time specified and promptly give notice to the code compliance officer that such corrective action has been taken. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(3.1); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-196. - Method of petitioning for hearing. 
(a)  Any person affected by any notice issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of appeals; provided that such person shall file in the office of the board of appeals a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after the day the notice was served. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such petition, the board of appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner notice thereof in person or by mail. 
(c)  At such hearing, the board of appeals shall take evidence to determine whether such notice should be sustained, modified, or withdrawn. 
(d)  The hearing shall be commenced not later than 30 days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that upon application of the petitioner the board of appeals may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such 30 day period, if in its judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(3.2); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-197. - Power of board of appeals to alter notice. 
    After such hearing, the board of appeals shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings as to the compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the board of appeals sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to this article shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the board of appeals within ten days after such notice is served. There shall be an appeal from the board of appeals to the superior court in the manner provided by state law. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(3.3); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-198. - Recording of public hearing. 
    The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the board of appeals, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the board of appeals. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(3.4); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-199. - Notice of intent to sell, transfer or rent property subject to order. 
(a)  When required. Any person who proposes to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of lease or sublet any dwelling unit, lodging house, rooming unit, or other premises against which there is any existing lawful order of the code compliance officer, the board of appeals or any court of competent jurisdiction shall furnish the proposed grantee or transferee a true copy of such order and shall notify the office of planning and development in writing of the intent to so sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of lease or sublet in writing giving the name and address of the person to whom such transfer is proposed within three days of the proposed transfer. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who violates the terms of this section shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to a penalty or fine of not less than $50 and not more than $100 to be enforced by complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(3.5); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-200. - Placarding of buildings unfit for human habitation. 
(a)  Authority of code compliance officer. If the person so affected fails to appeal to the board of appeals or if after an appeal, the board of appeals sustains the decision of the code compliance officer, the dwelling, dwelling unit, lodging house, or rooming unit so affected may be declared unfit for human habitation and placarded by the code compliance officer. 
(b)  Procedure. To placard, the code compliance officer shall issue to the occupants and the owner or operator a written notice to vacate the premises within such time as the code compliance officer may deem reasonable, but not less than seven days, and a placard prohibiting continued occupancy or re-occupancy may be conspicuously posted on the premises, and a copy of such notice may be filed with the police department. 
(c)  Use of placarded buildings prohibited. No dwelling or dwelling units, lodging house, or rooming unit which has been placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the code compliance officer. The code compliance officer shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the placarding action is based have been eliminated. 
(d)  Defacement and removal of placard prohibited. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit, lodging house or rooming unit, which has been declared unfit for human habitation and placarded as such. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(3.6); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-201. - Order to vacate dangerous premises. 
    In instances where the health officer, fire chief, and chief of police, or their duly qualified deputies, determine in writing that extreme danger or menace to the occupants or the public health exists, the code compliance officer, health officer, fire chief, and chief of police, or their duly qualified deputies may order immediate correction to be made or, if the circumstances warrant, may order that the occupants vacate the premises as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(3.7); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Secs. 12-202-12-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 12-225. - Compliance with city codes and state law required. 
    All structures and structural elements of buildings and the construction, use and occupancy thereof shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Code, including the building and technical codes adopted by the city, and with state law and regulations. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-A(6.1), 20-A(12.1); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-226. - Maintenance. 
    All structures and structural elements shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, hazard free and suitable for the intended use. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(6.2); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-227. - Plumbing. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink and a bathtub or shower. In addition, every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy, a flush water closet and a lavatory basin. All plumbing facilities required by this Code shall be in accordance with the requirements of the plumbing code adopted by the city as of date of installation and maintained in good sanitary working condition; water-related plumbing facilities required by this Code shall be connected to adequate supply of water. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(art. 7); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-228. - Heating and ventilation. 
(a)  Maintenance. All heating and ventilating facilities shall be maintained in safe operating condition for use without danger of asphyxiation or of overheating combustible material. 
(b)  Requirements when central heating plant not available. When heat is not furnished by a central heating plant, each dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be provided with one or more masonry flues and smoke or vent pipe connections, or equal arrangement, in accordance with the provisions of the basic building code to permit the use of heating equipment capable of providing heat as required by this section. 
(c)  Heating facilities required in rented or leased premises. Every habitable room, let for occupancy, shall be served by heating facilities capable of providing a minimum temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit, at a distance of three feet from the exterior walls, five feet above floor level, as required by prevailing weather conditions. In addition, the heating facilities must be operated to protect the building equipment and systems from freezing. 
(d)  Window specifications. Every habitable room shall have a window or windows with a total sash area equal to at least eight percent of its floor area opening on a street, alley, yard, or court open to the sky and constructed and maintained so that at least one-half of the sash area can be opened, except that an approved method of mechanical ventilation may be substituted for such window or windows 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(art. 8); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-229. - Electrical and lighting. 
    All lighting and other electrical facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements of the electrical code adopted by the city and shall be maintained in good, safe and suitable electrical order. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-A(9.1), 20-A(9.2); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-230. - Passageways, stairways and exits. 
(a)  Exits. Every dwelling unit and every rooming unit shall have safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress leading from the interior of the building to safe and open spaces at ground level in accordance with applicable statutes and ordinances. 
(b)  Lighting. Every passageway and stairway shall have at least one ceiling-type or wall-type electric light fixture adequate to provide safe passage. 
(c)  Obstructions. Every hallway, stairway, corridor, exit, fire escape door or other means of egress hall be kept clear of obstructions at all times. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-A(9.3), 20-A(12.3), 20-A(12.4); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-231. - Garbage and rubbish. 
(a)  Method of disposal. Every responsible occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner. Every owner of rental property shall provide his tenants with suitable waste containers as required by city ordinance. 
(b)  Accumulations prohibited. Every dwelling shall be clean and free from garbage or rubbish. When a dwelling or dwelling unit is not reasonably clean or free from garbage or rubbish, the code compliance officer may cause the responsible person to put the dwelling or dwelling unit in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(10.1); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 02-02222016, 3-7-2016) 
Sec. 12-232. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Owner responsible for extermination in multiple dwellings. If infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(b)  Occupant responsible for extermination. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(10.2); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-233. - Space and occupancy. 
(a)  Floor space requirements. The total area of every dwelling unit shall contain at least 250 square feet of floor area, with an additional 125 square feet for each occupant over two. 
(b)  Ceiling height. At least one half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a room ceiling height of at least 7 feet; and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. 
(c)  Use of basement. No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless it conforms to the minimum requirements of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(art. 11); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 12-234. - Dwelling occupancies prohibited adjacent to hazardous establishments. 
    No dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be located within a building containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable liquids or producing toxic gases or vapors in any quantity that may endanger the lives or safety of the occupants. 
(Code 1967, § 20-A(12.2); Ord. of 3-26-1990; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. B, 4-16-2013) 
Chapter 14 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND PERMITS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal officers as licensing authority of municipalities, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3701; regulation of closing out sales, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3781 et seq.; regulation of innkeepers, victualers and lodginghouses, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3811 et seq.; temporary licenses, 32 M.R.S.A. § 59; camping areas, recreational camps, youth camps and eating establishments, 22 M.R.S.A. § 2491 et seq.; licensing for food establishments, 22 M.R.S.A. § 2167; massage therapy and therapists, 32 M.R.S.A. § 14301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    In order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, this chapter is enacted by the city to control the licensing and regulate the conduct of certain businesses and business practices. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-1, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult amusement device means any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin or the payment of consideration, operates or may be operated to depict, display, or project, obscene matter as defined in 17 M.R.S.A. § 2911(1). 
    Aftercare means instructions on how to care for a new tattoo. 
    Agricultural barn sale means a sale of property, personal or household goods or other used items from a barn or property that is or was used by the current owner, and operator of the barn sale, primarily for an agricultural use and is located in an Agriculture and Resource Protection or Residential Zoning District. 
    Antique means those items defined as antiques by the federal Tariff Act of 1930, 19 U.S.C. § 1337 et seq. 
    Aquifer means a geological formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that stores and transmits significant quantities of recoverable water, as mapped by the state geological survey. 
    Aseptic means free from pathogenic microorganisms. 
    Autoclave means pressure vessel using steam, pressure, heat and time to kill micro-organisms. It must be used according to the manufacturer's directions. A pressure cooker is not an autoclave. 
    Automobile graveyard means a yard, field or other area used as a place of storage, other than temporary storage, by an establishment or place of business that is engaged primarily in doing auto body repair work for the purpose of making repairs to render a motor vehicle serviceable, for three or more unserviceable, unregistered or uninspected, discarded, worn out or junked motor vehicles as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101(42), or parts thereof, referred to in this article as "vehicle" and includes an area used for automobile dismantling, salvage and recycling operations. 
    Beano or bingo means a specific kind of group game of chance, regardless of whether such a game is characterized by another name. In "beano," each participant is given or sold one or more tally cards, so-called, each of that contains preprinted numbers or letters and may or may not be arranged in vertical or horizontal rows. The participant covers or marks the numbers or letters as objects similarly numbered or lettered are drawn from a receptacle and the winner or winners are determined by the sequence in which those objects are drawn. 
    Billiard or pool hall means any place for the playing of any game of billiards, pool, bagatelle or similar game. 
    Blasting means the ignition, detonation or setting off of any charge or explosive or any solid, liquid or gaseous substance capable of any chemical reaction releasing energy or pressure in great force. 
    Bowling alley means any building, structure, enclosure or other place for the playing of bowls, candlepins, duckpins, tenpins or similar games, other than coin-operated amusement devices. 
    Business means any vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise, establishment or other kind of activity or matters, together with all devices, machines, equipment, vehicles and appurtenances used in connection therewith, any of which are conducted for profit or benefit, whether directly or indirectly, on any premises or location in this city or within its jurisdiction. 
    Carnival means any traveling amusement show, excluding circuses, with or without midway, rides, concessions or other specific attractions. For licensing purposes, the term "carnival" shall also include rodeos, thrill shows and freak shows. 
    Charitable purpose means any activity conducted without profit and for a public, medical, scientific, educational, fraternal or religious purpose. 
    Circus means any show in which feats of horsemanship, tumbling, strength, etc., are exhibited, excluding carnivals and harness or running horse races; any show with an enclosed ring for the exhibition of animals. 
    Class A Lounge means any business establishment which holds a class A lounge license issued by the state bureau of alcoholic beverages for the sale of spirituous, vinous and malt liquors. 
    Classified waterway means surface water, inland or tidal, and direct or indirect tributaries thereof, that is described and designated by distinct category by the state department of environmental protection pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 363-A or 38 M.R.S.A. § 364. 
    Client means any person who receives a therapeutic massage. 
    Coin-operated amusement device means any machine or device which upon the insertion of a coin may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score, and that is operated for amusement only and does not dispense any form of payoff, prize or reward except free replays. For the purpose of licensing, the owner of the establishment where the device is located shall be the party responsible for obtaining the license. 
    Critical violation means any violation of these rules which presents a clear risk of contamination, illness, or environmental health hazard. The commission of a critical violation of these rules is an aggravating factor which may warrant a greater fine, imprisonment, or license suspension or revocation. 
    Department means the city. 
    Disqualifying criminal conviction means any conviction for a criminal offense punishable by imprisonment whether or not the sentence was served, but shall not include any conviction which was set aside on appeal or collaterally, or for which a pardon, certificate of rehabilitation of equivalent under the law of the sentencing jurisdiction has been granted, or that is not rationally related to the licensing or operation for which a license is being applied. 
    Doing business means the selling of any goods or services, the soliciting of business or offering of goods or services for sale or hire, the maintenance or providing of any equipment or device, or the acquiring or using of any vehicle or other conveyance or any premises in the city for business purposes. 
    Donated personal property means the personal property of persons other than those residing on the residential premises where such sale is to take place, such personal property being donated to, or the sale being conducted by, a tax-exempt religious or charitable organization, and the entire proceeds from such sale being donated to, or retained by, the sponsoring tax-exempt religious or charitable organization. 
    Entertainment means any amusement, performance, exhibition, or diversion whether live, taped, or otherwise, for patrons or customers of the licensed premises whether provided by professional entertainers, by full-time or part-time employees of the licensed premises whose incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value, by patrons induced to win prizes or otherwise to act as entertainers, or by any other person. 
    Ethylene oxide means a method of sterilization, involving high pressure, conducted in a manufacturing facility. 
    Exhibitions, performances and shows meansanyperson who shall conduct or operate any exhibitions, performances or shows, including trade shows, tattoo shows, or any other public gathering where a fee is charged to either the participants or the attendees. 
    Fill-in means any goods, wares and merchandise not mentioned in the original inventory for a sale filed with the application for an auction license. 
    Flea market means the selling or offering for sale, to the public, of any services, goods, wares and merchandise or personal property by three or more individuals, groups or organizations from or at one fixed location. Also known as a craft fair, swap meet, bazaar. 
    Floodplain means the low land and relatively flat areas adjoining inland and coastal waters, including flood prone areas of offshore islands, which are inundated by a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of recurring in any year or a flood of magnitude equaled or exceeded once in 100 years on the average as identified by the federal insurance administration. 
    Food means and includes all liquid or solid substances intended for human consumption. 
    Food service establishment (FSE) means any person who prepares, sells, serves or packages food for consumption on premises within the corporate limits of the city, including but not limited to restaurants, luncheonettes, diners, snack bars, drive-ins and concession stands. The term "food service establishment," for the purpose of licensing, shall include any caterer doing business within the corporate limits of the city, any lessee or subtenant of any premises, business or dominant lessor (such as recreation or amusement areas, drive-in theaters, sports arenas or public exhibition halls) who prepares, serves, sells or packages food for consumption on the premises of any such business or dominant lessor, and any person, club or other establishment offering for sale malt, spirituous or vinous liquors for consumption on the premises. The city issues licenses for the following types of food service establishments: 
(1)  Class I-Liquor-Beer, wine and spirits, and mixed drinks. 
(2)  Class III-Liquor-Wine. 
(3)  Class III/IV-Liquor-Beer and wine. 
(4)  Class IV-Liquor-Beer. 
(5)  Class On or Off Premises-No liquor. 
(6)  Bottle Club/BYOB. 
(7)  Temporary Food Service Establishment-Per event, maximum of 30 days. 
(8)  Off Premises Retailer. 
    Garage sale means the sale of used household or personal goods held on the seller's own premises. Also known as a yard sale, barn sale, moving sale, tag sale. 
    Group care facility means a boarding care facility for more than eight individuals wherein children under 18 years of age or adults over 16 years of age and not legally related to the operator are provided personal care, supervision and social or rehabilitative services. Group care facilities within the meaning of this definition must be licensed by this state and may include, but are not limited to, group homes, half-way homes and congregate homes, but do not include foster family homes. No city License is required for group care facilities. 
    Itinerant Vendors means any person selling or with the intent of selling at a future date any merchandise or services by means of personal contact, i.e. door to door. 
    Junk means old iron, chains, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals, old rope, old bags, rags, wastepaper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens, clips, bagging, rubber and glass, and empty bottles of different kinds when less than one gross, and all articles discarded or no longer used, or a manufactured article composed of any one or more of the materials mentioned. 
    Junk collector means anyone dealing or trading in junk; anyone who engages in the collection, storage, transfer or sale of junk. 
    Junkyard means a yard, field or other area used as a place of storage for: 
(1)  Discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating supplies, household, appliances and furniture; 
(2)  Discarded, scrapped and junked lumber; 
(3)  Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, waste and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or nonferrous material; 
(4)  Garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary fills; 
all of which are referred to in this article as "junk." 
    Licensee means any holder of a valid and current license or permit issued by the city. 
    Local means of or pertaining to this city. 
    Lodging house or rooming house means a dwelling which, for compensation, lodging or lodging and meals is provided to more than four persons and where a proprietor or owner may reside in the building. No provisions for cooking in individual rooms other than a main kitchen are allowed. 
    Malt liquors means all kinds and types of liquors intended for human consumption produced by the fermentation of malt wholly or partially, or from any substitute therefore, that contain more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
    Mass gathering area means any place maintained, operated or used for a mass gathering, except an established permanent stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium, coliseum, fairground, or other similar permanent places of assembly. 
    Mass outdoor gathering means any gathering held outdoors with the intent to attract the continued attendance of 1,000 or more persons for two or more hours. 
    Massage establishment or therapeutic massage establishment are used interchangeably to mean any business including, but not limited to, a sole proprietorship in which the business operations consist of providing or making available massage in the city for consideration or with the expectation of receiving consideration or any gratuity, whether or not the business has a fixed place of business within the city limits. 
    Massage or therapeutic massage are used interchangeably to mean any method of rubbing, kneading, tapping, vibration, compression, percussion, application of friction or manipulation of the external parts of the human body other than parts of the body above the neck, with the hands or other parts of the body or with the aid of any instrument or device. 
    Massage therapist means any person who performs therapeutic massage for consideration or gratuity or with the expectation of receiving consideration or any gratuity. 
    Minor means an individual under 18 years of age. 
    Motion picture theater means any building or area, including drive-in parks, arenas, exhibition halls or public buildings, where commercial films, movies or motion pictures, including previews of motion pictures, closed circuit telecasts and videotape replays, are shown, or where any cinematograph or similar apparatus is kept, used or exhibited for any commercial use whatsoever. 
    Motor bus means motor vehicles designed and equipped for the general transportation of passengers for hire which possess a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of 15 or more passengers. 
    Neighborhood garage sale means a garage sale where two or more households hold a garage dale which takes place on the same days and during the same hours as permitted in the ordinance. In order to be considered a neighborhood garage sale, the sponsors and participants must all reside on the same street. 
    Nursing home means a facility that is operated in connection with a hospital, or in which nursing care and medical services are prescribed by or performed under the general direction of persons licensed to practice medicine or surgery in the state, for the accommodation of convalescent or other persons who are not acutely ill and not in need of hospital care, but who do require skilled nursing care and related medical services. No municipal license is required for nursing homes. 
    Operator means the person responsible for managing the mass gathering area. In the event that no manager exists, the owner, or in the event of his unavailability, the lessee of the ground encompassing the mass gathering area, shall be deemed to be the "operator" under these regulations. 
    Outpatient addiction treatment clinic means a program or facility operated for the purpose of and specializing in the care, treatment or rehabilitation of persons suffering with addictions, including, but not limited to gambling addiction, alcohol or controlled substance addictions. This includes, but is not limited to, substance abuse treatment programs licensed by the state department of behavioral and developmental services office of substance abuse. Outpatient addiction treatment clinic does not include an inpatient or residential addiction treatment program, or a program consisting solely of support group activities without treatment by licensed health practitioners, such as Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous, and similar programs. 
    Pawnbroker means any person engaged in the business of lending money on deposit or pledges of personal property or other valuable thing other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or in the business of purchasing personal property, or chooses in action, or other valuable thing, and selling or agreeing to sell the same back to the seller at a price other than the original price of purchase, or in the business of purchasing personal property such as articles containing gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals or jewels for the purpose of reducing or melting them into a different form and reselling the product. 
    Peddler means any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise and offering or exposing the same or any service for sale; or who without traveling from place to place shall sell, expose or offer any goods, wares, merchandise or service for sale from any portable, mobile or temporary structure, or from a wagon, automotive vehicle or other vehicle or conveyance; or who without traveling from place to place shall sell, expose or offer for sale the same in the entrances to buildings or other premises or upon vacant lots or other tracts of land within the corporate limits of the city. The term "peddler" shall not be construed to include the following: vendors of food sold by wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, vendors of merchandise by sample, list or catalogue for future delivery, vendors of farm, dairy, orchard, fish and forest products of their own production, vendors of newspapers and religious literature, route salesmen while engaged in making deliveries to their regular customers, commercial travelers or selling agents who, in the usual and customary course of business, make sales to dealers, or persons duly authorized to conduct tag days, sell poppies or otherwise solicit. 
    Pigment means the materials used in tattooing to implant a lasting pattern in the skin. Also, pigment may be referred to as "ink." 
    Plumbing means the art of installing in buildings the pipes, fixtures and other apparatus for bringing in the water supply and removing liquid and water-carried wastes, and shall include the necessary water piping and water connections to all types of heating apparatus using water. 
    Premises means all lands, buildings, structures, places and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property that is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in connection with, any such business conducted on such premises. 
    Racetrack means any fairgrounds, racetrack or field in the city which has on it any structure or grandstand with a capacity of over 100 persons and that is used by spectators at races. 
    Recognized school means any post secondary, academic institution for massage, bodywork, or somatic therapy which offers a course of training in the theory, method, profession and work of massage therapy consisting of 500 hours or more, such institution being approved by the state higher education department or an equivalent agency in another state. The 500 hours shall include at least 100 hours of anatomy/physiology; at least 100 hours devoted to professional aspects of the practice of massage including but not limited to ethics, draping, contraindications, first aid, CPR, and business management; and at least 200 hours of theory, practice and techniques of massage therapy. 
    Refuse means all combustible and non combustible, spoilable or non-spoilable solid or liquid waste. 
    Residential premises means a building or structure having at least one dwelling unit, the lot of land associated therewith, and any accessory structures; and any lot of land within a residential zone. 
    Roving diner and mobile food vendors means any portable, mobile or temporary structure, and any vehicle, cart, wagon, conveyance or carrier of any kind, from which food is sold or caused to be sold, at retail, from house to house, store to store, building to building, or along or upon any sidewalk, street, park or other public property in the city; lunch wagons. The term "roving diner" shall not be construed to include caterers, vendors of dairy products, ice, bakery products, or similarly employed route salesmen while engaged in making deliveries to their regular customers or persons making deliveries on order from customers of retail stores in the city. 
    Secondhand dealer means any person who engages in the purchase, collection, transfer or storage for later resale, or who engages in the trading or selling, unless such sale is by auction of less than four days' duration, of any article, vehicle or material, or portion thereof, of which prior use has been made in any manner whatsoever. The term "secondhand dealer" shall not be construed to include pawnbrokers, junk collectors, used car dealers; nor shall it include any person primarily engaged in the retail sale of new and unused goods, who deals with used goods only incidentally, such as accepting such goods in trade as part of a transaction involving the sale of new goods, but only to the extent that such used goods are of the same type as the new goods sold by such person. 
    Sterilize means to render free from infectious organisms, specifically for tattoos by use of an autoclave used in accordance with accepted sterilizing procedures unless previously manufactured and packaged with ethylene oxide (E.O) form of sterilization. 
    Solicitor means any person using or upon any sidewalk, street park or other public place, or at any doorway or entranceway immediately abutting thereon, within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of begging, collecting or soliciting alms for the poor or funds for any charitable, philanthropic, civic, musical, athletic, patriotic or related purposes. 
    Sound amplification means any private conveyance or carrier of any kind having, either mounted or un-mounted, any electronic, mechanical or other appliance, apparatus, equipment or device used to broadcast or otherwise amplify any announcement, voice, advertisement, recording, tape or other sound for any purpose other than use during a public emergency, and traveling upon or using any street, sidewalk, park or other public place within the corporate limits of the city. The term "sound amplification" shall not be construed to include any private or public emergency vehicles used to perform a public service. 
    Spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage produced by distillation or if produced by any other process, strengthened or fortified by the addition of distilled spirits of any kind, intended for human consumption, that contains more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
    Takeout establishment means an establishment in which food is prepared on the premises to be licensed that is sold exclusively to customers to be consumed off the premises. 
    Tattoo establishment means permanent, non-dwelling premises where a Tattoo Practitioner performs tattooing. 
    Tattoo means to insert pigment under the skin of a human being by pricking with a needle or otherwise, so as to produce an indelible mark or figure visible through the skin. 
    Tattoo practitioner means the person who places a tattoo on a human being. 
    Tattoo trade show means an event held for the purpose of promoting the tattoo and other licensed body art industry, where a minimum of 20 licensed tattoo practitioners operate at an approved facility at a fixed location for a specified length of time of not more than seven days in conjunction with a single event or celebration, where the primary function of the event or celebration is tattooing. 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle used for the conveyance of passengers for hire from place to place on the streets of the city, and shall include, in addition to such motor vehicles as are commonly known as taxicabs, all motor vehicles of every kind, character and description which are used as taxicabs, cabs, for-hire cars, or livery cars and engaged as such in the conveyance of passengers for hire. The term "taxicab" shall not be construed to include motor vehicles owned by undertakers and used for funeral services, motor vehicles for hire while being used for services at funerals or weddings or motorbuses. 
    Ultrasonic machine means a mechanical device that uses sound wave vibration through a liquid medium to clean soiled or used instruments or utensils before being sterilized. 
    Vinous liquor means wine. 
    Work Station means the actual area where a tattoo is being applied, including work surfaces and all sterile equipment being utilized during the application of a tattoo. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-8, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 14-11042013, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 12-06152015, 7-16-2015; Ord. No. 13-06152015, 7-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-3. - City clerk. 
    As an agent of the city council, the city clerk or designee is hereby authorized and directed to receive all applications not otherwise provided for, and act thereon with reasonable promptness consistent with the nature of the matter, by either issuing the license as applied for, subject to limitations on his authority as contained herein, or denying same and so notifying the applicant personally or in writing, such notice to state the reason for such denial. If the issuing officer be other than the city clerk, the issuing officer shall follow the same procedure as outlined above for the city clerk or designee in the issuing of licenses and permits. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-2, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-4. - Council reservation. 
    Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the city council hereby reserves sole power to grant or deny licenses or permits. Certifications by officials and any other restriction in this chapter are standards set up for the direction of, and limitations placed upon the authority of the city clerk or designee in the exercise of his powers granted herein as agent of the city council and are not to be construed as limitations on or as delegations of power by the city council. In such specific cases or classes as it may desire at any time, the city council may assume original jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-3, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-5. - City manager's authority. 
    The city clerk or designee may confer with the city manager when the clerk believes that the granting of an application may not be in the best interest of the city. The city clerk or designee shall deny or defer action for a reasonable period on any license application if so ordered in writing by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-4, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-6. - Certification. 
    In all cases where the certification of any city official is required as a condition precedent to issuance of any license or permit by the city clerk, he shall notify promptly such officer or officers and shall not issue such a license or permit until and unless all required certifications are received, as evidenced by signature on the application. Whenever any required certification is refused by the appropriate city official, the license or permit applied for shall be denied, until said certification can be obtained by the appropriate official. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-3, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-7. - Ownership certificates. 
    No license shall be issued to partnerships or persons engaged in business as sole proprietors under any name, style, or designation other than their own name, unless a certificate of sole proprietor or partnership has been filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-5, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-8. - Conformance with zoning ordinances. 
    No license shall be issued to any applicant for use at any location where such use is prohibited by city zoning regulations unless the code enforcement officer shall certify on the application therefore that such use is an approved nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-6, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-9. - State applications. 
    Applications to the state that require the approval of the municipal officers of the city must be approved by the city council. The city clerk or designee is hereby authorized to execute such consents on behalf of the city council after such approval. council approval is required for the initial application or changes to existing liquor license applications or special amusement permits. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-7, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-10-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 14-26. - Compliance with state and local law and rules required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, no person shall engage in any business or activity, nor maintain any equipment or device, for which a license or permit is required, without having first complied with all applicable rules and regulations and having paid the proper fee and obtained a license therefore. 
(b)  Specifically, all licensees and applicants for licenses are required to comply with state statutes and rules, city ordinances and rules and regulations of city departments which pertain to the business or activity for which a license is desired. State rules include and are not limited to: 
(1)  State of Maine Food Code 2013 as adopted by the Maine Department of Health and Human Services, Health Inspection Program, 10-144 CMR 200 and the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, 01-01 CMR 331, October 1, 2013. 
(2)  Rules Relating to Lodging Establishments, Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Environmental Health 10-144 CMR 206, January 1, 2003. 
(3)  Rules relating to the Administration and Enforcement of Establishments Licensed by the Health Inspection Program, Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Center for Disease Control Prevention, Division of Environmental Health Inspection Program 10-144 CMR Chapter 201, last Amended on October 7, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-26, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 07-12172012, § 24-36(a), 1-7-2013; Ord. No. 08-09222014, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 14-27. - Penalty. 
    The violation of any provision of this division shall be punished by a civil penalty, payable to the city, of not less than $100.00 and not more than $2,500.00 for each offense, based on the severity of the offense and number of occurrences. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation occurs shall constitute a new and separate offense. In addition to such penalty, if the court finds for the city, the city shall recover its costs of suit, including reasonable experts' fees, reasonable attorneys' fees and reasonable and necessary investigative costs. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-27, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-28. - License for each location required. 
    A license is required for each place or premises where a business regulated by this chapter, or any part thereof, including storage, is conducted. No licensee shall engage in such business in any manner at any place without first obtaining such license. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following licenses, except that a separate license shall be required for each cart, vehicle, conveyance or other carrier employed by such licensees: peddler, solicitor, sound amplification and taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-28, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-29. - Written application to be on approved form; submitted with appropriate fee. 
    Except when otherwise provided by the ordinances of the city, every application for a license shall be made in writing to the city clerk or designee upon a form to be provided by the clerk. Such application shall be signed by the applicant. The proper fee shall be paid to the clerk at the time of filing the application. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-29, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-30. - Business beginning after application date. 
    The license fee for any business shall be due and payable before such business is begun, provided, that when the licensee begins such business after the expiration of six months of the current license year, then such licensee shall be required to pay one-half the applicable yearly license fee prescribed, except as provisions otherwise require payment of the full license fee. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-30, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-31. - Fees; waiver. 
    The fees for business licenses shall be paid by the owner or his agent in accordance with the business fee schedule established by the city council The city council is the only authority allowed to waive fees prescribed by ordinance. An application for waiver of any fees must be presented in writing to the city clerk to be brought to the city council at its next available meeting. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. §§ 24-31, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-32. - Applicants required to furnish information. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license shall furnish to the city the following information: 
(1)  Complete and exact name under which the business is proposed to be operated; 
(2)  If the business is proposed to be operated by an individual under any assumed name, the name of such individual and his address; 
(3)  If the business is a partnership, the name and address of each partner; 
(4)  If the business is a corporation, the name and address of the officers of the corporation, and the location of the principal office; 
(5)  Nature of the business for which a license is desired; 
(6)  Proposed physical location; and 
(7)  Proof of ownership or legitimate interest in property where business is to be conducted. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall furnish to the city clerk or designee such other information as may be required by him in order to enable him to determine the proper classification of the applicant and the appropriate license fee and any other associated costs directly related to the application for a license, such as, but not limited to, the costs of public hearing ads and background check. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-32, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-33. - Investigation of applicants. 
    Wherever his approval is required or upon the request of the city clerk, the police chief may cause an investigation of any applicant for a license to be conducted prior to approval of such application for a license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-33, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-34. - Certification from city officials. 
(a)  Before an applicant receives a license, the city clerk shall submit the application for certification to the code enforcement officer, fire chief, police chief and city treasurer or their designee. 
(b)  Each city official has the authority to use back ground investigations, city records and any other means necessary to review each application in the course of the approval or denial process. 
(c)  The code enforcement officer shall inspect the premises to determine whether the facilities are sanitary and in compliance with the provisions of land use regulations, building standards and codes as well as all state and city rules and regulations for the type of business activities intended to be conducted. 
(d)  The fire chief shall determine whether the premises are free of a health safety and fire hazards and in compliance with all applicable standards. 
(e)  The police chief shall certify that the applicant has not had a history of complaints or problems on the proposed business, applicants, owners or managers; where the approval of the license would be adverse to the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(f)  The city treasurer shall certify that all taxes and any monies due to the city have been paid or are current. 
(g)  In any case where the city requires the approval of the building inspector, code enforcement officer, police chief, fire chief or any other city official prior to issuance of the license, it shall be the duty of the city clerk or designee to notify in writing the officials whose approvals are required. 
(h)  The officials so notified, or their duly delegated representatives, shall approve or disapprove the application without delay and shall note their approval or disapproval thereon, stating the reasons for any disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-34, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 07-12172012, § 24-36, 1-7-2013) 
Sec. 14-35. - Hearing before city council; notice. 
    When required by the city council, a hearing will be held at which time the council shall decide whether to approve or disapprove any application for a license or permit. It shall be the duty of the city clerk or designee to notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by the city clerk, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his last known address at least 48 hours prior to the date set for such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-34, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 07-12172012, § 24-36, 1-7-2013) 
Sec. 14-36. - Inspection of applicant's premises and merchandise. 
    Whenever required by state law, the ordinances of the city, the regulations of any city department, or upon the request of the city clerk, an inspection may be made of the applicant's premises or merchandise by the city assessors, police chief, fire chief, code enforcement officer, building inspector or other duly authorized city official prior to approval of any application for a license or permit. In addition, the premises or merchandise of every licensee shall be subject to such inspection at any time during the current license year; and the results of such inspections may be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-35, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-37. - Disapproval by city officials; appeal to city council. 
(a)  In any case where the city requires the approval of the building inspector, code enforcement officer, police chief, fire chief or any other city official prior to issuance of the license, it shall be the duty of the city clerk or designee to notify in writing the officials whose approvals are required. 
(b)  The officials so notified, or their duly delegated representatives, shall approve or disapprove the application without delay and shall note their approval or disapproval thereon, stating the reasons for any disapproval. When required by the city council, a hearing will be held at which time the council shall decide whether to approve or disapprove any application for a license or permit. It shall be the duty of the city clerk or designee to notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by the city clerk, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his last known address at least 48 hours prior to the date set for such hearing. 
(c)  The decision and order of the council on such hearing shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-36, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-38. - Grounds and procedure for denial of license applications; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, a license under this chapter shall be denied if the council makes a finding that: 
(1)  The applicant is a corporation that is not licensed to do business in the state; 
(2)  The applicant is a corporation, of which, at any time during the previous five years, a principal officer, or a person having an actual or beneficial ownership interest or management authority therein has been convicted of (a) any Class A, Class B, or Class C crime, or (b) a crime committed under the laws of the United States of America or of any other state or territory thereof, that is punishable (whether or not such punishment was actually imposed) by a sentence at least as harsh as that that is authorized for the commission of a Class C crime under state law; provided that such conviction was for an offense that is rationally related to the regulation of the business sought to be licensed; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of (a) any Class A, Class B or Class C crime, or (b) a crime committed under the laws of the United States of America or of any other state or territory thereof, that is punishable (whether or not such punishment was actually imposed) by a sentence at least as harsh as that that is authorized for the commission of a Class C crime under Maine law; provided that such conviction was for an offense that is rationally related to the regulation of the business sought to be licensed; 
(4)  The applicant has had his business license revoked within the five years preceding the date of the application; 
(5)  The applicant is a corporation, person or other business entity which does or will employ a person (a) who will be substantially in the ownership or management of the business and the employee's business license has been revoked within the five years preceding the application; or (b) who was a principal of any corporation whose business license has been revoked within the five years preceding the application; 
(6)  The applicant is a corporation, person or other business entity of which any person is a principal who will be substantially involved in the ownership or management of the business and the principal's business license has been revoked within the five years preceding the application; 
(7)  The proposed licensed premises or its use fails to comply with zoning or other land use ordinances; 
(8)  The proposed licensed premises or its use fails to comply with any municipal ordinance or regulation; 
(9)  There exist on or about the premises proposed to be licensed conditions such as waste disposal violations, health or safety violations or other such conditions that unreasonably disturb, interfere with, or affect the ability of persons or businesses residing or located in the vicinity of the licensed premises to use or enjoy their property in a reasonable manner; 
(10)  The applicant has knowingly furnished false or misleading information on his application. 
(b)  No license or permit shall be issued by the city clerk or designee following a hearing at which the city council has disapproved any application for such license. In addition, the city clerk or designee shall deny a license or permit to any person whose application was disapproved by any city official whose approval was required. 
(c)  No license or permit shall be issued to any person who is indebted to the city upon any claim, tax or account that is more than 60 days delinquent. The city treasurer shall be responsible for making available to the city clerk or designee and any other license-issuing officers such information as is essential for compliance with this section. 
(d)  In case an application is disapproved, the city clerk or designee shall then notify the applicant in writing of such denial and shall refund the fee paid in. The city clerk or designee shall also notify the city council of such action at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. 
(e)  In the event that the council, in an exercise of its sound discretion, determines that there exist extenuating circumstances with respect to the grounds for denial of a license or that the circumstances giving rise to the denial can be ameliorated by the imposition of conditions or limitations to the grant of a license, the council may, notwithstanding the grounds set forth in this section, grant a license to the applicant upon such conditions as the council in an exercise of its sound discretion deems to be just and appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. §§ 24-36, 24-37, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 07-12172012, § 24-36, 24-37, 1-7-2013) 
Sec. 14-39. - Appeal. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, appeals shall be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the office of the city clerk or designee within 30 days of the date of any such denial to the council in writing, whereupon a hearing will be scheduled, at which time the applicant shall have the right to be heard. It shall be the duty of the city clerk or designee to notify such applicants who have appealed, of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  Such notice shall be mailed by the city clerk, postage prepaid, to the applicant at the address furnished on the application form at least 48 hours prior to the date set for hearing. The city council may, at that time, approve any application previously denied by the affirmative vote of five or more members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-37, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-40. - Issuance of licenses. 
    Except where the ordinances of the city require a license to be signed by some other official or where otherwise provided for by the city council, the city clerk or designee shall issue all licenses for which an application has been submitted and approved. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-38, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-41. - Display of licenses. 
    Every license shall be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of the licensee named in the license, or, in the case of equipment licenses, the license shall be affixed to such machines or equipment as required to allow such license to be inspected at any time by any proper city official. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-39, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-42. - Change of location of licensed business. 
    No license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the conduct of any business at a fixed place designated in the license issued therefore shall be valid for the conduct of such business at any place other than that designated in such license. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-40, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-43. - Nontransferability. 
    Every license issued by the city shall be a personal privilege and shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-41, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-44. - Duration of licenses; expiration date. 
    All licenses, except when otherwise provided, shall be for 12 months' duration and shall expire on the last day of the expiration month according to the following schedule: 
Type of License Term of License Expiration Adult Amusement Device One Year June Automobile Graveyard One Year October Beano/Bingo Six Months, Or Up To Three Years Maximum December Bowling/Pool One Year Coincides With Food License Circus/Traveling Amusement Show Per Day Per Event Coin-Operated Device One Year June Exhibition/Performance /Show Per Day Per Event Flea Market 30 Days, 60 Days, 90 Days, Or One Year Per Event Food Service Establishment Class A-E, G One Year One Year From Date Of Issuance Food Service Establishment Class F Up To 30 Days Per Event Itinerant Vendor 30 Days, 60 Days, 90 Days, Or One Year Per Event Junk Collector/ Pawnbroker/Secondhand Dealer One Year Date Of Issuance Mass Gathering/Event Per Day Per Event Massage Establishment One Year Date Of Issuance Motion Picture Theater One Year January Outpatient Addiction Treatment Clinic One Year Date Of Issuance Peddler Up To 30 Days Per Event Roller Skating Rink One Year April Roving Diner/Mobile Food Vendor 3 Months, 6 Months, One Year April Special Amusement One Year Coincides With Liquor License Tattoo One Year Date Of Issuance Taxicab/Taxicab Driver One Year December  
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-43, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-45. - Effective date. 
    Unless otherwise provided upon issuance of the license, the effective date of all licenses shall be the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-44, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-46. - Responsibilities of licensee. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the licensee of establishments regulated by this chapter to make certain that all rules and regulations prescribed by this chapter and state law are complied with, and each licensee shall cooperate fully with city officials to enforce such regulations. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-45, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-47. - City officials to notify police of violators; prosecutions. 
    Any city official having knowledge of any person operating any business or activity regulated by this chapter without the required license, or violating any state or local regulations, shall furnish the police chief the name of such person. It shall be the duty of the police chief to commence proceedings against the offenders of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-46, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-48. - Suspensions and revocations; hearings. 
(a)  Where provided, duly authorized city officials; police chief, fire chief or code enforcement officer; shall have the power to temporarily suspend licenses, upon written notification of violation, for a period of up to five calendar days, when the continued operation of the licensed business or activity presents a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. This temporary suspension can be revoked when the licensed business rectifies the deficiencies which presented the danger. 
(b)  Any license issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the city council and any license fees retained by the city, upon a finding by the council that the licensee has violated the ordinances of the city or the laws of the State, or has willfully or persistently failed to comply with any applicable rules and regulations. Any action to suspend or revoke a license may be commenced upon the initiative of the council, upon the recommendation of any city official charged with approving, inspecting or otherwise regulating the licensee's business or activity, or upon complaint from any resident of the city. 
(c)  Prior to suspending or revoking a license, the city council shall hold a hearing at the regular meeting of the council or a special meeting thereof called for that purpose. At such a meeting, the licensee shall have the right to be heard. Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by the city clerk, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least 48 hours prior to the date set for hearing. The decision and order of the city council at such hearings shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-47, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-49. - Exemptions from license requirement or fees. 
(a)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction and persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers, such as sheriffs and marshals, shall not be required to secure a local license. 
(b)  Orphanages and public and private hospitals, as defined in the laws of the State, shall not be required to secure a local business license to operate a children's home or day care facility. 
(c)  Persons selling, exclusively, farm, dairy, orchard or fish products of their own production shall not be required to obtain a local license. 
(d)  No charge shall be made for the issuance of a solicitor's license, blasting permit or chimney cleaner permit; however, persons traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street to street selling magazines or other merchandise by sample, list or catalogue for future delivery shall be required to obtain a local itinerant vendor/peddler's license. 
(e)  Persons licensed in accordance with state law to maintain an automobile graveyard or junkyard shall not be required to obtain a local license to also operate as a junk collector. 
(f)  Persons who use their own homes to provide foster care to children shall not be required to obtain a local license. 
(g)  Public or private school cafeterias and nursing homes shall not be required to obtain a local food service establishment license. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-48, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-50. - Food sovereignty license exemption. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The intent and purpose of Auburn's Food Sovereignty Ordinance is to ensure that residents are provided unimpeded access to local food and to reduce governmental regulation of the local food system to the fullest extent permitted by home rule authority under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, the Constitution of Maine, Article VIII, Part Second, and pursuant to 7-A M.R.S.A. § 201 et seq. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Consumer means any individual who purchases or otherwise receives local food or food products from a producer, grower or processor. 
    Grower means any individual who grows local food or food products. 
    Local food or food products means food, food products or drink grown, produced and processed by individuals within Auburn who sell or provide directly to consumers. 
    Local food system means a community food system within a municipality that integrates food production, processing, consumption, direct producer-to-consumer exchanges and other traditional foodways to enhance the environmental, economic, social and nutritional health and well-being of Auburn and its residents. 
    Processor means any individual who processes or prepares local food or food products. 
    Producer means any individual who produces local food or food products. 
(c)  Exemption. Producers, growers, and processors of local food or food products in the city are exempt from licensure and inspection with respect to their provision or sale of local food and food products to consumers within the local food system of the city. To the extent this section conflicts with any portion of the Code of Ordinances of the city, this section shall prevail and, as it pertains to this section, that portion of code shall be inapplicable. 
(Ord. No. 07-08072017, 8-21-2017) 
Secs. 14-51-14-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS 

Sec. 14-72. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to any automobile graveyard or junkyard all or part of that is within the city, except those owned or operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-72, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-73. - Permit required; fees. 
(a)  No person shall establish, operate or maintain, and the owner of property shall not permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of, any junkyard or automobile graveyard all or any part of that is within the city without first obtaining a permit therefore in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3752 et seq. 
(b)  All permits issued under this article shall be approved by the city council and issued by the city clerk. 
(c)  All permits issued under this article shall be for a term not to exceed one calendar year, which expires on the first day of the year next following unless earlier suspended or revoked. 
(d)  In addition to the application fee provided for in this article, the fee required for the issuance of any permit under this article shall be paid in advance in the amount provided for in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3756. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-73, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-74. - Administration. 
(a)  Conditions of approval: The city council may impose conditions on the approval of any permit application under this article to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  That the applicant provide documentation to the city clerk or designee of the receipt of any approvals required by any federal or state agency or department pursuant to federal or state law prior to the issuance of any permit under this article. 
(2)  That the applicant provide documentation to the city clerk or designee of the receipt of any approvals required by any city board pursuant to this code prior to the issuance of any permit under this article. 
(3)  Any screening requirements imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter be installed and completed prior to the issuance of any permit under this article. 
(b)  Contents of application: All applications for permits under this article shall be filed with, and in a form satisfactory to, the city clerk. Such application shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name, address and contact information including a phone number of the applicant and all other persons having a legal interest in the property. 
(2)  The location of the premises for which a permit is sought by identification of city tax map number and street address. 
(3)  The dimensions and acreage of the property. 
(4)  An original and three copies of a site plan, drawn to a scale of 100 feet or less to the inch, that contains the following information: 
a.  The boundary lines of the property for which a permit is sought. 
b.  The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
c.  The location of all existing and proposed areas within which all vehicles and junk will be located. 
d.  The location of any aquifer or classified waterway on the property or within 300 feet thereof. 
e.  The location of any water bodies on the property or within 300 feet thereof. 
f.  The location of any floodplain areas located on the property. 
g.  The location and characteristics of all existing and proposed vegetation that is proposed to be maintained for required screening. 
h.  The location and characteristics of all existing and proposed fencing proposed to be maintained for required screening. 
i.  The location of any residences, private wells or schools within 300 feet of the property. 
j.  The characteristics of the soils existing on the property as determined by the soil conservation service soils survey map. 
k.  The contours of the property as determined by the U.S. Geological Survey Contour Map. 
l.  The location and characteristics of all vehicular entrances and exits serving the property. 
(5)  A statement as to whether approval by any state agency or department is required pursuant to state law and, if so, a copy of the required license or approval. 
(6)  A nonrefundable application fee in accordance with the city's fee schedule as approved by the city council. 
(c)  Compliance standards: The following standards shall govern the issuance of permits under this article and the operation and maintenance of all permitted premises: 
(1)  An effective visual screen at least six feet in height shall be located and maintained around all sides of the area where vehicles or junk are to be located such that these areas are entirely screened from ordinary view from all directly abutting properties and public ways at all times. 
(2)  All screening and location requirements of 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3754-A and 3755-A shall be satisfied. There shall be no vehicles or junk stored outside the screened area. 
(3)  No vehicle or junk shall be stored within 300 feet of any water body, aquifer or classified waterway. 
(4)  No vehicles or junk shall be stored within 300 feet of any residence, private well or school. 
(5)  No vehicles or junk shall be stored within a floodplain. 
(6)  Upon receiving a motor vehicle, the fuel tank and battery shall be removed and the fuel, engine lubricant, transmission fluid, brake fluid and engine coolant shall be drained into watertight, covered containers and shall be recycled or disposed of according to all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations regarding disposal of waste oil and hazardous materials. No discharge of any fluids from any motor vehicle or junk shall be permitted into or onto the ground. 
(7)  No vehicles or junk shall be located closer than 100 feet from all lot lines of the property. 
(8)  All dismantling of motor vehicles with power tools shall take place within a building. 
(9)  All federal and state hazardous waste laws and regulations shall be satisfied. 
(10)  All vehicular entrances and exits shall be located and constructed in a manner which does not create or aggravate a traffic safety hazard. 
(11)  No noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor shall be emitted that is detectable to the normal senses from any abutting property. 
(12)  Upon recommendation of the director of planning and code enforcement, the city council may waive compliance with any of the above standards when both the director of planning and code enforcement and the city council determine that strict compliance therewith is not necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Nonconforming Uses: Any automobile graveyard or junkyard in existence and for which a valid permit was in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives may remain in operation in its present location, pending the expiration of such permit, so long as such use complies with the provisions of 30 M.R.S.A. § 3751 et seq. Thereafter, such automobile graveyard or junkyard shall be required to comply with all the provisions of this article except those compliance standards contained in subsections (c)(3), (4), (5), (7), (8) and (10) of this section. Any expansion of such junkyard or automobile graveyard beyond the size which existed and for which a valid permit was in effect on the effective date of this article shall comply with all provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-74, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-75-14-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BEANO/BINGO AND GAME OF CHANCE 

Sec. 14-100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the issuance of permits for beano, bingo and games of chance, in accordance with 13-A M.R.S.A. § 311-329. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-75, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-101. - Application and municipal approval; licenses not transferable. 
    The city clerk and police chief or their designee may approve or deny all beano/bingo or games of chance license submitted on properly completed forms, provided by the state department of public safety. Applicant shall pay a licensing fee to the city. If beano/bingo or a game of chance will be conducted on a regular basis, the applicant may be eligible for a blanket letter of approval for a maximum period of three years. Licenses are non-transferable. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-76, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-102-14-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 14-120. - Activity that requires licensure. 
    No person shall conduct or operate any of the following without first obtaining a license therefore. No such license shall be granted except upon certification by the fire chief, police chief and code enforcement officer that the proposed exhibition or show will not create a hazard to the health and safety, including traffic hazards. 
(1)  Motion picture theaters. 
(2)  Roller skating rink. 
(3)  Exhibitions, performances and shows. 
(4)  Bowling and pool. 
(5)  Circuses and traveling amusement shows. 
(6)  Coin-operated devices. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-77, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-121-14-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLEA MARKETS 

Sec. 14-140. - Permit required; application. 
    No flea market shall be conducted without a permit, which shall be obtained by the owner or duly authorized agent of the premises where the flea market is to be located by submitting a completed application to the city clerk's office upon forms provided for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-123, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-141. - Provisions of section 14-2 not applicable. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter relating to peddlers, individual participants in a flea market need not secure a peddler's license. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-124, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-142. - Reoccurring sales of personal property. 
    No person may conduct anysale of personal property for more than two periods not to exceed three days each within a six month period, even on their own property, without first obtaining a permit to operate a flea market. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-125, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-143-14-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Food and Food Handlers Generally, 7 M.R.S.A. § 401 et seq., 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 2491-2501, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3931, 32 M.R.S.A. §§ 1751-1854. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-160. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in, operate or conduct the business of the manufacture, preparation, sale or service of food in the city unless such person has first acquired a license in accordance with Articles I and II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-147, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-161. - Sanitary conditions required. 
    Every person owning, managing or operating an establishment or business where food is manufactured, prepared, sold or served to the public in the city shall at all times keep the premises and all fixtures, appliances and utensils in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-148, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-162. - Running water, toilet facilities required. 
    Every establishment or business where food is manufactured, prepared, sold or served to the public in the city shall be provided with an adequate supply of hot and cold running water under pressure from the public mains where such is available, and shall be equipped with proper lavatory and toilet facilities convenient, accessible and sufficient to ensure the comfort and cleanliness of its employees; and where both male and female help are employed, the code enforcement officer may require separate toilets, lavatories and dressing rooms to be installed for the use of either sex. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-149, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-163. - Diseased and unhealthy employees. 
    Food service establishments are regulated and inspected in accordance with the state department of health and human services established rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-150, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-164. - Certificate of health required. 
    Food service establishments are regulated and inspected in accordance with the state department of health and human services established rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-152, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-165. - Physician's duty. 
    Food service establishments are regulated and inspected in accordance with the state department of health and human services established rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-153, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-166. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person who makes delivery of prepackaged food items to customers on order from an established and regular place of business located in the city or to route salesmen while making deliveries of prepackaged food items to their regular customers. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-154, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-167. - Inspections in compliance with state law and rules. 
    This section should indicate that all food establishments are to be inspected in accordance with the state department of health and human services established rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-154, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-168-14-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL FOOD HANDLERS AND ROVING DINERS 

Sec. 14-190. - Approval of code enforcement officer, license required. 
    No person shall operate a roving diner nor maintain, or otherwise engage in, any business as a special food handler or food service establishment without having first secured the approval of the code enforcement officer and obtained a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-167, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-191. - Pushcarts, roving diners and mobile food units in streets and public places. 
(a)  Pushcarts licensed as roving diners may be operated in the streets, ways and public places in accordance with the provisions of this section. For the purpose of this section, the term "public places" shall include public parks and grounds. 
(b)  No pushcart shall be operated or stationed: 
(1)  In the roadway, except when specifically authorized to do so by the police chief on a street which has been blocked to vehicular traffic for purposes of a public event. 
(2)  Within 200 feet, measured by the most direct line, of any part of a food service establishment having a fixed location. This provision is not applicable for special events and festivals approved by the city council, i.e. the Balloon Festival. 
(3)  In such a manner as to unreasonably obstruct the normal flow of pedestrian traffic or to expose any pedestrian to a risk of injury. 
(4)  On any city sidewalk where the remaining pedestrian travel path is less than six feet. 
(5)  In such a way that any part of the equipment overhangs over private property, unless the owner of the pushcart has authorization from the property owner in writing. 
(c)  No pushcart shall be operated or stationed in, on or within 50 feet of any area subject to an exclusive franchise granted by the city. The city clerk or designee shall maintain a list of such areas and shall advise operators of pushcarts of the location thereof. 
(d)  Operators of pushcarts shall provide waste paper receptacles for use by their customers and shall maintain the areas in which they operate free of litter generated by their business. 
(e)  A license to operate a pushcart in the streets, ways and public places pursuant to this division may be suspended by the city clerk or designee upon three days' written notice and hearing, for a period of five days, for a violation of any provision of this section and may be revoked by the municipal officers upon five days' written notice and hearing, for repeated violations of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-169, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-192-14-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION OF BOTTLE CLUBS/BYOB[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Bottle clubs, § 14-580 et seq. 

Sec. 14-210. - Regulation of business days and hours. 
(a)  No liquor shall be consumed in a bottle club except as provided in this section: 
(1)  Liquor may be consumed in any bottle club between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:15 a.m. except as provided in this section. 
(2)  No liquor shall be consumed in any bottle club between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and between 1:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(3)  Licensees of bottle clubs may permit the consumption of liquor on their premises on January 1 of any year until 2:15 a.m. 
(4)  Liquor may be consumed in bottle clubs on the day of holding a general election or statewide primary after the city polls have closed. 
(5)  No liquor shall be consumed in a bottle club on Memorial Day prior to 12:00 noon. 
(b)  Any licensee of a bottle club, by himself or herself, clerk, servant or agent, who permits the consumption of liquor on his premises in violation of this section, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-170, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-211. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No bottle club registered with the State under 28-A M.R.S.A. § 161 and approved by the city under 28-A M.R.S.A. § 161-A and no other business establishment subject to license under this Code shall permit on its premises and of the following activities, without regard to whether such activities are carried out by professional entertainers, employees, or any other person and without regard to whether any compensation is paid by the permit holder. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premise and music, except radio or mechanical device, dancing, or entertainment of any sort unless that licensee has obtained from the city council a special amusement permit under this section. 
(c)  No permit holder shall offer or allow entertainment which includes: 
(1)  Exposing to view the genitals, public hair, anus, vulva, or any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola area thereof. "Exposing to view" includes, without limitation, appearing without an opaque covering or appearing with only an opaque covering which adheres to the skin, such as body paint. 
(2)  The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, or genitals. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-171, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-212. - Inspection of premises. 
    Each bottle club or other business establishment, by accepting its city approval or license, agrees to allow inspection of his premises by representatives of the city during business hours without prior notice and at other times with prior notice. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-172, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-213-14-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TAKEOUT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 14-216. - License required. 
    No person shall operate a takeout establishment without first obtaining a license to do so. Before the applicant receives a license, his premises shall be reviewed or inspected by the applicable city officers. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-175, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-217-14-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - JUNK COLLECTORS, PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 

Sec. 14-220. - License. 
(a)  No person shall conduct business as a pawnbroker, junk collector or secondhand dealer without first obtaining a license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The city clerk or designee shall issue a license to conduct business as a pawnbroker to any person over the age of 21 who demonstrates that he has no record of criminal convictions for crimes of moral turpitude, dishonesty or fraud and possesses adequate financial resources as defined in state law. A license shall be obtained by the owner or duly authorized agent of the premises where the business is to be located by submitting a completed application to the city clerk's office upon forms provided for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-191, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-221. - Account of business done and disclosure to consumer. 
(a)  Account kept: Every pawnbroker shall maintain records in which the pawnbroker shall enter: 
(1)  The date, duration, amount, periodic rate of interest and annual percentage rate of every loan that is made; 
(2)  The finance charge, due dates for payment and the total payment needed to redeem or repurchase the pawned property; 
(3)  An accurate account and description of the property pawned; 
(4)  The terms of redemption or repurchase, including any reduction in the finance charge for early redemption or repurchase and the right of the consumer to at least one extension of 31 days at the same rate of interest upon request in writing or in person; and 
(5)  The name and address of the consumer. 
(b)  Inspection: The pawnbroker shall allow the municipal officers to inspect these records at all reasonable times. 
(c)  Delivery to consumer: At the time of the pawn transaction, the pawnbroker shall deliver to the consumer a signed, written disclosure complying with the truth-in-lending provisions of the Maine Consumer Credit Code, 9-A M.R.S.A. § 8-101 et seq., containing the items required by subsection 1 and the name and address of the pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-192, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-222. - List of transactions; seller to furnish proof of identification. 
(a)  Every person licensed as a junk collector or secondhand dealer shall make out, and have available for periodic collection, a legible and correct list, upon a format furnished by the police chief, containing an accurate description of all articles taken in pawn, purchased, or taken in exchange, the name, residence and date of birth of the buyer or seller other than the licensee, together with the correct and exact time when such articles were pawned or purchased, and the amount the item was sold for. 
(b)  Before recording the information required by this section, a dealer shall require reasonable written proof of the seller's identification in the form of a motor vehicle operator's license, military identification card, adult liquor identification card or similar item which confirms the person's identification by date of birth and by physical description. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-193, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-223. - Receiving articles from minors, thieves. 
    No one licensed pursuant to this article shall purchase or receive any article from any person under the age of 18 years without the written consent of such person's parent or guardian, or from a person known or suspected to be a thief or a receiver of stolen property. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-194, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-224. - Retention of articles purchased. 
(a)  Articles purchased by anyone licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article, excepting pawnbrokers, shall be retained by such licensee in the same condition in which they were obtained and in an accessible place where such articles can be examined and inspected for at least 15 days before they are disposed of. 
(b)  No pawnbroker shall sell, destroy or alter any property pawned until it has remained in his possession for the duration of time as required by this article, unless forfeited in writing by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-195, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-225. - Fixed establishment. 
    Any person or business meeting the definition of secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall have a fixed principal establishment in the city. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-196, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-226-14-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MASS GATHERINGS AND EVENTS 

Sec. 14-250. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article or any permit condition imposed on the operator shall be punished by a civil penalty up to $20,000.00. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-222, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-251. - Permit required; application. 
(a)  No operator or landowner may sponsor, promote, or conduct a mass gathering without first obtaining a permit from the city. A permit application to hold a mass gathering must be submitted to the city clerk. Gatherings which are expected to attract up to 5,000 people must be submitted at least 45 days prior to the proposed date of the mass gathering. Gatherings expected to attract more than 5,000 people must be submitted at least 90 days prior to the proposed date of the mass gathering. 
(b)  A written application for permit shall be received by the city council at least 30 days in advance of the proposed mass gatherings. 
(c)  At applicant's expense and approved by the city council, the city clerk shall place a public notice in a newspaper serving the area where the mass gathering is proposed to be held, 30 days in advance of the date of the mass gathering unless a lesser time is authorized by the city council. The notice informs the public of the applicant's intention to hold a mass gathering, and invites public comments to be addressed to the city council. 
(d)  For any event that is expected to attract more than 5,000 people and that is planned to be held in any residential area, the city council may require the operator, at his own expense, to provide additional notice of any proposed mass gatherings through other means, including notices mailed to the residences of the persons whose property is adjacent to the mass gathering site. 
(e)  The following shall be included with the application for permit: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the operator and the owner of the property. If the operator is not a resident of Maine, the operator must list the name of a designated agent in Maine who will receive all notices in connection with the issuance of revocation of the permit or the filing of any claim against the security bond or public costs escrow. 
(2)  A description of the proposed mass gathering. The operator shall include information, including the dates and locations, number of persons who attended and the names of the sponsoring organization and promoter, if any, regarding the three most recent mass gatherings which he sponsored and, when a performance of some type is to be presented, the operator shall include information regarding the three most recent performances, if any, of the same person or persons. 
(3)  An outline map of the area to be used showing the location of all proposed toilets to be used, lavatory and bathing facilities, water supply sources, areas of assemblage, camping areas, food service areas, ingress and egress of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, egress roads, refuse disposal and collection facilities, first aid buildings or area, telephones, sources of potable water, seating areas, stages, refuse containers, electrical connections, lighting, parking areas and spaces, all water bodies, streams, brooks, and wetlands within 250 feet of the mass gathering area or that may be affected by the activities at the mass gathering, fire hydrants, and, if permitted, the location of areas where fires are permitted. 
(4)  Detailed drawings of toilet facilities, sewage disposal system, lavatory and bathing facilities, and water supply system. 
(5)  Size of area to be used. 
(6)  An anticipated attendance figure and dates and hours which mass gathering will be held. 
(7)  Details of provisions for preventing people in excess of maximum permissible number from gaining access to mass gathering area. 
(8)  Detailed description of the water supply to be used including, but not necessarily limited to: 
(9)  The source and its treatment and protection from pollution. 
(10)  For water distributed under pressure, the operating pressures to all fixtures and the rate of delivery in gallons per person per day. 
(11)  Where water is not available under pressure, and non-water carriage toilets are used, the gallons of water per person per day to be provided for drinking and washing purposes. 
(12)  Source of transported water. 
(13)  Manner of storage and dispensing of transported water. 
(14)  Detailed description of excreta and liquid waste disposal facilities, including but not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Facilities to be provided. 
b.  Maintenance. 
c.  If public sewer system available, whether all plumbing fixtures and building sewers shall be connected thereto. 
d.  Name and address of the company which will be providing and servicing the toilets. 
(15)  Detailed description of refuse disposal including, but not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Measures to prevent odor, insect, rodent, and other nuisance conditions. 
b.  The number and size of refuse containers to be provided. 
c.  Accessibility of refuse containers. 
d.  Frequency of collection of refuse. Location of disposal of refuse. 
e.  Plans for cleaning area of refuse following mass gathering. 
f.  For area where cars and recreational vehicles to be parked, number of rubbish disposal facilities per car or recreational vehicle. 
g.  Detailed description of vermin and vector control. 
(16)  Detailed description of grounds including, but not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Illumination - location and light level intensities. 
b.  Size of areas for assemblage, camping and parking. 
c.  Width of service roads. 
d.  Number of parking spaces per person and density per vehicle. 
(17)  Detailed description of sanitary facilities including, but not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Number of toilets or urinals per person. 
b.  Construction materials of buildings housing plumbing fixtures. 
c.  Provisions for maintenance and cleaning of fixtures. 
d.  Measures to provide privacy of toilets. 
e.  Identification of water points or drinking fountains. 
f.  Drinking facilities. 
g.  Drainage of waste water. 
(18)  Detailed description of medical facilities and services including, but not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Names, positions, and qualifications of medical personnel to be available and a statement whether such personnel will be on site or on call. 
b.  On site facilities and supplies. 
c.  On site first aid vehicles. 
d.  Communication systems available 
e.  Statement whether area hospitals have been advised of gathering. 
(19)  Detailed description of food service activities including, but not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Facilities to be provided. 
b.  Statement whether eating places servicing mass gathering are licensed. 
(20)  Detailed description of safety precautions including, but not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Electrical system and equipment. 
b.  On site fire prevention equipment. 
c.  Internal and external security control. 
d.  A statement that the respective police and sheriff's departments have been notified. 
(21)  Detailed description of noise control including, but not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Proximity of closest inhabitant. 
b.  Expected noise level in decibels at perimeters of mass gathering area. 
(22)  For those applicants seeking approval for the sale and for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at their mass gathering, a detailed statement providing all information required by section 14-275 and a signed written affirmation of intent to comply with all provisions of section 14-275. 
(f)  A statement that the mass gathering has municipal approval must be sent to state department of health and human services or applicable state agency. 
(g)  The following shall be available for inspection and testing by the city clerk. 
(1)  All private water supplies for mass gathering. 
(2)  A copy of the water analysis. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-218, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 10-02172015, 3-2-2015) 
Sec. 14-252. - Clerk's notification to council. 
    As soon as the city clerk or designee receives an application to hold a mass gathering, the clerk shall give public notice by notifying the city council. Such notification shall appear as a formal communication on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-200, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-253. - Prior approval. 
    No permit may be issued to the operator without first receiving the necessary certification from the state department of human services, when applicable, and without being reviewed by the city police, fire, health, public works, and community development departments to ensure that the operator has or will satisfy the assurances contained in the permit. In addition, the operator must obtain approval from the Auburn Water District or the Lake Auburn Watershed Commission for mass gatherings which will be held in close proximity (100 feet) to Lake Auburn or the Lake Auburn Watershed and agree to conduct the mass gathering in accordance with the rules of the Water District. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-213, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-254. - City council review; public hearing; issuance or denial. 
(a)  Prior to granting and mass gathering permit, the city council shall hold a public hearing. Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given to the operator and shall be published at least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. At the public hearing, testimony of the operator and any interested member of the public will be heard. 
(b)  Within seven days after considering the permit application, the city council takes the following action: 
(c)  Issue the permit, when satisfied that the operator has provided all the information required and has met the standards of the ordinance; 
(d)  Issue the permit with conditions. The conditions include additional actions the operator must take to ensure protection of the public health, peace, or safety and that are directly related to the location and the expected attendance at the mass gathering; 
(e)  Deny the permit, when the city council finds that the operator has not or cannot satisfy the assurances contained in the mass gathering permit application or cannot reasonably comply with the criteria set forth in this ordinance. In the case of a denial, the city council shall state in writing the specific reasons for the denial. If the council fails to issue a decision within the time allowed, the permit is deemed to have been denied. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-203, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-255. - Appeal of denial or revocation by applicant or operator. 
(a)  In the event of either a denial or a revocation of a mass permit by the city clerk, the operator may appeal in writing to the city council. The city council shall either issue the permit, with or without conditions, or deny the permit, within seven days after hearing the appeal. 
(b)  In the event of either a denial or revocation of a mass gathering permit by the city council the operator may appeal the decision to the Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-201, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-256. - Appeal by other persons. 
(a)  When the city clerk or designee grants a permit for a mass gathering, any aggrieved person may appeal the city clerk's decision to the city council within 14 days of the clerk's decision. The city council may overturn the clerk's decision when it is determined that any of the criteria set forth in this article have not or would not be met by the operator if the mass gathering were held. 
(b)  When the city council issues a mass gathering permit, an appeal of the decision may be taken to the Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-202, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-257. - Insurance. 
    Prior to receiving the permit, but in no event any later than 30 days before the scheduled date of the mass gathering, the operator shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance issued by a reputable insurance company providing liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury or death and $300,000.00 per occurrence for property damage. The insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured and shall contain a clause providing that the policy may not be cancelled by either party except upon not less than 30 days written notice to the city. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-220, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-258. - Responsibility for damage and clean-up costs. 
    The operator and landowner shall be jointly responsible for assuring that the area in the vicinity of the mass gathering is cleared of any debris left by persons attending he mass gathering and for repairing or reimbursing the cost of repairing any damage to private property caused by employees of the operator or by persons attending the mass gathering. The operator and landowner shall be responsible for satisfying and other valid claims for damage to real or personal property caused by the operator, the operator's employees, or any persons attending the event. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-221, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-259. - Security bond. 
(a)  When a permit is issued, the operator shall file with the city clerk or designee a surety bond not less than 15 days prior to the event. The bond shall be issued by a reputable surety company qualified to do business in this state and in the amount that the city council shall reasonably determine, but in no event less than $5,000.00, to ensure the public peace and safety and compensation for damage to public or private property. Cash or negotiable securities or equivalent value may be furnished in lieu of a bond. The amount of the bond may be reduced by any similar bond furnished to the state department of health and human services in connection with the same vent pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 1604. 
(b)  The bond shall ensure cleanup by the operator of the area used for a mass gathering, compliance by the operator with applicable state or local laws, and payment by the operator of all valid claims against the operator for damage to real or personal property in the city and arising out of acts done or omitted to be done by the operator, his agents, or his employees, or by other persons attending the mass gathering. 
(c)  The bond shall be used to satisfy any valid claims, including payment of penalties for any violations of this ordinance or permit conditions, and for claims of damage to real or personal property caused by the operator, his agents or employees, or by persons attending the event and to reimburse expenses incurred as a direct result of the mass gathering for which the permit was issued. 
(d)  Any person, including the city, having such a claim shall file notice of a claim upon the bond with the applicant or his agent within 90 days after the claim arose and shall bring an action on the bond in the Superior Court of Androscoggin County within six months of the act complained of. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-223, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-260. - Public costs escrow. 
    In addition to the bond, not less than 15 days prior to the mass gathering, the operator shall deposit with the city an amount equal to 120 percent of the public costs of the contemplated mass gathering, as estimated by the city manager. Public costs are those costs incurred by the city in connection with a mass gathering and which would not have been incurred by the city if the mass gathering had not been held. Promptly after the conclusion of the mass gathering, the city shall calculate the public costs and the deposit shall be refunded to the operator to the extent the deposit exceeds the public costs or, if the public costs exceed the amount deposited, the operator shall pay the excess to the city within 15 days of being so notified in writing. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-224, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-261. - Waiver of fees or surety bond. 
    An appeal for waiver of fees or surety bond may be made in writing to the city council. The city council may waive the permit fee or surety bond, when it determines that such waiver will not compromise the purpose or enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-225, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-262. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The city clerk or designee of the city council may revoke the permit at any time prior to the date of the scheduled mass gathering when it is determined that the operator has failed to comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance, any requirements contained in the permit, or has failed to secure in a timely manner any other license or permit required by the city or any other government agency in order to hold the event. 
(b)  The city shall give written notice to the operator that the permit is being revoked and the reasons for such revocation. Whenever possible, the city will revoke a permit only after notice to the operator stating the reasons for revocation and an opportunity to be heard in the city council. Notice of the reasons for the revocation will be delivered to the operator or his agent personally or by expedited mail service. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-219, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-263. - Tickets. 
    If tickets are to be sold to the event, the operator will state the maximum number of tickets that will be available. For the purpose of this ordinance, a "ticket" includes any receipt or token of eligibility to attend the event, including parking permits. The mass gathering area must have sufficient area to allow ten square feet per person. In no event may more tickets be available than the number of person who can be accommodated at the site of the mass gathering. After all tickets are sold, or after the conclusion of the mass gathering, whichever occurs first, the operator must provide the city clerk or designee with a sworn statement regarding the number of people who attended the event. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-204, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-264. - Curfew. 
    No mass gathering shall continue later than 11:00 p.m. except that the city council may extend the curfew for a reasonable period based on a determination that such an extension is not likely to have an adverse effect on neighboring property owners. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-205, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-265. - Parking. 
(a)  The operator must ensure that there will be adequate on-site and off-street parking areas, including handicapped parking spaces, to accommodate the number of vehicles expected. "Adequate" means that there must be at least one parking space for every four persons. Off-site parking areas are permitted if the operator provides written authorization from the property owner for the use of those sites. On-street parking will be permitted if the police chief determines it will be create an undue safety hazard. The operator will provide and post signs directing people to parking sites. 
(b)  For events where the expected attendance will exceed 5,000 people and the operator will be using off-site parking, the operator must provide a written statement from a towing company retained by the operator that towing services will be available to remove disabled vehicles or vehicles that block driveways, obstruct the free flow of traffic, obstruct the access of emergency vehicles, or otherwise create a safety hazard or nuisance. The operator will post notice at the entrance to the mass gathering that cars which are parked illegally or which are parked on private property without the property owner's permission will be towed at the vehicle owner's expense. In any such case, the owner of the vehicle or the operator will be liable for the towing charge and in no event will it be charged to the property owner. 
(c)  When parking occurs on private roads or public easement (commonly known as private ways), and when prohibitions on parking have been posted, and when such parking obstructs emergency vehicles and thus creates a public hazard, the Auburn Police may, on their own knowledge, or upon complaint that a car is parked without with property owner's permission, order the towing of such vehicles at the expense of the vehicle's owner. 
(d)  In addition, residents may, on their own, notify the towing company retained by the operator to have any vehicle located on their own private property towed at the vehicle owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-206, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-266. - Security. 
    A detailed plan describing measures that will be in place to ensure crowd control, police security, and protection of public and private property, including steps that will be taken to prevent trespassers from gaining access to the site via private property adjacent to the mass gathering site must be provided. The plan must include an explanation of how and when city police officers or private security officers will be deployed and where they will be located before, during, and after the event. The police chief will determine the number of police officers or private security officers that will be required at each event based on the number of persons reasonably expected to attend and on any other reasonably reliable information regarding security risks, if any, posed by the proposed mass gathering. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-207, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-267. - Medical care. 
    In the case of mass gatherings at which 5,000 or more persons are reasonably expected to be present at any one time, there must be a first aid building, tent, or equivalent facility that is equipped with basic and advanced medical supplies and equipment and is staffed by at least one paramedic licensed by this state and one firefighter trained to the first responder level or higher. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-208, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-268. - Water supply. 
    The applicant must provide an adequate, safe supply of potable water in accordance with the requirements of the state department of health and human services, division of health engineering. In addition there must be adequate water to extinguish a fire at the site. The plan must detail the source and location of water supplies. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-209, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-269. - Refuse. 
(a)  There must be at least one 50 gallon refuse container or equivalent for each 100 persons expected to attend. Recycling containers will be available for materials which are accepted by the city recycling program. 
(b)  Refuse must be collected and the receptacles must be emptied or replaced periodically during the mass gathering to ensure that the site is free from accumulation of refuse and to minimize odor, infestation of insects or rodents, or any other condition that is a nuisance or inconsistent with standards for health, safety, and welfare for the patrons of the gathering or the public. 
(c)  The operator is responsible for removal of any and all refuse, waste receptacles, sanitation facilities, staging, tents, equipment, and any other structures that were brought to the site for the purpose of the mass gathering. Clean up of the site must be completed within 24 hours after the mass gathering concludes. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-210, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-270. - Communications. 
    There must be telephone or radio communication available for emergency purposes. In areas of the city where there are bodies of water that pose additional risk to public safety, the fire department rescue boat will be available at the site. The city fire chief will determine the number of personnel needed and the times during which they will be available. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-211, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-271. - Noise levels. 
(a)  The city council may, as a condition of issuing a permit, require the operator to control sound generated at any mass gathering which involves the live or electronically or mechanically produced performance of music (herein after referred to as a "concert." 
(b)  The city council may establish permissible noise levels which will be made a condition of the mass gathering permit and which may vary depending on the nature and topography of the area and the proximity of nearby residents. 
(c)  When so required by the city council, the operator will, at his expense, take sound measurements during the concert and will allow up to three representatives designated by the city in advance to be present at the concert for the purpose of verifying the sound measurement levels. 
(d)  If any limits are exceeded during the concert, the city representative will promptly issue a verbal warning to the operator. The operator will be required to take immediate steps to ensure that the sound levels are not exceeded again during the concert. Each incident after the initial warning will constitute a separate violation of this ordinance and the operator will be required to pay the city $1,000.00 for the first violation, $2,000.00 for the second violation at the same concert, and $5,000.00 for the third and each subsequent violation at the same concert. 
(e)  The operator may appeal any penalty to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 48 hours after the conclusion of the concert. The city council will hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting and may reduce or rescind the penalties if the council finds that the operator made a good faith attempt to avoid violating the limits and despite the operator's efforts the violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-212, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-272. - Overnight assembly. 
    A description of the sleeping area and facilities that will be available for patrons who will be staying at the mass gathering site after the conclusion of the event must be provided. Patrons will be permitted to remain overnight at the site of the mass gathering only to the extent that adequate facilities and space are available. In no event shall such lodging at the site be permitted beyond noon the day following the conclusion of the event. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-214, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-273. - Traffic control. 
    In order to protect the public safety, the operator must ensure that there will be safe and adequate access for pedestrian and vehicular traffic and for emergency vehicles to enter and exit the site of the mass gathering. The police chief will determine the adequacy of the operator's traffic plan. At a minimum, the operator must submit a detailed plan that contains the following: 
(1)  A description of the streets or road people attending the event are likely to take to reach the site of the mass gathering, plus the entrance and exit points for pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
(2)  The type, number, and location of persons who will be present to direct traffic both before and after the event, plus the location of signs which will direct people to the site, including places where people are allowed to park. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-215, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-274. - Protection of environmental features. 
    The operator must provide information regarding the location of watercourses, wetlands, marshes, surface water, wooded areas, and other natural resources in the area of the mass gathering which may be affected by the event. In consultation with the community development department, the operator must provide information regarding what steps he will take to protect any environmentally sensitive areas and to site the event so as to not adversely impact the surrounding environment. When applicable, the operator must demonstrate compliance with the environmental restrictions contained in city zoning regulations unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-216, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-275. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited within a mass gathering area unless: 
(1)  The operator obtains all permits required by section 14-251; 
(2)  The operator obtains all licenses required by Chapter 14 Article XVI; 
(3)  The operator obtains all other licenses and permits required by the City of Auburn and the State of Maine and complies fully with all applicable city ordinances and state statutes; 
(4)  The operator restricts the time and location of such sale so that alcoholic beverages are sold only during the particular event and in a manner that does not disrupt public safety and order; 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed only within the permitted area of the facility which shall not include parking lots; 
(6)  In applying for a mass gathering permit the operator identifies the specific restricted areas where it proposes to sell alcoholic beverages, and the means by which it anticipates to limit the consumption of alcohol to such restricted portions of the mass gathering area; 
(7)  The operator exercises due diligence and works with the Auburn Police Department and state authorities to strictly enforce, control, limit and prevent the unauthorized consumption of alcoholic beverages in any part of the mass gathering area outside of the restricted areas, and to prevent patrons in the mass gathering area from using, consuming, bringing in, or otherwise obtaining alcoholic beverages in any manner not authorized by this section, any other city ordinances and state statutes; and 
(8)  No individual under the age of 21 is permitted within the areas designated for sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages except for those employed and appropriately licensed by the State to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  An operator seeking to obtain a mass gathering permit at which it is seeking authorization for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall affirm, in writing and through its signature, its commitment to comply with all of the above provisions and shall post signs at the mass gathering event indicating its compliance in full with this section. 
(c)  An operator who permits the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages in a manner that does not adhere to this section, or who otherwise violates this Section, shall be deemed to be in violation of Chapter 14, Article IX and subject to the penalties in section 14-250. In addition to the penalties in section 14-250, any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity including the operator, violating this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of at least $100.00. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city manager or such other municipal official or employee as the city manager shall designate in writing. The city shall also be entitled to its reasonable attorney's fees and costs for bringing any action under this section. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-217, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 04-01262015, 2-9-2015) 
Secs. 14-276-14-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ITINERANT VENDORS AND PEDDLERS 

Sec. 14-316. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on any public street or sidewalk, park or other public place or at any doorway or entranceway, within the corporate limits of the city, the sale of any subscription of any magazine, periodical or other publication, newspapers excepted, or the sale of any tangible personal property, for delivery at a subsequent time without a license. 
(b)  A permit is required for all persons selling or with the intent of selling at a future date any merchandise or services by means of personal contact and who does not have, for that purpose, any permanent place of business within the city. Any person or business which does not have a fixed location of operation within this state must obtain all state department permits prior to engaging in sales, and provide a copy of said licenses when applying for the city permit. 
(c)  Any business which has a permanent place of business within the city who wishes to conduct door to door sales must first notify the police department in writing of the names of the personnel who will be conducting such door to door sales, the dates, times and locations of such door to door sales. No additional permit is necessary. 
(d)  Any non-profit or civic organizations who wished to conduct door to door sales, surveys, fund raisers or other such activities must first notify the police department in writing of the names of the personnel who will be conducting such door to door sales or surveys, the dates, times and locations of such activities. No additional permit is necessary. 
(e)  Political activities are excluded from this provision. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-316, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-317. - Application. 
    Applicants for licenses under this article shall file with the city clerk or designee a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant and name of the agent making the application and remuneration to be received by the agent for services rendered; 
(2)  Proof of identification of the agent making application, on a government issued form such as driver's license, state identification, passport, etc. 
(3)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant and of the agent making application; 
(4)  A brief description of the nature of the applicant's activities and the goods to be sold; 
(5)  The name and address of each employee, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship, and government issued identification for each employee; 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle, together with a license number or other means of identification; and current vehicle registration and insurance if applicable. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any agents for the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, felony or violation of any Municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore. 
(8)  If permit is for a non-profit or civic organizations, a brief description of the intended disposition of the funds to be solicited by the applicant shall be filed with application; 
(9)  If the application is for a so-called "tag day" or "poppy day," then the exact date the solicitation is to be made on. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-317, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-318. - Issuance and duration. 
    After an investigation of the representations made in an application required by this article, the city clerk or designee shall issue the license. If the application is for a "tag day" or "poppy day," then the license shall be issued for a date certain on a first come, first served basis only, and no more than one such license shall be made available to any person and used by him in any one calendar year. If the application is for other than a "tag day" or "poppy day," then the license may be issued for any period of time not in excess of one year. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-318, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-319. - Use of streets. 
(a)  No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any peddler be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this Article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(b)  In all cases, the itinerant vendor or peddler must obtain written permission from the property owner before operating on any public or private property. If the property is public, written permission must be obtained from the city manager. If the property is private, written permission must be obtained from the organization or persons who own the property. A copy of said permission shall be filed with application. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-319, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-320. - Contents of license. 
    A license issued pursuant to this article shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the date of issuance and the length of time such license shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-320, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-321. - Special event license. 
(a)  A special event peddler's license can be issued to eligible applicants for a maximum of seven consecutive days, and will limit their sale area to be inside the designated mass gathering area, as per requirements of the mass gathering event organizers. Only one special event peddler's license shall be needed for booths or sales tables operated by the same vendor. Excluding food vendors with separate food preparation areas for multiply booths or tables. Individuals working for the primary vendor at the booth shall not be required to obtain a separate license. The primary vendor shall be subject to a criminal background investigation regarding their peddler application for this section. 
(b)  The license shall be displayed the entire time the vendor is operating the booths or sales tables. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-321, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-322-14-339. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TATTOOING 

Sec. 14-340. - License required. 
    No individual shall tattoo another, or operate or conduct a tattooing establishment, or organize a tattoo exhibition or show, or participate in a tattoo exhibition or show of any kind within the city without first obtaining a state and city license in accordance with the provisions of this article and state law. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-361, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-341. - Application form and content. 
(a)  An applicant for a practitioner's license shall submit a completed application form together with the following: 
(1)  Information including: applicant's name, home and mailing address, business address, telephone number , photo ID and date of birth plus social security number or federal identification number. 
(2)  All new and renewal applications shall be accompanied by a criminal background check, this check shall be dated no more than 3 days prior to submission of application. 
(3)  All new applicants and renewals shall provide proof of having attended, within the last 3 years, a blood borne pathogen training program approved by the city and the department of Environmental Health, Health Inspection Program. 
(4)  A demonstration of knowledge of safe practices in regard to the art of tattooing. 
(5)  The licensure fee. 
(b)  Applications shall be obtained from the city and the state department of environmental health, health inspection program. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-341, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-342. - Sanitary facilities. 
    In accordance with the state department of environmental health, health inspection program established rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-342, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-343. - Tattooing procedures. 
    Tattooing procedures shall be in accordance with rules and regulations established by the state department of environmental health, health inspection program. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-343, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-344. - Care of instruments. 
    The care of instruments shall be in accordance with rules and regulations established by the state department of environmental health, health inspection program. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-344, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-345. - Tattooing of animals. 
    The tattooing of animals shall be in accordance with rules and regulations established by the state department of environmental health, health inspection program. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-345, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-346. - Licensed practitioners. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any establishment under the control or direction of a duly licensed practitioner of the healing arts, nor do they apply to licensed medical hospitals, and similarly licensed medical institutions. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-346, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-347. - Tattoo exhibitions or shows. 
(a)  All organizers of tattoo exhibitions or shows must obtain a city license for each show; and must have the minimum number of 20 licensed tattoo practitioners to operate at an approved facility or at a fixed location for a specific length of time. 
(b)  Each participant of said show must obtain a temporary tattoo license from the city. Said license shall be valid for the duration of the exhibition or show, but not to exceed a seven day period. 
(c)  Approval of the facilities will be at the discretion of the code enforcement officer and shall be in an approved facility in accordance with rules and regulations established by the state department of environmental health, health inspection program. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-362, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-348-14-369. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS 

Sec. 14-370. - Purpose. 
    The city recognizes that the practice of legitimate massage therapy by trained and experienced therapists is a valuable component of our health care system. The city also recognizes that persons without legitimate massage training or experience may masquerade as massage therapists as a facade for unlawful purposes such as prostitution. It is the purpose of this article to clearly distinguish between these persons and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by simultaneously acknowledging and permitting legitimate massage therapy practices. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-382, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-371. - Exemptions. 
    The following persons shall be exempt from this article while licensed and practicing in accordance with the laws of this state: physicians, physician's assistants, surgeons, osteopaths, nurses, chiropractors, physical therapists, and persons holding said licenses issued by the State of Maine department of Professional and Financial Regulations, Division of Licensing and Enforcement. Students enrolled in a recognized school who are required to give massages as part of their training shall be exempt from these licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-383, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-372. - General provisions to apply. 
    Except to the extent that this article contains a contrary provision, all provisions of chapter 14 shall apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-384, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-373. - Licenses required. 
(a)  Therapeutic massage establishment license: No person shall operate a therapeutic massage establishment without a valid therapeutic massage establishment license issued by the city. A separate license shall be required for each such establishment. 
(b)  Massage therapist license: No person shall work as a massage therapist without a valid massage therapist license or a combined massage establishment/therapist license issued by the city. 
(c)  Combined massage establishment/massage therapist license: A sole practitioner who employs no massage therapist other than himself/herself may apply for a combined massage establishment/massage therapist license in lieu of both a therapeutic massage establishment license and a massage therapist license. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-386, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-374. - Compliance of existing therapists and massage establishments. 
    Any person presently operating as a massage therapist or operating a massage establishment in the city as defined herein on the effective date of this article shall comply with the terms of this article by obtaining a license hereunder within three months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-387, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-375. - Application and information. 
(a)  Each applicant for a license shall: 
(1)  Complete all information upon and file an application on a form prescribed by the city clerk; 
(2)  Pay a nonrefundable application fee in accordance with the city's fee schedule as approved by the city council in advance to the city clerk; 
(3)  Submit the completed application to the city clerk, together with attested copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws, if the applicant is a corporation, evidence of partnership, if a partnership, or articles of association and bylaws, if the applicant is an association, as well as a list of all officers and directors; 
(4)  File an affidavit with the city clerk or designee which will identify all owners, officers, managers or partners of the applicant and their places of residence at the time of the application and for the immediately preceding five years. 
(5)  File the release authorized by 16 M.R.S.A. § 620(6) with the application for each applicant and for each officer, owner, manager or partner of an applicant seeking a therapeutic massage establishment or combined massage establishment/massage therapist license; 
(6)  Provide a copy of a criminal background check not more than three days prior to submission of application; and 
(7)  File any information not set forth above that is required by this chapter. 
(b)  The application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a photograph, in duplicate, of the applicant, which meets specifications for a passport photograph and is current within 30 days annually and a copy of a government issued identification. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-389, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-376. - Qualifications of applicant, officers. 
    Within the five years immediately preceding the date of application, no applicant nor, for a massage establishment or combined massage establishment/massage therapist license, any owner, officer, manager or partner of an applicant shall have been convicted of a crime now classified under Maine Statute as a Class A, B, or C crime, a crime involving moral turpitude, the crimes of engaging in prostitution or promotion of prostitution, nor of violating any of the gambling, drug or prohibitive liquor laws under the laws of the United States or the State of Maine or any other state. In this article, any one of the foregoing convictions or violations may be referred to as a "disqualifying criminal conviction." 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-390, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-377. - Investigation of applicant, officers. 
    Upon receipt of an application or notice of a change of the owners, officers, managers or partners of the applicant: 
(1)  The building inspector shall verify that the premises at which the establishment will be located complies with all applicable ordinances of the city including, but not limited to, the building code, electrical code, plumbing code and zoning regulations and shall report his findings in writing to the city clerk; 
(2)  The city clerk or designee shall review the application and other documents and determine whether such documents comply with all of the requirements of this article; 
(3)  The code enforcement officer shall inspect the location or proposed location to determine whether the applicable ordinances relating to health and safety have been satisfied and shall report his findings in writing to the city clerk; 
(4)  The fire chief or designee shall inspect the location or proposed location to determine if all city ordinances concerning fire and safety have been satisfied and shall submit his report in writing to the city clerk; and 
(5)  The police chief or designee shall investigate the application, including the criminal history record information and shall report his findings in writing to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-391, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-378. - Basic proficiency. 
    Each applicant for a massage therapist license or combined massage establishment/therapist license shall show proof of basic proficiency in the field of massage therapy which may be satisfied by: 
(1)  Evidence of the satisfactory completion of all formal course work and training in massage therapy required for graduation from a recognized school, which shall be in the form of a diploma or certificate of graduation or equivalent documentation; or 
(2)  A written statement from a physician, nurse, osteopath, chiropractor, physical therapist, or member of the AMTA stating that that person refers clients to the applicant for therapeutic massage. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-392, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-379. - Obtaining license by fraud. 
    No person shall make any false, untruthful or fraudulent statement, either written or oral, or in any way conceal any material fact, or give or use any fictitious name in order to secure or aid in securing a license required by this chapter. All names, including, but not limited to maiden name, ever used by the applicant must be noted on the application. Any license so secured shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-393, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-380. - Use of license. 
    No person shall make use of, in any manner, to his own or another's benefit, any license which has not been duly issued to him in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-394, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-381. - Standards for denial. 
(a)  Generally. A license under this division shall be denied to: 
(1)  An applicant who has submitted an incomplete application, knowingly made an incorrect statement of a material nature, or failed to supply additional information required by the city clerk or designee or reasonably necessary to determine whether the license is issuable; or 
(2)  An applicant, if such applicant or any person having an actual ownership interest or management authority therein has been denied a license for knowingly making an incorrect statement of a material nature within the immediately preceding five years; or 
(3)  An applicant, if such applicant or any person having an actual ownership interest or management authority therein has had a license granted pursuant to this article revoked for any reason within the immediately preceding five years. 
(b)  Therapeutic massage establishment license . Therapeutic massage establishment licenses shall be denied to: 
(1)  A corporation not registered to do business in this state; or 
(2)  A corporation if any principal officer thereof or any person having an actual ownership interest or management authority therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction within the immediately preceding five years; or 
(3)  An applicant, other than a corporation, if such applicant or any person having an actual ownership interest or management authority therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction within the immediately preceding five years. 
(c)  Massage therapist license, or combined massage establishment/massage therapist license. Massage therapist licenses, or combined massage establishment/massage therapist licenses shall be denied to: 
(1)  An applicant who has a disqualifying criminal conviction at any time during the five years immediately preceding application; or 
(2)  An applicant who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-395, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-382. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(a)  All licenses. In addition to the grounds of denial set forth in section 24-395, any license may be suspended or revoked upon a determination that the licensee failed to notify the clerk of any change in material fact set forth in the application for such license or violated any provision of this article. 
(b)  Therapeutic massage establishment or combined establishment/therapist license. In addition to the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, either a massage establishment license or combined establishment/therapist license may be suspended or revoked upon a determination that the licensee: 
(1)  Permitted any person to perform therapeutic massage without a valid license to do so; 
(2)  Permitted or allowed an employee, massage therapist or conditional massage therapist, to violate any provision of this chapter on the premises of the establishment or in the course of conduct of the business of the establishment; or 
(3)  Knowingly permitted any violation of 17-A M.R.S.A. §§ 851 through 855, and such knowledge shall be presumed if there has been a conviction of any such offense within the immediately preceding five years. The applicant or licensee may rebut said presumption by showing that due diligence was exercised to prevent the recurrence of any such offense and despite such diligence, he did not know and could not reasonably have known of any subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-396, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-383. - Age restrictions. 
    No massage or therapeutic massage shall be practiced on a minor without the written consent of a parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-398, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-384. - Massage tables. 
    All therapeutic massage shall be administered on a massage table, treatment table, treatment mat, or treatment chair. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-399, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-385. - Maintenance and cleaning. 
    Every person who conducts or operates a therapeutic massage establishment shall keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments, supplies and devices of any kind, or parts thereof, that come into contact with the human body shall be kept clean by a modern and approved method of cleaning, in accordance with state rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-400, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-386. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a client whose genitals are exposed. 
(b)  No massage therapist shall administer or agree to administer a massage to the genitals or anus of a client. 
(c)  No massage therapist shall administer a massage unless he is fully clothed with nontransparent clothing. 
(d)  No massage therapist shall perform any sexual act or make sexual contact, as defined in 17-A M.R.S.A. § 251, in the commission of his professional activities. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-401, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-387. - Operation hours. 
    At all times when open for business, a therapeutic massage establishment shall have upon the premises a licensed massage therapist or person who possesses a combination massage establishment/massage therapist license who shall be available to supervise the operation of the establishment and assure that no violations of this article occur. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-402, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-388. - List of employees. 
    The therapeutic massage establishment shall keep a written list of the names and current addresses of all employees, both on duty and off duty. Such list shall be shown to the police chief or designee, the city clerk or designee, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-403, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-389-14-405. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - OUTPATIENT ADDICTION TREATMENT CLINICS 

Sec. 14-406. - Purpose. 
    The city council recognizes that an outpatient addiction treatment clinic can be a valuable component of our health care system. The city council finds that with the reasonable and necessary siting restrictions listed herein, there remain sufficient suitable areas within the city to site outpatient addiction treatment clinics. Licensing of these facilities will enhance community relations with the providers of such clinics and will establish lines of communications with the clinics. Licensing of these facilities is appropriate and consistent with the city's policies and practices to review and license business activities that impact its citizens. The licensing is not meant to duplicate the licensing done at the state level pursuant to state law and rules but to provide separate and additional requirements as necessitated by the above findings. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-406, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-407. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to any outpatient addiction treatment clinic that is located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-407, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-408. - Application requirements. 
    All applications for licenses under this article shall be filed with, and in a form satisfactory to, the city clerk. Such application shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name, address and contact information including a phone number of the applicant and all other persons having a legal interest in the clinic and property and the individuals hired by the applicant to manage operation of the facility, if any. 
(2)  The location of the premises for which a license is sought by identification of city tax map number and street address. 
(3)  The dimensions and acreage of the property upon which the clinic is to be located. 
(4)  A copy of an approved site plan, drawn to a scale of 50 feet or less to the inch, that contains the following information: 
a.  The boundary lines of the property for which a license is sought. 
b.  The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
c.  The location of all existing and proposed parking areas and walkways and any other site improvements. 
d.  The location and characteristics of all existing and proposed vegetation that is proposed to be maintained for required screening. 
e.  The location and characteristics of all existing and proposed fencing proposed to be maintained for required screening. 
f.  The location and characteristics of all vehicular entrances and exits serving the property. 
g.  The signature of the chairman of the city planning board after a finding by the board that the site plan meets the requirements of city building and zoning regulations. 
(5)  A site location map at a scale of not greater than one inch to 100 feet showing all adjoining residential uses and any schools, churches, family day care homes, small day care facilities, day care centers and public parks and play grounds. 
(6)  A detailed description of the proposed outpatient addiction treatment clinic to include the following: population to be served, client services, methods of treatment, identification of controlled substances to be kept on site, staffing requirements, security provisions, hours of operation, anticipated parking demand, peak hour traffic, identification of other required licenses, etc. 
(7)  Identification of any other approvals required the city, by any state agency or department or of any federal agencies. 
(8)  A nonrefundable application fee and an original and 15 copies of the license application and all supporting documentation. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-408, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-409. - Review procedure; conditions of approval. 
(a)  License applications for outpatient addiction treatment clinics shall be filed with the city clerk or designee and the clerk will order a background check from the police department for the applicant, individuals with a legal interest in the facility and any individuals hired to manage operation of the facility. The license application with the background check will then be reviewed by the city clerk or designee to determine if the application is complete. If the application is not deemed complete, the license shall be denied. If the application is deemed to be complete, it shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the city council. 
(b)  The city council may impose conditions on the approval of any license application under this Article to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article or any other provision of law. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  That the applicant provides documentation to the city clerk or designee of the receipt of all approvals required by any federal or state agency or department pursuant to federal or state law prior to clinic operations. 
(2)  That the applicant provides documentation to the city clerk or designee of the receipt of any approvals required by any city board pursuant to this Code prior to the issuance of any license under this article. 
(3)  That any screening and or other requirements imposed by the city council pursuant to the provisions of this article or by the planning board upon site plan and special exception review, shall be installed, completed and approved by staff prior to the issuance of any license under this article. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-409, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-410. - Semi-annual meetings with the police chief. 
    A minimum of two meetings per calendar year will be conducted at the clinic to allow the applicant and city staff the opportunity to discuss issues with the police chief or designee. The purpose of the meetings is to establish a good working relationship between the police department and the owner and operators of clinics. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-410, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-411. - Location criteria. 
    Applicants for licenses must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city council that all of the standards contained in this section are met in order to approve a license to operate an outpatient addiction treatment clinic. An outpatient addiction treatment clinic shall not be located within 2,000 feet of any property that is occupied by a church, school, family day care home, small day care facility, day care center, or public park or playground on the date of application for a license for such a facility. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-411, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-412. - Screening requirements. 
    All clinics shall be required to erect and maintain opaque fencing to provide an effective visual screen at least six feet in height to be located along side and rear property lines that abut properties in residential use. The fencing is to screen the clinic entrance and parking lot from ordinary view from all directly adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-412, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-413. - Nonconforming facilities. 
    Any outpatient addiction treatment clinic in lawful existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may remain in operation in its present location for twelve months following such effective date. Thereafter, such clinics shall be required to comply with all the provisions of this article except the location and screening requirements set forth in the sections pertaining to semi-annual meeting with the police chief and location criteria. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-413, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-414-14-429. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-430-14-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSES 

Sec. 14-451. - Required; application. 
(a)  License required: No person shall operate a taxicab business without first obtaining a license to do so. Any person desiring to operate a taxicab business in the city shall first submit a written application therefore to the city clerk or designee which shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Signature: Every application shall be signed and verified by each of the principal officers of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, and in all other cases, by all persons having actual ownership interests in the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall state the name and address and the date and place of birth of each of the principal officers of the applicant and of every person having management authority in the business of the applicant. In all other cases, the application shall state the name and address and the date and place of birth of every person having an actual ownership interest or having management authority in the business of the applicant. 
(c)  Insurance: The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of liability insurance, providing for minimum coverage of $50,000.00 property damage, $100,000.00 bodily injury per person, and $300,000.00 per accident. 
(d)  Criminal conviction statement: The application shall include a record of disqualifying criminal conviction of any principal officer of a corporation or owner of the business or of any person having management authority in the business, or a statement that no such convictions exist. 
(e)  Vehicle information: The application shall include the make, model, year, serial number, and license plate number of each vehicle for which a taxicab business license is sought and the address of the garage or other terminal at which the vehicle will be stationed when not in service. The licensee must also provide a copy of the valid state of Maine registration for each vehicle to be licensed. 
(f)  Vehicle description: The application shall include a detailed description of the graphic design, insignia, wording, and coloring which will appear on the vehicle, if licensed. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-427, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-452. - Denial of taxicab business licenses. 
(a)  The city clerk or designee may deny an application for a taxicab business license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A corporate applicant is not licensed to do business in this state. 
(2)  A principal officer or other person having actual ownership interest in a corporate applicant or managing authority in the business has a disqualifying criminal conviction. 
(3)  Any person having an actual ownership interest or management authority in a non-corporate applicant has a disqualifying criminal conviction. 
(4)  An applicant or any of the principal owners having a controlling interest held a taxicab business license in the city which was revoked within the three years preceding the filing of the application. 
(5)  The application contains a material and knowingly false statement of fact. 
(b)  The city clerk or designee shall promptly give written notice to the applicant of the reasons for denial and shall keep a copy on file. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-428, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-453. - Inspections. 
    Before a taxicab business license may be issued, all taxicabs to be covered by the license shall be thoroughly inspected by the police chief or designee at the applicant's expense and certified to be in safe condition. The applicant shall make its taxicabs available for such additional inspections at its expense as the police chief may reasonably require and shall not operate any taxicab not certified to be in safe condition until the unsafe condition is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-429, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-454. - Cancellation of insurance policy. 
    Should an insurance policy of any licensed taxi business in the city be canceled before its expiration date, the issuing company shall mail a 30-day written notice to the city. This notice should be sent to the police chief and the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-420, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-455. - Suspension of taxicab business licenses. 
(a)  The city clerk or designee shall suspend any taxicab business license for up to five days when satisfied that the licensee has: 
(1)  Failed to notify the clerk of any material change of fact set forth in the license application; 
(2)  Failed to exercise proper control over its taxicab drivers as evidenced by the existence of three or more driver suspensions during the period of 12 months; 
(3)  Permitted a taxicab to be operated when it has been determined to be in unsafe condition; 
(4)  Refused to comply with the provisions of this article regarding the maintenance and inspections of its taxicabs. 
(b)  In the event of a second or subsequent violation of the terms of these ordinances within the period of twelve months, the city clerk or designee shall suspend the licensee's taxicab business license for up to ten days. The length of the period of suspension shall vary in each case subject to the stated maximums depending on the gravity of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-431, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-456-14-474. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSES 

Sec. 14-475. - Application for taxicab driver's licenses. 
(a)  Any person who wishes to secure a taxicab driver's license shall submit a written application to the city clerk or designee which shall contain the following: 
(1)  The age of the applicant. 
(2)  A complete statement of the applicant's health and physical condition. 
(3)  A complete record of the applicant with respect to any disqualifying criminal conviction or a statement that no such conviction exists. 
(4)  A record of convictions for reckless driving, driving to endanger, operating under the influence, or attempting to operate under the influence during the year preceding the application. 
(5)  A statement as to whether any driver's license held by the applicant is presently revoked or has been revoked during the last three years preceding the application and the reasons for such revocation or revocations. 
(6)  An appropriate form or statement over the signature of the applicant giving all persons and governmental agencies having information relevant to the above items permission to release the same to the clerk. 
(b)  The application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a photograph, in duplicate, of the applicant, which meets specifications for a passport photograph and is current within 30 days annually. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-432, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-476. - Denial of taxicab driver's licenses. 
(a)  The city clerk or designee shall deny an application for a taxicab driver's license if: 
(1)  The applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant does not have a valid motor vehicle operator's license. 
(3)  The applicant is unable to operate a taxicab safely by reason of physical incapacity. 
(4)  The applicant received a disqualifying criminal conviction at any time during the previous five years, provided that the conviction was for an offense that is reasonably related to the operator's fitness to operate a taxicab. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted during the preceding three years of reckless driving, driving to endanger, operating under the influence or attempting to operate under the influence, or an equivalent offense in another state. 
(6)  His driver's license has been revoked during the preceding three years for any reason reasonably related to his ability to safely operate a taxicab. 
(b)  The city clerk or designee shall keep a written record of every decision to deny a taxicab driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-433, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-477. - Suspension of taxicab driver's licenses. 
(a)  The city clerk or designee shall suspend any taxicab driver's license when satisfied that the licensee: 
(1)  Knowingly took a longer route to his destination than was necessary unless so requested by the passenger. 
(2)  Knowingly conveyed any passenger to a place other than that which the passenger specified. 
(3)  Transported any person other than the passenger first engaging the taxicab without the express consent of such passenger. 
(4)  Harassed, threatened, or assaulted a passenger. 
(5)  Charged more than the maximum fare specified in this article. 
(6)  Failed to notify the clerk of any change of material fact set forth in the application for such license. 
(7)  Removed from the taxicab or obscured the notice required by this article. 
(b)  The suspension shall be for up to five days. In the event of a second or subsequent violation of these ordinances within a twelve month period, the city clerk or designee shall suspend the license of the taxicab driver for up to ten days. The length of the period of suspension shall vary in each case subject to the stated maximums depending on the gravity of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-434, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-478-14-499. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATION AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-500. - List of taxicabs in active use. 
    Every taxicab business shall maintain an up-to-date list on file with the city clerk or designee containing its current business address and the make, model, serial number, and license plate number of each taxicab being operated by it and the garage or other terminal at which the vehicle will be located when not in service together with such additional information regarding the operating condition of each taxicab as the police chief may reasonable require. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-430, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-501. - Equipment condition and maintenance. 
    Every taxicab operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in clean and serviceable condition and adequate repair. Each taxicab shall have two doors affording direct entrance and exit to and from the passenger compartment. Clean and adequate repair shall mean, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  No visible tears in carpeting; 
(2)  No dents larger than six inches in diameter; 
(3)  No tears in seat upholstery; 
(4)  No loose trash or large amounts of dirt or sand in the interior passenger area, whether or not the area is currently occupied by a passenger; 
(5)  No missing trim or body work; 
(6)  No cracks in windshield or windows; 
(7)  Seat belts for all passenger seats visible and in working order; 
(8)  No missing hubcaps; 
(9)  No visible primer paint; and 
(10)  No rust greater than one inch in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-420, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-502. - Vehicle lettering design. 
    The name of the owner of the taxicab shall appear on the exterior of the taxicab in letters not less than two inches in height. In additions, the business telephone number of the taxicab owner may be included together with an identifying design. Any such design must first be approved by the police chief as not being confusing to customers or unnecessarily distracting to other motorists. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-420, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-503. - Display of cards. 
    All licensed taxicabs shall have three cards of a size and form to be established by the police chief. These cards shall be placed or secured in a frame so that they may not be easily tampered with or destroyed. Each card shall show the license number assigned to the vehicle by the city clerk or designee and a statement that any customer complaint shall be directed to the police chief and shall include the license number of the taxicab, the schedule of the established rates of fares and zones, and the driver's identification card and number. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-421, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-504. - Number of passengers. 
    No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in the taxicab than the seating capacity of the cab. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-422, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-505. - Record of daily trips. 
    The owner of each licensed taxicab shall maintain daily records of trips made by the vehicle. These records shall be kept in a form and manner approved by the police chief and shall be open to inspection by any police officer delegated by the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-423, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-506. - Receipts for fares. 
    Every taxicab driver, when requested by a passenger, shall furnish a signed receipt showing the owner's name together with the date and amount of the fare charged. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-424, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-507. - Consent of passenger to additional fares. 
    No taxicab driver shall carry any person other than his initial passenger without first obtaining the first passenger's consent. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-425, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-508. - Rates and zones. 
(a)  The city council, on its own initiative, or on petitions of ten or more residents of the city, or two or more persons regularly operating taxicab businesses in the city, may revise the schedule of fares and definitions of the zones for such fares. The schedule of fares shall be established and the zones defined so as to protect the public interest while at the same time providing taxicab owners with a reasonable return on their investment. 
(b)  At least seven days before any action is taken by the city council at alter existing fares or change the description of zones, notice shall be given by publication in a daily newspaper having a general circulation in the city of the time and place of the meeting at which such action is proposed to be taken and of the fact that the city council will be considering a proposal to alter existing taxicab fares or zones. When the request for a change in rates or zone descriptions is initiated by one or more taxicab businesses, the applicants shall assume the expense of publishing the notice of the hearing. 
(c)  At the hearing, the city council shall consider any relevant evidence that is offered to show whether or not fares or zone descriptions should be altered. 
(d)  A schedule of the rates and zones currently in effect shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-426, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-509-14-529. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - ADULT AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 14-530. - License required; suspension. 
    No person shall own or manage a place of business in which an adult amusement device is located and offered for the use of patrons of the establishment without first having obtained a city license to do so. Any such license may be suspended or revoked by the city council after notice and hearing upon finding that the use of any such adult amusement device is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or violates any state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-440, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-531-14-549. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - ALCOHOL RELATED BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS ACTIVITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-550. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the ameanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bottle club means a person operating on a regular, profit or nonprofit basis a facility for social activities in which members or guests provide their own liquor, where no liquor is sold on the bottle club premises, which maintains suitable facilities for the use of members on a regular basis or charges an admission fee to members or the general public and where members, guests or others are regularly permitted to consume liquor. As used in this definition, the term "regularly" includes daily, weekly or monthly, but does not include once a year or less often. A bottle club is not a public place, as defined in 17 M.R.S.A. § 2003-A(D). 
    BYOB function means an event held by a BYOB sponsor and to which no liquor is sold but entertainment is provided and the general public is invited, regardless of whether admission is charged, and permitted to bring liquor for their personal consumption. 
    Entertainment includes any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion whether live, taped or otherwise for patrons or customers of the licensed premises whether provided by: 
(1)  Professional entertainers; 
(2)  Fulltime or parttime employees of the licensed premises whose incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value; 
(3)  Patrons induced by prizes or otherwise to act as entertainers; or 
(4)  Any other person. 
    Licensee includes the holder of a license issued by the state for the sale of liquor to be consumed on premises owned by said licensee, or any agent or employee of any such licensee. 
    Liquor means spirits, wine, malt liquor or hard cider, or any substance containing liquor, intended for human consumption, that contains more than one half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
    Low-alcohol spirits product means a product containing spirits that has an alcohol content of six percent or less by volume. 
    Malt liquor means liquor produced by the fermentation of malt, wholly or partially, or from any malt substitute, which contains one half of one percent of alcohol or more by volume. The term "malt liquor" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Ale, beer, porter and stout. 
(2)  Beverages made with malt liquor, but to which no spirits are added. 
    Premises includes all parts of the contiguous real estate occupied by a licensee over which the licensee has direct or indirect control or interest, which the licensee uses in the operation of the licensed business. 
    Restaurant means a reputable place operated by responsible persons of good reputation, which is regularly used for the purpose of providing food for the public, and which has adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity for preparing and serving suitable food for the public. 
    Tavern means premises where beer, wine or hard liquor are served for consumption on the premises, but where no food is sold. 
    Wine means any liquor containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume that is produced by the fermentation of fruit or other agricultural products containing sugar or wine to which spirits have been added not to exceed 24 percent by volume. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, wine coolers, table wine, still wine, sparkling wine, champagne and fortified wine, provided that the alcohol content is not above 24 percent by volume. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, 28-A M.R.S.A. § 2. 
Sec. 14-551. - Penalties. 
    Violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a civil penalty of $500.00. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such penalty, the city may enjoin or abate any violation of this section by appropriate action. In the event that the city shall prevail in any action to enforce this section, the city shall recover its costs of suit, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
Sec. 14-552. - Inspections. 
    By accepting its city approval or license under this article, the applicant agrees to allow inspection of its premises by representatives of the city during business hours without prior notice and at other times with prior notice. 
Sec. 14-553. - Certain entertainment prohibited. 
    No business approved or licensed under this chapter shall permit on its premises any act prohibited in section 14-603, without regard to whether such activity is carried out by professional entertainers, employees or any other person and without regard to whether any compensation is paid. 
Sec. 14-554. - Classes of licenses. 
    The city issues licenses classified as follows: 
Food Establishment, on or off premises Temporary Food Service Establishment Class I Spirituous, Vinous and Malt Class III Vinous Only Class III/IV Malt and Vinous Class IV Malt Liquor Only Class V Spirituous, Vinous and Malt Clubs Without Catering Privileges Class X Spirituous, Vinous and Malt Class A Lounge Class XI Spirituous, Vinous and Malt Restaurant/Lounge Bottle Club/BYOB Off-Premise Retailer - Malt Liquor Off-Premise Retailer - Table Wine  
(Ord. No. 02-03052012, 3-19-2012) 
Secs. 14-555-14-569. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAVERNS 

Sec. 14-570. - License required. 
    No person shall operate a tavern without first obtaining a license to do so. Fees for licenses under this section shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
State Law reference- Tavernkeepers generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3811 et seq. 
Secs. 14-571-14-579. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOTTLE CLUBS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Operation of bottle clubs, § 14-210 et seq. 

Sec. 14-580. - Registration required. 
    Bottle clubs within the city shall be required to register as provided in 28-A M.R.S.A. § 161. 
Sec. 14-581. - Suspension or revocation; appeal. 
    After a public hearing preceded by notice to the bottle club or other business establishment and to the public, the city council may suspend or revoke the approval granted under 28-A M.R.S.A. § 161-B or the license granted under the code, as the case may be, on grounds that there has been a violation of this section. Appeals from such a decision may be taken to the superior court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. 
Sec. 14-582. - Bottle club closing hours. 
    No person shall conduct the business of a bottle club as defined in 28-A M.R.S.A. § 2 between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1967, § 25-5.7) 
Secs. 14-583-14-599. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL AMUSEMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 14-600. - Purpose and authority. 
    The purpose of this section is to control the issuance of special amusement permits for music, dancing, or entertainment in facilities licensed by the state to sell liquor. This section is adopted pursuant to 28-A M.R.S.A. § 1054 and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-450, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-601. - Special amusement permit required. 
    No licensee shall permit on the licensed premise and music, except radio or mechanical device, dancing, or entertainment of any sort unless that licensee has obtained from the city council a special amusement permit under this section. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-451, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-602. - Applications. 
    Applications for special amusement permits and annual renewals thereof shall be made in writing to the city council and shall state the following: 
(1)  Name of the applicant. 
(2)  Business address. 
(3)  The nature of the business, including a specific description of the entertainment to be offered. 
(4)  The location to be used. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has ever has a license to conduct the type of business therein described either denied or revoked and those circumstances specifically. 
(6)  Whether the applicant, including all partners and corporate officers, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, the applicant shall describe those circumstances specifically. 
(7)  Any additional information which may be required by the city council prior to the issuance of the permit, including but not limited to a copy of the applicant's current liquor license. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-452, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-603. - Entertainment regulated. 
    No special amusement permit shall be issued for premises that will offer entertainment which includes: 
(1)  Exposing to view the genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola area thereof. "Exposing to view" includes, without limitation, appearing without an opaque covering or appearing with only an opaque covering which adheres to the skin, such as body paint. 
(2)  The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, or genitals. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-453, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-604. - Public hearing on applications. 
    Prior to granting the initial special amusement permit, the city council shall hold a public hearing. Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given by the city clerk or designee to the applicant and shall be published at least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. At the public hearing, testimony of the applicant and of any interested person shall be heard. Subsequent applications do not require a public hearing unless there is a substantive change in the original application materials. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-454, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-605. - Issuance of permits. 
    After public hearing and within 15 days of the city council's receipt of the completed application, the city council shall grant the special amusement permit requested unless the issuance of the permit would violate any prohibition in this article or any state law or city ordinance or is otherwise contrary to public health, safety, or welfare. In granting a permit, the city council may impose reasonable restrictions to protect property owners in the vicinity of the licensed premises from any nuisance aspects of the proposed amusements including, without limitation, noise and hours of operation. The applicant shall be informed in writing of the decision on his application and of the reasons for the decision. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-455, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-606. - Admission charges. 
    A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class a restaurant malt liquor licensee, as defined in title 28-A of the Maine Revised Statutes, that has been issued a special amusement permit, may charge admission in designated areas as approved in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-456, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-607. - Inspection of premises. 
    Each permit holder, by accepting a special amusement permit, agrees to allow inspection of his premises by representative of the city during business hours without prior notice and at other times with prior notice. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-457, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-608. - Prohibited activities. 
    No permit holder shall allow on the permitted premises any prohibited activity described in this article, without regard to whether such activities are carried out by professional entertainers, employees, or any other person and without regard to whether any compensation is paid by the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-458, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 14-609-14-629. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - GARAGE, YARD AND BARN SALES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Retitled "Garage Sales" by Ord. No. 12-06152015, adopted July 6, 2015. 

Sec. 14-630. - Permit required. 
    No person shall sell or offer for sale personal property from any residential premises except as permitted by this article. Only the sale of donated personal property and the sale of personal property owned, used and maintained for personal use only by the seller, and not for resale to the public, shall be permitted to be sold from residential premises, and only after issuance to the seller of a permit for such purposes, as follows: 
(1)  A permit may be obtained from the city. The fee for a permit shall be paid in accordance with the business fee schedule as established by the city council. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued for sales of personal property upon residential premises for a period of more than three consecutive days, and no more than two permits shall be issued for such sales upon residential premises in any six month period. Permits required under this article shall be on forms furnished by the city. Two or more people may hold a garage sale jointly at one location upon obtaining a permit. The person who resides at the location where the yard sale is to be held shall be listed as the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-460, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-631. - Neighborhood garage sales. 
(a)  A neighborhood garage sale is permitted under this article. When applying for a garage sale permit, the organizer or one of the participants in the garage sale shall list his address as a the location of record where the garage sale shall take place. In addition, the names and addresses of all of the participants shall be listed on the permit application. 
(b)  For the purposes of the article, a neighborhood garage sale shall be considered as a single event and the permit charge shall be the same as for a single garage sale. 
(c)  Neighborhood garage sale permits are valid for the same periods as other garage sales and no more than one neighborhood garage sale on the same street may take place in any six month period. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-462, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 14-632. - Agricultural barn sale. 
(a)  A permit may be obtained from the city. The fee for a permit shall be paid in accordance with the business fee schedule as established by the city council and shall be the same as a garage sale. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for the sale of property, personal or household goods or other used items upon the agricultural or formerly agricultural premises for a period of more than three consecutive days, and no more than one permit in any one-month period between April and October. Permits required under this article shall be on forms furnished by the city. The person who resides at the location where the agricultural barn sale is to be held shall be listed as the applicant and will provide information to confirm that they use or used the premises for agricultural purposes of generating more than 50 percent of their household income for 25 years or more. 
(Ord. No. 12-06152015) 
Sec. 14-633. - Signs. 
    Notwithstanding any other municipal provisions relating to signs, one single-faced sign containing not more than four square feet in total area may be placed upon a residential premise where the sale of personal property has been permitted for duration of the sale only. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-463, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 12-06152015) 
Note- Formerly numbered as § 14-632. 
Sec. 14-634. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales of personal property made under court order or process. 
(Ord. No. 38-02072011-05, att. § 24-464, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 12-06152015) 
Note- Formerly numbered as § 14-633. 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Maine Emergency Management Agency, 37-B M.R.S.A. § 701 et seq.; local civil emergency preparedness programs, 37-B M.R.S.A. § 781 et seq.; local disaster emergency plans, 37-B M.R.S.A. § 783; state search and rescue plan, 37-B M.R.S.A. § 850; emergency proclamations, 37-B M.R.S.A. § 742; designated emergency telephone numbers, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2932; emergency location of local governments, 1 M.R.S.A. § 761. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 16-19. - Established; duties of council and manager. 
(a)  There is hereby created an emergency management agency in compliance and conformity with the provisions of 37-B M.R.S.A. § 781, referred to in this chapter as the emergency management agency. 
(b)  The manager shall be responsible for the agency's organization, administration and operation. The manager may employ such permanent and temporary employees as he deems necessary and prescribe their duties. 
(c)  The council shall advise the manager and the emergency management director on all matters of civil emergency preparedness, review the existing operational organization to ascertain the agency's ability to cope with its responsibilities, and accept or reject, after public hearing, such rules and regulations submitted to it under section 16-21. 
Sec. 16-20. - Emergency management director. 
    The manager shall appoint a director who shall coordinate the activities of all departments, organizations and agencies for civil emergency preparedness within the city, and maintain liaison with other emergency management agencies and public safety agencies, and have such additional duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the manager. 
State Law reference- Appointment of municipal agency director, 37-B M.R.S.A. § 782. 
Sec. 16-21. - Administrative and operational regulations. 
    The emergency management director shall prepare, under the direction and control of the manager, such policies as may be deemed necessary for the administration and operational requirements of the emergency management agency. All policies must be approved by the council prior to becoming effective. The council, after public hearing, shall accept, amend or reject such policies. 
Sec. 16-22. - Proclamation of emergency. 
(a)  The mayor or the manager shall have the power and authority, after consultation with the council, to issue a proclamation that an emergency exists under conditions specified in 37-B M.R.S.A. § 742. The proclamation may declare the fact that an emergency exists in any or all sections of the city. If the manager is temporarily absent from the city or is otherwise unavailable, the next person in the city who would serve as acting manager shall have the authority to issue an emergency proclamation. A copy of such proclamation shall be filed within 24 hours with the clerk. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, when consultation with the council would result in a substantial delay in an effective response in alleviating or preventing an emergency or disaster, the mayor or the manager is authorized to take whatever actions are necessary to prevent the loss of life and property in the city. 
(c)  The mayor or the manager and/or the emergency management director shall be responsible to submit a full report to the council of actions taken under this section as soon as the council can convene. 
Sec. 16-23. - Emergency powers of officials. 
(a)  During any period when an emergency or disaster exists or appears imminent, the mayor or the manager may promulgate such regulations deemed necessary to protect life and property and to preserve critical resources within the purpose of this chapter. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles from areas within or without the city. 
(2)  Regulations pertaining to the evacuation of persons from any hazard-stricken or threatened areas of the city. 
(3)  Regulations necessary to abate, clean up or mitigate whatever hazards exist. 
(4)  Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. 
(b)  The mayor or the manager or the emergency management director shall be authorized to request aid and/or assistance from the state or any political subdivisions of the state and shall render assistance through reciprocal mutual aid agreements to other entities or political subdivisions under the provisions of 37-B M.R.S.A. §§ 701 and 784. 
(c)  The mayor or the manager or purchasing agent may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property. 
(d)  The provisions of subsections (a) through (c) of this section will terminate with the official termination of the emergency/disaster event. 
Sec. 16-24. - Emergency operational plan. 
(a)  The manager will cause to be prepared an emergency operational plan for the city, which shall be submitted to the council for approval. Amendments to the emergency operational plan shall be submitted to the council for approval. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions and/or responsibilities assigned and to maintain their portion of the emergency plan in a current state of readiness. The emergency operational plan shall be reviewed periodically by the mayor or the manager in conjunction with all department heads and the emergency management director. 
State Law reference- Disaster emergency plan, 37-B M.R.S.A. § 783. 
Sec. 16-25. - Civil emergency preparedness forces. 
    The civil emergency preparedness forces of the city shall be the employees, equipment and facilities of all departments, agencies, boards and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to, the activities of emergency management, and in addition shall include all private volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by or obtained from private volunteer persons and organizations. 
Sec. 16-26. - Immunity from liability. 
    Immunity from liability shall be as set forth in 37-B M.R.S.A. § 822. 
Sec. 16-27. - Compensation for injuries. 
    All members of the civil emergency preparedness forces shall be deemed to be employees of the state when engaged in training for or on duty and shall have all the rights of state employees under the workmen's compensation act as specified in 37-B M.R.S.A. § 823. 
Sec. 16-28. - Right-of-way of personnel and equipment responding to emergency. 
    Personnel and equipment required to respond to an emergency or disaster shall have the right-of-way over all public ways and roads, and anyone failing to grant such right-of-way shall suffer penalties as specified under 37-B M.R.S.A. § 828. 
Sec. 16-29. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization as described in this chapter in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation or plan issued thereunder. 
Secs. 16-30-16-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SECURITY SYSTEMS 

Sec. 16-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm site means a single premises or location served by an alarm system. 
    Alarm system means a device or system which transmits a signal intended to summon aid in a robbery, burglary, or personal hostage situation. The term "alarm system" does not include a system installed on a vehicle, personal safety alarm device, or a system designed to alert only the persons within a premises which does not emit a signal visible or audible outside of the premises. 
    Chief means the chief of police of the city or his authorized representative. 
    False alarm notification means an alarm notification to the police department when the responding personnel find no evidence of actual or attempted robbery, burglary, or personal hostage. 
    Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site which is audible or visible from the exterior of the alarm site. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.1) 
State Law reference- Security system defined, 32 M.R.S.A. § 9403(10). 
Sec. 16-48. - Permit required. 
    The owner or person in control of a premise commits an offense if he installs an alarm system or possesses an activated alarm system without first obtaining a permit from the chief. A separate permit is required for each alarm site. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.2) 
Sec. 16-49. - Application; false statements; issuance; transferability; permit fees. 
(a)  The application for a permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, business address, home address, business telephone number, and home telephone number of the person in whose name the permit is requested; 
(2)  Name, business telephone number, and home telephone number of two persons who are authorized and have agreed to receive notification at any time from responding police personnel to come to the alarm site within 30 minutes after receiving such notification; 
(3)  Classification of the alarm site as residential, commercial or banking institution; 
(4)  Purpose of the alarm (i.e. burglary, robbery); 
(5)  Any other information required by the chief to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(b)  The permit holder shall notify the chief of any change in the information contained in the application within five days of such change. 
(c)  If the application complies with all requirements of this article, the chief shall issue a permit upon receipt of a permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(d)  Any false statement of a material nature made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining a permit shall be grounds for denial of the issuance of the permit, or cancellation of the permit if it has been issued. 
(e)  A permit is not assignable or transferable to another person. 
(f)  A permit shall be valid for the period of January 1 through December 31 of the same year issued. However, if a permit is obtained after December 1, the permit shall be valid through December 31 of the next calendar year. Permits expire on December 31. After expiration, a new application must be made. 
(g)  Permit renewals for the next calendar year shall start on December 1 of the year of expiration. Renewals may be made on weekdays during normal business hours in person, by telephone, or by mail. A renewal fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule will be charged if renewal occurs before expiration. There will be an additional charge in the amount provided in the city fee schedule for renewals made after December 31. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.3) 
Sec. 16-50. - Automatic shutoff required. 
    In the event that a mechanism sounds an alarm signal for longer than 15 minutes after being activated, the chief of police or his designated representative is authorized to disable the alarm. All costs of the city in disabling such an alarm shall be assessed to the operator of the alarm system and shall be paid to the city within 30 days after the operator has received notice that the said costs have been assessed. Application for a permit under the provisions of this section constitutes a grant of approval by the operator of the alarm system for the city to deactivate the local alarm system under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.4) 
Sec. 16-51. - Maintenance of system. 
    The permit holder shall maintain the alarm system in such a manner as to ensure proper operation and to minimize false alarm notifications. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.5) 
Sec. 16-52. - Reporting of alarm signals. 
(a)  A permit holder commits an offense if he allows alarm signals to be reported through a relaying intermediary that is not licensed to legally provide such service. 
(b)  A permit holder or other party commits an offense if they allow an alarm signal to be reported through an automatic dialing system directly to the police department other than through the installed alarm console. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.6) 
Sec. 16-53. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
    A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall: 
(1)  Send notification of an alarm to the city by an individual; 
(2)  Keep his business premises locked and secured at all times; 
(3)  Allow an inspection of his business premises by authorized agents of the police chief; 
(4)  Report alarms only to a telephone number designated by the city; 
(5)  Send alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the city; and 
(6)  Maintain sufficient staff to ensure that valid alarms are relayed immediately to the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.7) 
Sec. 16-54. - Alarm dispatch records. 
    The chief shall maintain a written record of all alarm notifications, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name of permit holder; 
(2)  Location of alarm site; 
(3)  Date and time of alarm notification; 
(4)  Name of the responding police officer in charge of response; 
(5)  Weather conditions; and 
(6)  Whether the notification was a false alarm notification. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.8) 
Sec. 16-55. - False alarm notification-Determination. 
(a)  The chief shall not consider an alarm notification to be false if he determines that the alarm was caused by: 
(1)  A natural or manmade disaster; 
(2)  Severe weather that causes physical damage to the premises; 
(3)  Vandalism; 
(4)  Telephone line outage; 
(5)  Attempted entry or attempted robbery; or 
(6)  Accidental activation by the occupant provided the alarm is immediately reported to the police department. 
(b)  The determination of the chief in classifying an alarm notification as false or actual is final. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.9) 
Sec. 16-56. - Same-Penalty. 
(a)  The permit holder shall pay a penalty of $30.00 beginning with the third and fourth false alarm notification (the first two are at no charge); an additional fee of $50.00 will be assessed for the fifth and sixth false alarm and all subsequent false alarms will be assessed at $100.00. 
(b)  The time period for alarms will be from the beginning of the permit period. 
(c)  The police department shall, on a monthly basis, send to the permit holder, at the address stated on the application, a statement of fees due. The permit holder shall pay such fees within 30 days of the date of the statement and shall be delinquent after such 30-day period. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.10) 
State Law reference- False alarms or reports, 17A M.R.S.A. § 509. 
Sec. 16-57. - Revocation of permit. 
    The chief shall revoke an alarm permit if he determines that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material nature in the application for a permit; 
(2)  The permit holder has violated any provision of this article; or 
(3)  The permit holder is delinquent in payment of fees for false alarm notifications. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.11) 
Sec. 16-58. - Appeal from denial of issuance or revocation of permit. 
(a)  If the chief denies the issuance of a permit, or suspends a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action setting forth the reason for such action and advising the applicant or permit holder of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the chief to the city manager by filing with the city manager's office a written request for a hearing, setting forth his objections to the action of the chief, within ten days after receipt of the notice from the chief. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager shall stay the action of the chief in denying the issuance of or suspending a permit until a final decision on the appeal is made by the city manager. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day limit, the action of the chief is final. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall preside at any administrative hearing conducted under the provisions of this section and shall consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at such hearing. The city manager shall render a written decision setting forth findings of fact and conclusions of law within 30 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. Such decision shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the chief, and the city manager decision is final. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(01), § 2.12) 
Sec. 16-59. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person commits an offense if he violates by commission or omission (nonregistration of alarm) any provisions of this article that impose upon him a duty or responsibility, other than false alarms. Each day or portion of a day in which the violation exists or is committed shall constitute a separate offense. Each offense other than false alarms is punishable by a fine in the amount of $100.00. 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State department of environmental protection, 38 M.R.S.A. § 341 et seq.; wellhead protection 38 M.R.S.A. § 1391 et seq.; water pollution control, 38 M.R.S.A. § 411 et seq.; corruption of waters forbidden, 38 M.R.S.A. § 571; site location of developments, 38 M.R.S.A. § 481 et seq.; protection and improvement of air, 38 M.R.S.A. § 581 et seq.; municipal air pollution control, 38 M.R.S.A. § 597; Soil and Water Conservation Districts Law, 12 M.R.S.A. § 1 et seq.; improvement of navigation and prevention of erosion, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Prohibited activities in Lake Auburn watershed area. 
    No person shall swim, bathe or engage in other recreational activities in the Lake Auburn watershed area within the boundaries of the city which involve a reasonable likelihood that he will become totally or partially immersed in the lake or in any stream emptying into the lake, nor shall any person wash or clean any clothing or animal in the lake, or deposit any filth, waste or rubbish in or near the lake. 
(Code 1967, § 22-1.1) 
Secs. 18-2-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL DISTURBANCE AND FILL STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City engineer means the city engineer, acting directly or through his duly authorized representative. 
    Drainage course means an established river or brook, or an intermittent or permanent stream, swale, channel or ditch, manmade or otherwise, which is used for the conveyance of water. Drainage courses may also be determined by their location on a USGS topographic map, USDA soil survey map, city topographic or tax map, or approved subdivision plan, or by a field investigation by the engineering division. 
    Fill material includes inert uncontaminated (as determined by the state department of environmental protection) fill material, gravel, sand, silt, clay, loam, stumps and trees. Fill material shall exclude solid waste and special and hazardous waste, mixed demolition debris, and organics such as leaves, grass clippings and garden spoils. 
    Inert fill material means clean soil material, rocks, bricks and cured concrete which are not mixed with other solid or liquid waste and which are not derived from an ore mining activity. 
    Land adjacent to a drainage course, wetland or great pond means: 
(1)  Any land within the floodway of a river, stream or brook. 
(2)  Any land area within a horizontal distance of 75 feet of the normal high-water line of a great pond, river, or freshwater wetland. 
    Wetlands means freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adopted for life in saturated soils and not considered part of a great pond, coastal wetland, river, stream or brook. Wetland areas can be located: 
(1)  On a USDA soil survey as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial or floodplain soil. 
(2)  By their location on a USGS topographic map. 
(3)  Through an on-site investigation. 
(Code 1967, § 34-1.2) 
Sec. 18-22. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Encourage the efficient use of land by the proper placement of fill material on the land and within water bodies or drainage courses; 
(2)  Protect the environment from the adverse impacts of flooding, erosion, sedimentation and pollution; 
(3)  Encourage recycling by the more responsible regulation of fill materials; and 
(4)  Ensure an accurate and permanent record of the placement of fill material. 
(Code 1967, § 34-1.1) 
Sec. 18-23. - Enforcement. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article or any condition or term of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to the enforcement procedures set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Any land use complaint issued under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 may be signed by the city engineer or his authorized representative. Alternatively, such violations may be processed in accordance with the citation system. 
(Code 1967, § 34-2.0) 
Sec. 18-24. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  Generally. The standards in this article shall apply to the placement of ten or more cubic yards of fill material at any one time at a specified site or to the accumulation of ten or more cubic yards of fill material from the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. These standards shall also apply to any filling done in excess of ten cubic yards while constructing a building, and includes foundation excavation material used as fill on- or off-site. 
(b)  Waivers. The city engineer may grant a written waiver of strict compliance with the standards set forth in this article if he has determined that enforcement of this article would result in undue hardship to the applicant. Such a waiver must be applied for in writing and cannot create a health or safety hazard or otherwise impair the integrity of this article. A waiver may be granted orally for emergency situations such as a flood or other acts of God, or when necessary to provide access for emergency vehicles or personnel. 
(Code 1967, § 34-1.3) 
Sec. 18-25. - Disturbance of soil near drainage course, wetland or great pond. 
(a)  Applicability. This section pertains to the disturbance of soil adjacent to, but not in, a drainage course, freshwater wetland or great pond. Such work includes depositing of fill material, bulldozing and scraping the land for purposes other than agriculture within 250 feet of the normal high-water line or upland edge, measured horizontally from a freshwater wetland, great pond or river and within 75 feet of a stream. These standards are designed to ensure that the disturbance of soil material is stabilized in order to prevent erosion of the shoreline, siltation of the water, and sedimentation of any drainage courses. 
(b)  Seasonal restriction. Any work within a river, stream or brook shall be restricted between October 2 and July 14 of each year unless approval is granted by the Army Corps of Engineers. Any work adjacent to such water bodies shall conform to state department of environmental protection shoreland zoning rules. 
(Code 1967, § 34-1.4) 
Sec. 18-26. - Erosion control. 
(a)  Subsections (b) through (e) of this section apply to work described in section 18-25 and subsections (f) and (g) of this section apply to all projects. 
(b)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized within one week from the time it was last worked using temporary or permanent measures such as placement of riprap, sod, mulch, erosion control blankets or other comparable measures. 
(c)  Hay or straw mulch, where used, shall be applied at a rate of at least one bale per 500 square feet (one to two tons per acre to cover 75 to 90 percent of the ground surface). 
(d)  If mulch is likely to be moved because of steep slopes or wind exposure, it shall be anchored with netting, peg and twine, or other suitable method and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established over the disturbed area. 
(e)  In addition to placement of riprap, sod, erosion control blankets or mulch, additional steps shall be taken, where necessary, in order to prevent sedimentation of the water. Evidence of sedimentation includes visible gully erosion, discoloration of water by suspended particles, and slumping of banks. Silt fences, staked hay bales and other sedimentation control measures, where planned for, shall be in place prior to commencement of work, but shall also be installed whenever necessary due to sedimentation danger. 
(f)  Mulch or other temporary erosion control measures shall be maintained where necessary until the site is permanently stabilized with vegetation or other permanent control measures. 
(g)  Permanent revegetation of all disturbed areas, using native plant material wherever possible, shall occur within 30 days from the time the areas were last actively worked, or, for fall and winter activities, by June 15, except where precluded by the type of activity (e.g., riprap, road surfaces, etc.). The vegetative cover shall be maintained. 
(h)  Any erosion or sedimentation control measures not covered in this article shall be installed in accordance with the state erosion and sedimentation control manual published by the state department of environmental protection. 
(Code 1967, § 34-1.5) 
Secs. 18-27-18-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FILL PERMIT 

Sec. 18-56. - Application; site plan. 
(a)  Persons wanting to place fill material must obtain a fill permit application from the engineering division of the public works department. The application will be processed by the engineering division. The application for a fill permit must contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and the date. 
(2)  The property tax map number and areas of the abutting lots. 
(3)  A locator map including a city topographic/tax map. 
(4)  The square footage of fill area. 
(5)  The amount of fill material to be deposited and the time period when the filling will take place. 
(6)  A description of the fill project area and a description of the proposed use of the filled area. 
(7)  Any and all temporary or permanent stabilization measures. 
(8)  An attached sketch including overhead and side views of the area to be filled, showing dimensions and depth of fill, existing structures, distance from adjacent watercourses and water bodies, section of lots to be filled, any manmade or natural physical features, and the distance between the edge of the fill area and adjacent properties or streets. 
(9)  Comments from the city water district if the project is within 250 feet of Lake Auburn. 
(10)  The signature and title of the applicant and the date. 
(11)  Any or all of subsection (b) of this section as deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
(b)  Persons wanting to disturb soil or place fill material that will cover 22,500 or more square feet on land, wetland or water at one time or in accumulation from the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived must also prepare a site plan according to the following conditions. The site plan must: 
(1)  Be stamped by either a registered land surveyor or professional engineer. 
(2)  Be drawn to a scale of not more than 20 feet to the inch with contours shown at not more than five-foot intervals. 
(3)  Show the proposed limits of the area to be filled or be graded, indicate existing and modified topography and drainage, and indicate the relationship of the fill to the total width of the flood-carrying channel. The plan shall indicate erosion control measures taken and their location. 
(4)  Show abutting properties. 
(5)  Include a written certification, from the engineer/surveyor stamping the site plan, noting the effect of filling or regrading on flood heights and that the proposed fill will not create undue erosion, siltation, drainage or runoff problems either on the proposed fill area or on abutting properties. 
(Code 1967, § 34-1.6) 
Sec. 18-57. - Issuance. 
(a)  Standards for issuance. The following considerations will be made by the engineering division before a fill permit is issued: 
(1)  The extent to which the proposed fill will produce any erosion, sedimentation or flood hazard for abutting properties, drainage courses or water bodies; 
(2)  The extent to which the proposed fill will impound surface water or reduce the absorptive capacity or stormwater detention/retention capacity of any fill area; 
(3)  The extent to which the proposed fill will raise the normal high-water elevation of Taylor Pond, Taylor Brook, Lake Auburn, the Androscoggin River, the Little Androscoggin River, or any of their respective tributaries; 
(4)  The extent to which the proposed fill will damage spawning grounds or habitat for aquatic life, birds or other wildlife; and 
(5)  The extent to which the proposed fill will change or have an adverse cumulative effect on surface water and groundwater movement, wetland areas, drainage courses and the water quality of nearby or adjacent bodies of water. 
(b)  Conditions. Reasonable conditions may be attached to the issuance of a fill permit when required to ensure that environmental concerns will be addressed. These conditions may include but are not limited to a buffer zone, minimum back slopes, or the posting of a performance bond to the city in an amount determined by the engineering division to ensure compliance with the approved permit. 
(c)  Filing of application; fee. The completed application and site plan, when applicable, shall be submitted to the engineering division with the appropriate processing fee as provided in the city fee schedule . 
(d)  Investigation; action by engineering division. The engineering division will review the application and site plan, if required, and perform an on-site investigation of the proposed fill area to determine the effect of any filling. The engineering division will either approve and then issue, or deny, the fill permit. 
(Code 1967, § 34-1.7) 
Sec. 18-58. - Renewal; fees. 
(a)  Fill permits shall be granted for a one-year period. Persons wanting to renew or extend a fill permit must apply for renewal before the original permit expires. Any fill permits granted for areas greater than 22,500 square feet shall be valid for one year only. 
(b)  If a project that has been issued a fill permit cannot be completed before the permit expires, a request for renewal or extension can be made under the ordinances or regulations governing the original permit in order to complete the project. Renewal permits are valid one year from the day they are issued, and may be reissued at any time prior to their expiration at no charge. 
(c)  The fee for renewal of fill permits shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1967, § 34-1.8) 
Sec. 18-59. - Exemptions. 
(a)  If after reviewing a request for a fill permit it is found that the project comes under the jurisdiction of either 38 M.R.S.A. § 361-A et seq. (protection and improvement of waters 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-A et seq. (Natural Resources Protection Act), or section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act, 42 USC 1251 et seq., which regulates the discharge of dredged or fill material in most waters of the United States, including wetlands, then the fill permit application or site plan requirements shall be waived. In the absence of the exercise of jurisdictional control by the state or federal government, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(b)  Persons who are filling, grading or transferring any fill material from one part of a lot, tract or parcel of land to another part of the same lot, tract or parcel of land in the same ownership at a rate of less than ten cubic yards per acre per year do not have to apply for a fill permit. 
(c)  No fill permit is required for surface grading loam applications that do not affect the existing general slope of the land. 
(d)  Any unexpired permits issued before the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be valid so long as they are renewed on a yearly basis. Renewals issued after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall conform to this article. 
(Code 1967, § 34-1.9) 
Secs. 18-60-18-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of city citizens through monitoring and enforcement of compliance with post-construction stormwater management plans in order to comply with minimum control measures requirements of the federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., other federal regulations and Maine's Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems General Permit. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § 1; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. C, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 18-101. - Objectives. 
    This article seeks to ensure that post-construction stormwater management plans are followed and stormwater management facilities are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § 2; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. C, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 18-102. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person with requisite right, title or interest or an agent for such person who has filed an application for new development or redevelopment that requires a post-construction stormwater management plan under this article. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the state. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
    Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., which is commonly referred to as the Clean Water Act. 
    Construction activity means construction activity including one acre or more of disturbed area, or activity with less than one acre of total land area that is part of a subdivision, if the subdivision will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one acre. 
    Direct discharge and point source means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. 
    Discharge means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping, disposing or other addition of pollutants to "waters of the state." 
    Disturbed area means clearing, grading and excavation. Mere cutting of trees, without grubbing, stump removal, disturbance or exposure of soil is not considered "disturbed area." "Disturbed area" does not include routine maintenance but does include redevelopment. "Routine maintenance" is maintenance performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of land or improvements thereon. 
    Enforcement authority means the director of planning and permitting, director of community services, or their designees, the persons or departments authorized by the city to administer and enforce this article. 
    Permitting authority means the city official or body that has jurisdiction over the land use approval or permit required for a new development or redevelopment. 
    Separate storm sewer system (MS4) means conveyances for storm water, including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, city streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains (other than publicly owned treatment works and combined sewers) owned or operated by any cityity, sewer or sewage district, fire district, state agency or federal agency or other public entity that discharges directly to surface waters of the state. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") or by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection ("DEP") that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    New development means any construction activity on unimproved premises. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage, refuse, effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, dirt and industrial, city, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind. 
    Post-construction stormwater management plan means BMPs and stormwater management facilities employed by a new development or redevelopment to meet the standards of the city's subdivision, site plan, or other zoning, planning or other land use ordinances and approved by the permitting authority. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located within the city. 
    Qualified inspector means a person who conducts post construction stormwater management facilities inspections. The director of community services or his designee may require inspections for engineered systems to be completed by a registered professional engineer at his discretion. 
    Redevelopment means construction activity on premises already improved with buildings, structures or activities or uses, but does not include such activities as exterior remodeling. 
    Regulated small MS4 means any small MS4 regulated by Maine's General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems effective July 1, 2008 ("general permit"), including all those located partially or entirely within an urbanized area (ua) and those additional small MS4s located outside a ua that as of the issuance of the general permit have been designated by the DEP as regulated small MS4s. 
    Small MS4 and small municipal separate storm sewer system means any MS4 that is not already covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater program including city owned or operated storm sewer systems, state or federally-owned systems, such as colleges, universities, prisons, state department of transportation and state turnpike authority road systems and facilities, and military bases and facilities. 
    Storm drainage system means the city's regulated small MS4. 
    Stormwater and storm water mean any stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater management facilities means any parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related structures that are part of the post-construction stormwater management plan for a new development or redevelopment. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § 3; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. C, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 18-103. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to all new development and redevelopment within the city that discharges stormwater to the city's MS4 and to associated stormwater management facilities. This article does not apply to new development or redevelopment on a lot, tract or parcel where that lot, tract or parcel is part of a subdivision that is approved under this article; the lot, tract or parcel shall not require additional review under this article, but shall comply with the post-construction stormwater management plan requirements for that approved subdivision. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § 4; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. C, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 18-104. - Management plan approval. 
(a)  General requirement. Notwithstanding any ordinance provision to the contrary, and except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this article, no applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other zoning, planning or other land use approval for new development or redevelopment to which this article is applicable shall receive such permit or approval for that new development or redevelopment unless the applicant also receives approval under the city's subdivision, site plan or other zoning, planning or other land use ordinances for its post-construction stormwater management plan and stormwater management facilities for that new development or redevelopment, even if the city's subdivision, site plan or other zoning, planning or other land use ordinances would not otherwise apply to that new development or redevelopment. 
(b)  Notice of BMP discharge to city's MS4. At the time of application for a building permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other zoning, planning or other land use approval for new development or redevelopment to which this article is applicable, the applicant shall notify the permitting authority if its post-construction stormwater management plan includes any BMPs that will discharge to the city's MS4 and shall include in this notification a listing of which BMPs will so discharge. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § 5; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. C, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 18-105. - Plan compliance. 
(a)  General requirements. Any person owning, operating, leasing or having control over stormwater management facilities required by a post-construction stormwater management plan approved under the city's subdivision, site plan or other zoning, planning or other land use ordinances ("facility controller") shall demonstrate compliance with that plan as follows: 
(1)  The facility controller or a qualified inspector hired by the facility controller, shall at least annually inspect the stormwater management facilities, including but not limited to any parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related structures, in accordance with all city and state inspection, cleaning and maintenance requirements of the approved post-construction stormwater management plan. 
(2)  If the stormwater management facilities require maintenance to function as intended by the approved post-construction stormwater management plan, the facility controller shall take corrective action to address the deficiency or deficiencies. 
(3)  The facility controller or a qualified inspector hired by the facility controller, shall, on or by June 1 of each year provide a completed and signed certification to the enforcement authority in a form identical to that available from the office of the city clerk, certifying that the person has inspected the stormwater management facilities and that they are adequately maintained and functioning as intended by the approved post-construction stormwater management plan, or that they require maintenance or repair, describing any required maintenance and any deficiencies found during inspection of the stormwater management facilities. If the stormwater management facilities require maintenance or repair of deficiencies in order to function as intended by the approved post-construction stormwater management plan, the facility controller shall provide a record of the required maintenance or deficiency and corrective action taken. 
(4)  In addition, any persons required to file an annual certification under this article shall include with the annual certification payment in the amount established by the city for the purpose of contributing toward the administrative and technical costs of review of the annual certification. 
(b)  Right of entry. In order to determine compliance with this article and with the post-construction stormwater management plan, the enforcement authority may enter upon property at reasonable hours with the consent of the owner, occupant or agent to inspect the stormwater management facilities. 
(c)  Annual report. The city shall include the following in its annual report to the state department of environmental protection: 
(1)  The cumulative number of sites that have stormwater management facilities discharging into the MS4; 
(2)  A summary of the number of sites that have stormwater management facilities discharging into the MS4 that were reported to the city; 
(3)  The number of sites with documented functioning stormwater management facilities; and 
(4)  The number of sites that required routine maintenance or remedial action to ensure that stormwater management facilities are functioning as intended. 
(d)  Inspections. The city shall annually inspect a percentage of stormwater management facilities. If the owner or operator of a stormwater management facility hires or is deemed to be a qualified inspector, the permittee will have no inspection requirements. If the owner or operator of a stormwater management facility does a "self" inspection and is not a qualified inspector, the city is required to conduct the following inspection schedule: 
(1)  1-10 post construction sites: inspect at least one site, or 40 percent (whichever is greater). 
(2)  11-30 post construction sites: inspect at least four sites, or 30 percent (whichever is greater). 
(3)  31-60 post construction sites: inspect at least nine sites, or 25 percent (whichever is greater). 
(4)  61-100 post construction sites: inspect at least 15 sites, or 20 percent (whichever is greater). 
(5)  101-160 post construction sites: inspect at least 20 sites, or 17 percent (whichever is greater). 
(6)  Over 160 post construction sites: inspect at least 27 sites, or 11 percent (whichever is greater). 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § 6; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. C, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 18-106. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article or of the post-construction stormwater management plan. Whenever the enforcement authority believes that a person has violated this article or the post-construction stormwater management plan, the enforcement authority may enforce this article in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. 
(b)  Notice. Whenever the enforcement authority believes that a person has violated this article or the post-construction stormwater management plan, the enforcement authority may order compliance with this article or with the post-construction stormwater management plan by written notice of violation to that person indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The abatement of violations, and the cessation of practices, or operations in violation of this article or of the post-construction stormwater management plan; 
(2)  At the violator's expense, compliance with BMPs required as a condition of approval of the new development or redevelopment, the repair of stormwater management facilities or the restoration of any affected property; or 
(3)  The payment of fines, of the city's remediation costs and of the city's reasonable administrative costs and attorneys' fees and costs. 
If abatement of a violation, compliance with BMPs, repair of stormwater management facilities or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such abatement, compliance, repair or restoration must be completed. 
(c)  Penalties, fines and other remedies. Any person who violates this article or the post-construction stormwater management plan shall be subject to fines, penalties and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the city's attorney's fees and costs, all in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Moreover, any person who violates this article or the post-construction stormwater management plan also shall be responsible for any and all fines, penalties, damages and costs, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees and costs incurred by the city for violation of federal and state environmental laws and regulations caused by or related to the violation of this article or of the post-construction stormwater management plan. The responsibility for damages shall be in addition to any penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed under this section. 
(d)  Consent agreement. The enforcement authority may, with the approval of the city officers, enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of the violations of this article or of the post-construction stormwater management plan for the purposes of eliminating violations of this article or of the post-construction stormwater management plan and of recovering fines, costs and fees without court action. 
(e)  Appeal. Any person receiving a notice of violation or suspension notice may appeal the determination of the enforcement authority to the board of appeals in accordance with the rules of the board of appeals. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of violation. The board of appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the appeal within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The board of appeals may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the enforcement authority. A party aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal that decision in the manner provided by state law. 
(f)  Judicial action for enforcement. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal to the board of appeals, within 45 days of a decision of the board of appeals affirming the enforcement authority's decision, then the enforcement authority may recommend to the city officers that the city's attorney file an enforcement action in a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § 7; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. C, 4-16-2013) 
Secs. 18-107-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESTRICTIONS ON DISCHARGES TO THE CITY'S STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM 

Sec. 18-121. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this non-stormwater discharge article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Auburn through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipality's storm drainage system as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city's storm drainage system in order to comply with requirements of the federal Clean Water Act and state law. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 18-122. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prohibit unpermitted or unallowed non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system; and 
(2)  To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all inspection, monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 18-123. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the terms listed below are defined as follows: 
    Clean Water Act. "Clean Water Act" means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., also known as the "Clean Water Act"), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Discharge. "Discharge" means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping, disposing or other addition of Pollutants to "waters of the state." "Direct discharge" or "point source" means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. 
    Enforcement authority. The code enforcement officer is the enforcement authority who shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
    Exempt person or discharge. "Exempt person or discharge" means any person who is subject to a multi-sector general permit for industrial activities, a general permit for construction activity, a general permit for the discharge of stormwater from the Maine Department of Transportation and the Maine Turnpike Authority Separate Storm Sewer Systems, or a general permit for the discharge of stormwater from state or federally owned authority separate storm sewer system facilities; and any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge license or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") or the Maine Department of Environmental Protection ("DEP"). 
    Industrial activity. "Industrial activity" means activity or activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
    Municipality. "Municipality" means the City of Auburn. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system, or MS4. "Municipal separate storm sewer system" or "MS4," means conveyances for storm water, including, but not limited to, roads with drainiage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains (other than publicly owned treatment works and combined sewers) owned or operated by any municipality, sewer or sewage district, fire district, state agency or federal agency or other public entity that discharges directly to surface waters of the state. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit. "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit" means a permit issued by the EPA or by the DEP that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-storm water discharge. "Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to an MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person. "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasi-municipal corporation, State agency or federal agency or other legal entity which creates, initiates, originates or maintains a discharge of stormwater or a non-storm water discharge. 
    Pollutant. "Pollutant" means dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage, refuse, effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, dirt and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind. 
    Premises. "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located within the municipality from which discharges into the storm drainage system are or may be created, initiated, originated or maintained. 
    Regulated small MS4. "Regulated small MS4" means any small MS4 regulated by the State of Maine "General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems" dated June 3, 2003 ("general permit"), including all those located partially or entirely within an urbanized area (UA) and those additional small MS4s located outside a UA that as of the issuance of the general permit have been designated by the DEP as regulated small MS4s. 
    Small municipal separate storm sewer system, or small MS4. "Small municipal separate storm sewer system", or "small MS4," means any MS4 that is not already covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater program including municipally owned or operated storm sewer systems, state or federally-owned systems, such as colleges, universities, prisons, Maine Department of Transportation and Maine Turnpike Authority road systems and facilities, and military bases and facilities. 
    Storm drainage system. "Storm drainage system" means the municipality's MS4. 
    Stormwater. "Stormwater" means any stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage; "stormwater" has the same meaning as "storm water." 
    Urbanized area (UA). "Urbanized area" or "UA" means the areas of the State of Maine so defined by the latest decennial (2000) census by the U.S. Bureau of the Census. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 18-124. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all persons discharging stormwater and/or non-stormwater discharges from any premises into the storm drainage system. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 18-125. - Prohibition of non-stormwater discharges. 
(a)  General prohibition. Except as allowed or exempted herein, no person shall create, initiate, originate or maintain a non-stormwater discharge to the storm drainage system. Such non-stormwater discharges are prohibited notwithstanding the feet that the municipality may have approved the connections, drains or conveyances by which a person discharges unallowed non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system. 
(b)  Allowed non-stormwater discharges. The creation, initiation, origination and maintenance of the following non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system are allowed: 
(1)  Landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)); uncontaminated pumped ground water; uncontaminated flows from foundation drains; air conditioning and compressor condensate; irrigation water; flows from uncontaminated springs; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; uncontaminated flows from footing drains; lawn watering runoff; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; residual street wash water (where spills/leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred, unless all spilled material has been removed and detergents are not used); hydrant flushing and fire fighting activity runoff; water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources; and individual residential car washing; 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the enforcement authority as being necessary to protect public health and safety; and 
(3)  Dye testing, with verbal notification to the enforcement authority prior to the time of the test. 
(c)  Exempt person or discharge. This article shall not apply to an exempt person or discharge, except that the enforcement authority may request from exempt persons and persons with exempt discharges copies of permits, notices of intent, licenses and orders from the EPA or DEP that authorize the discharge(s). 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 18-126. - Suspension of access to the municipality's small MS4. 
    The enforcement authority may, without prior notice, physically suspend discharge access to the storm drainage system to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened non-stormwater discharge to the storm drainage system which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm drainage system, or which may cause the municipality to violate the terms of its environmental permits. Such suspension may include, but is not limited to, blocking pipes, constructing dams or taking other measures, on public ways or public property, to physically block the discharge to prevent or minimize a non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system. If the person fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the enforcement authority may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm drainage system, or to minimize danger to persons, provided, however, that in taking such steps the enforcement authority may enter upon the premises that are the source of the actual or threatened non-storm water discharge to the storm drainage system only with the consent of the premises' owner, occupant or agent. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 18-127. - Monitoring of discharges. 
    In order to determine compliance with this article, the enforcement authority may enter upon and inspect premises subject to this article at reasonable hours with the consent of the premises' owner, occupant or agent: to inspect the premises and connections thereon to the storm drainage system; and to conduct monitoring, sampling and testing of the discharge to the storm drainage system. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 18-128. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Whenever the enforcement authority believes that a person has violated this article, the enforcement authority may enforce this article in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. 
(1)  Notice of violation. Whenever the enforcement authority believes that a person has violated this article, the enforcement authority may order compliance with this article by written notice of violation to that person indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including, without limitation: 
a.  The elimination of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system, including, but not limited to, disconnection of the premises from the MS4; 
b.  The cessation of discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this article; 
c.  At the person's expense, the abatement or remediation (in accordance with best management practices in DEP rules and regulations) of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system and the restoration of any affected property; and/or 
d.  The payment of fines, of the municipality's remediation costs and of the municipality's reasonable administrative costs and attorneys' fees and costs. 
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such abatement or restoration must be completed. 
(2)  Penalties/fines/injunctive relief. Any person who violates this article shall be subject to fines, penalties and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the municipality's attorney's fees and costs, all in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Moreover, any person who violates this article also shall be responsible for any and all fines, penalties, damages and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys' fees and costs, incurred by the municipality for violation of federal and state environmental laws and regulations caused by or related to that person's violation of this article; this responsibility shall be in addition to any penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed under this section. 
(3)  Consent agreement. The enforcement authority may enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of the violation(s) of this article for the purposes of eliminating violations of this article and of recovering fines, costs and fees without court action. 
(4)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation or suspension notice may appeal the determination of the enforcement authority to the board of appeals, in accordance with article XV of chapter 60 of this Code. 
(5)  Enforcement measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal to the board of appeals, within 45 days of a decision of the board of appeals affirming the enforcement authority's decision, then the enforcement authority may file an enforcement action in a maine court of competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(6)  Ultimate responsibility of discharger. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the U.S. caused by said person. This article shall not create liability on the part of the municipality, or any officer agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any person's reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2005) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and protection generally, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2351 et seq.; municipal inspection of buildings, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2351-A et seq.; investigation of fire hazards and causes, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2391 et seq.; municipal fire protection, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3151 et seq.; continuation of certain municipally adopted fire safety codes and standards, 10 M.R.S.A. § 9725; explosives and flammable liquids, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2471 et seq.; construction standards for physically disabled, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Fire investigation. 
    The chief of the fire department is authorized and required to assume the duties imposed on the city officers by 25 M.R.S.A. §§ 2395, 2397. This authorization and delegation is made in conformity with 25 M.R.S.A. § 2391. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2.3) 
State Law reference- Filing statement of fire occurrence, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2395; compelling witnesses, right of entry into fire scenes, and disclosure, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2397; election, duties and compensation of fire ward, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2391. 
Secs. 20-2-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal fire protection, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3151 et seq. 

Sec. 20-21. - Ranks. 
    The head of the fire department shall be the chief. Other officers of the fire department shall be the deputy chief, battalion chiefs, captains, lieutenants and privates, in that descending order. 
(Code 1967, § 11-1.1) 
State Law reference- Firefighters, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3154. 
Sec. 20-22. - Chief. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department shall be the executive officer and shall be solely responsible for the supervision and maintenance of the department. He shall make such rules and regulations and issue such orders as are not inconsistent with statute laws, the Charter and city ordinances as may from time to time be necessary for the best interest of the department. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department shall promulgate rules and regulations and standard operating procedures and shall provide every member of the department with a copy. He shall cause sufficient copies to be printed so as to be able to provide a copy to any citizen who requests a copy. 
(Code 1967, § 11-1.2) 
State Law reference- Fire chiefs, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3153. 
Sec. 20-23. - Deputy chief. 
    During the absence or disability of the chief of the fire department, all of his powers and duties shall be assigned to a deputy chief. 
(Code 1967, § 11-1.4) 
Sec. 20-24. - Battalion chief. 
    The battalion chief shall direct and lead a battalion of firefighters. In his absence, the on-duty captain shall be in charge. 
Sec. 20-25. - Fire prevention officer. 
    The fire prevention officer, plans, directs and coordinates the department's fire prevention programs including code enforcement, public fire education and fire investigation. 
Sec. 20-26. - Authority of officers. 
(a)  Every officer of the fire department shall have the immediate control and command of the company to which he is assigned and shall be responsible for its efficiency and discipline. 
(b)  In the absence or disability of the officer, all his powers, duties and responsibilities shall be assumed and discharged by the next senior officer. 
(Code 1967, § 11-1.5) 
State Law reference- Firefighters, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3154. 
Sec. 20-27. - Issuance of equipment. 
    Each member of the fire department will be furnished with approved personal protection equipment as required by applicable adopted standards and laws and an employee handbook that also includes rules and regulations. A standard operating procedures manual will also be issued, and the member shall familiarize himself with the contents and such other orders as may from time to time to issued. 
(Code 1967, § 11-2.1) 
State Law reference- Automotive fire apparatus standards, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3157. 
Sec. 20-28. - Return of equipment. 
    All property of the fire department in the possession of a member must be returned at the termination of his connection with the department. Property lost or damaged through the negligence of a member shall be paid for by such member. 
(Code 1967, § 11-2.2) 
Sec. 20-29. - Interpretation of regulations. 
    When there is doubt as to the meaning of any fire department rule or regulation, application shall be made to the chief for an interpretation of the rule or regulation. 
(Code 1967, § 11-2.3) 
Sec. 20-30. - Agreements regarding fire rescue service to other communities. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department, with the approval of the city manager, may negotiate agreements with the municipal officers or appropriate fire department officials in contiguous or neighboring cities and towns for the supplying of fire rescue service in the event of an emergency within any of such cities or towns. The chief of the fire department shall ascertain whether such other community has authorized the execution of such agreements on its behalf and that the persons purporting to act for it have authority to do so. 
(b)  Such agreements may, in the discretion of the chief of the fire department and with the approval of the city manager, provide for: 
(1)  Mutual fire rescue aid and automatic aid on the part of the city and the other contracting community; or 
(2)  The rendering of fire rescue service by the city to such other community without any requirement that such other community provide reciprocal service to the city, but upon the assessment of a charge by the city to such other community reasonably reflecting the cost to the city for rendering such fire rescue service. The chief of the fire department may prepare and revise from time to time a list of fees to be charged for the use of particular pieces of firefighting equipment and for the time of the firefighting personnel of the city in providing such fire rescue service. The chief of the fire department shall furnish the city treasurer with itemized statements of such charges, which shall be billed by the city treasurer no less frequently than annually to any community which has received such fire rescue service. 
(c)  Any such agreement, whether or not providing for mutual aid, may also contain the following: 
(1)  A provision requiring that the community receiving fire rescue service from the city shall indemnify and hold harmless the city for the cost of all injuries or damage to any person or property caused by the emergency equipment or personnel of the city in the course of responding to or returning from an emergency call in such other community. 
(2)  A provision requiring that the community receiving fire rescue service reimburse the city for any expense to it as the result of damage to any emergency or injury to any fire-rescue personnel of the city incurred in the course of responding to or returning from an emergency call in such other community. 
(3)  A provision reserving to the chief of the city fire department or, in his absence, to his deputy chief, discretion to refuse to send any emergency equipment or personnel in response to a call from another community or to order the return of any such equipment or personnel in the event of the existence of a fire or substantial risk of fire or other emergency in the city requiring the presence of such equipment or personnel within the city. 
(4)  A provision setting forth the procedure for initiating and relating a call for fire rescue service to the city fire department from authorized personnel of such other community. 
(d)  When answering a call from another city or town, each company shall report to the officer in charge of the incident and shall be under his charge until ordered to return to its station. 
(Code 1967, § 11-1.3) 
State Law reference- Aid to other communities, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3156. 
Sec. 20-31. - Emergency medical services. 
    The fire department or its designee shall be responsible for providing emergency medical services. 
State Law reference- Interlocal agreements authorized, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2203. 
Sec. 20-32. - Fees for service. 
    Fees for fire department services shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. The fire chief shall have the authority to waive all or any portion of a fire department service fee for good cause shown. Fire department services for which fees are charged include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Salvage calls. Those calls that require the department to actively remove or mitigate those instances that could be harmful such as removal of water, smoke, odor, etc., not caused by department functions. 
(2)  Stand-by at fireworks. One firefighter at all fireworks displays (not sponsored by the municipality) from one half-hour before the show to one half hour after the show. 
(3)  False alarm. 
a.  A visual and/or audible signal including an automatic telephone dialing alarm transmitted by an alarm system, which indicates the existence of an emergency situation, when in fact, no such emergency exists. The term "false alarm" includes any activation of an alarm system by whatever means, but does not include alarms resulting from any of the following causes: 
1.  Severe weather conditions such as high winds, lightning, rain, freezing rain, snow or flooding; 
2.  Electrical service interruptions; 
3.  Broken city water main. 
b.  A fire alarm user, however, will be charged a service charge for false alarms resulting from any of the following causes: 
1.  Testing, repairing, alteration or addition to the fire protection or detection system without prior notification; 
2.  Faulty equipment or substandard installation of equipment; 
3.  Lack of maintenance to fire protection or detection system; 
4.  Negligence that constitutes a public nuisance or jeopardizes the public welfare or safety. 
c.  Provisions must also be made to protect alarm systems from activating during construction. Service charges will activate on the second time a false alarm is received and will escalate with each subsequent response to a false alarm as outlined in the charges as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(4)  Vehicle accidents/hazardous materials incidents. Providing command and control, scene safety, extrications, fire suppression, hazard mitigation, etc., at vehicle accidents. 
(5)  Hazardous materials incident. A hazard that poses a potential threat to life, health, environment or property. It may require limited or large scale evacuation of nearby residents or facilities; involvement of two or more jurisdictions; and/or the fire department to supply water, breathing air, air monitoring, ventilation, and medical monitoring, as well as operational level mitigation such as diking, diverting or denying entry. 
(6)  Demolition burn. The burning of structure in lieu of raising it and transporting building materials to a solid waste facility. Requests will be processed, when the fire chief or his designee determines that it is safe to do so and has documentation of having met all of the DEP compliance requirements. 
(7)  Oil/propane/gas burner permit. Any new or replacement burner requires a permit for installation. 
(8)  Out of control burns. Persons allowing open burning to get out of control, requiring the response of the fire department, shall be charged a fee as listed in this chapter. 
(9)  Illegal or unauthorized burning. Any type of burning that is identified as illegal or unauthorized will be charged a fee as listed in this chapter. 
(10)  Billing of excess time. Fire investigations requiring one hour or more of staff time will be billed per hour in accordance with the fees as listed in this chapter. 
(11)  Code inspection citations. Fees assessed for subsequent code violation inspections that indicate violations continue to exist will be charged a fee as listed in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2007) 
Secs. 20-33-20-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-53. - Fire prevention code and life safety code adopted. 
    The National Fire Protection Association Fire Prevention Code (also known as NFPA #1), current edition, is adopted by the city and incorporated by reference as part of this article, except such portions thereof as are deleted or modified in this article. The Life Safety Code, current edition (also known as NFPA #101, is adopted by the city and incorporated by reference as part of this article. At least one copy of the Fire Prevention Code and of the Life Safety Code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 21-1.1) 
State Law reference- Adoption of technical codes by reference, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003; continuation of certain municipally adopted fire safety codes and standards, 10 M.R.S.A. § 9725. 
Sec. 20-54. - Modifications. 
    Upon request, the chief of the fire department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article when there are practical difficulties in carrying out the letter of the code; provided, however, that public safety is secured and that the spirit of the code is followed. All requests for modifications must be in writing. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, shall be entered upon the records of the fire department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 21-1.8) 
Sec. 20-55. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals from determinations of the code enforcement officer that violations of the fire prevention code or the life safety code have occurred shall be taken to the fire chief, then to the city manager, then to the board of appeals, and then to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by state law. 
(b)  An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used. 
(Code 1967, § 21-1.9; Ord. of 12-15-2008, § 1.19; Ord. of 1-5-2009, § 1.9) 
Sec. 20-56. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the codes adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall be subject to the enforcement procedures and penalties set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Alternatively, the fire chief or fire prevention officer may process violations in accordance with the citation system. The application of the penalty under this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1967, § 21-1.12) 
Sec. 20-57. - Installation of outside above-ground tanks. 
(a)  Permitted locations. Facilities designed for the bulk storage and distribution of chemicals, gases, petroleum products and flammable and combustible liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings are allowed in industrial zones as defined in chapter 60. 
(b)  Design of facilities. The design of such facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city fire department and other agencies with codes and regulations applicable to the installation of above-ground tanks. At a minimum, the following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  The area surrounding a tank or group of tanks shall be provided with drainage and shall be diked to prevent accidental discharge of liquid from endangering adjoining property or reaching waterways, except that in particular installations these provisions may be waived or altered at the discretion of the fire chief when he determines that the tanks do not constitute a hazard to adjoining property or waterways. 
(2)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, the volumetric capacity of the diked area shall be 110 percent of the total capacity of the tanks. 
(3)  Walls of the diked area shall be of earth and designed so as to be liquid-tight and to withstand a full hydrostatic head. Earthen walls three feet or more in height shall have a flat section at the top not less than three feet wide. The slope of an earthen wall shall be consistent with the angle of repose of the material of which the wall is constructed. In appropriate cases, the fire chief, upon request, may permit the substitution of concrete or other suitable material for earth in constructing the dikes where, in his opinion, the use of such other material would not create a hazard. 
(4)  The walls of the diked area shall be restricted to an average height of ten feet above interior grade. 
(c)  Exceptions. Businesses that have bulk storage of chemicals, petroleum products and other flammable or explosive materials for their own use shall not be required to comply with the locational requirement described in subsection (a) of this section. Such facilities shall comply with the design requirements described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 21-1.4; Ord. of 9-22-1997(1)) 
Sec. 20-58. - Storage of explosives, ammunition and blasting agents. 
    The storage of explosives, ammunition and blasting agents shall follow current NFPA codes and state fire marshal's rules and regulations in conjunction with the approval of the fire chief or his designee. 
(Code 1967, § 21-1.7) 
Sec. 20-59. - Sprinkler and alarm systems required. 
(a)  Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in all buildings in which construction exceeds any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Three stories in height. 
(2)  40 feet in height. 
(3)  Five dwelling units but only when the structure housing such dwelling units exceeds two stories in height. 
(b)  All such sprinkler systems shall be equipped with approved supervisory equipment which will transmit an alarm to an approved receiver. 
(c)  This section shall apply only to applications for building permits after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived for the construction of new buildings or to make substantial renovations in existing buildings where the remodeled building will exceed the criteria set forth in subsection (a) of this section. In the case of existing buildings being substantially remodeled, the fire chief or the deputy chief in charge of fire prevention may grant a waiver from compliance with the requirements of this section where it is determined that the permittee will suffer economic hardship and the cost of the system will be disproportionate to the cost of the renovations and/or the fire danger involved. 
(d)  In all cases where sprinkler systems are installed, whether or not required by this section, no such system shall be modified, extended or altered without notification to the city fire department. 
(e)  Once an automatic sprinkler system has been installed and is operational, no one shall remove it or cause the water supply to be disconnected or interrupted without first notifying the fire department nor shall any such system be tested without the knowledge of the fire department. 
(f)  Approvals of sprinkler systems and supervisory equipment shall be made by the chief of the fire department or the deputy chief in charge of fire protection in accordance with standards of quality and efficiency generally accepted in the industry. 
(Code 1967, § 21-1.15; Ord. of 6-7-1982; Ord. of 11-19-2001(1); Ord. of 12-15-2008, § 1.15) 
Secs. 20-60-20-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 20-80. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consumer fireworks shall have the same meaning as in 27 C.F.R. § 555.11 or subsequent provision, but includes only products that are tested and certified by a third party testing laboratory as conforming with federal consumer product safety commission standards in accordance with 15 U.S.C. ch. 47. The term "consumer fireworks" does not include missile type rockets or helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the state fire marshal by rule. 
    Display means an entertainment feature where the public or a private group is admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of fireworks or special effects. 
    Fireworks does not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper caps or plastic caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are used if they are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; toy pistol paper caps or plastic caps that contain less than 20/100 grains of explosive mixture; sparklers that do not contain magnesium chlorates or perchlorates or signal; antique or replica cannons if no projectile is fired. 
    Sky rockets and bottle rockets means cylindrical tubes containing not more than 20 grams of chemical composition, as defined by the state fire marshal by rule, with a wooden stick attached for guidance and stability that rise into the air upon ignition and that may produce a burst of color or sound at or near the height of flight. 
(Ord. No. 12052011-04, § A, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 20-81. - Use and possession in city prohibited; exception. 
    No person shall within the city use, possess with the intent to use, sell, possess with the intent to sell or offer for sale consumer fireworks. The prohibition in this section does not apply to a person issued a fireworks display permit by the city or by the state pursuant to 8 M.R.S.A. § 227-A. 
(Ord. No. 12052011-04, §§ B, C, 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 20-82. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who uses consumer fireworks or possesses consumer fireworks with the intent to use in the city shall be punished for a first offense by a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $400.00 plus costs. For second and subsequent offenses, a fine of not less than $300.00 and not more than $600.00 per violation plus costs shall be imposed. 
    Any person who sells consumer fireworks or possesses consumer fireworks with the intent to sell in the city shall be punished for a first offense by a fine of not less than $500.00 plus costs. For second and subsequent offenses, a fine of not less than $1,000.00 per violation plus costs shall be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 12052011-04, §§ D(1), D(2), 12-15-2011) 
Sec. 20-83. - Seizure and disposal of fireworks. 
    The city may seize consumer fireworks that the city has probable cause to believe are used, possessed or sold in violation of this division and shall forfeit seized consumer fireworks to the state for disposal. 
(Ord. No. 12052011-04, § D(3), 12-15-2011) 
Chapter 22 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 24 - HUMAN RELATIONS AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S.A. § 4551 et seq.; fair housing, 5 M.R.S.A. § 4581 et seq.; civil rights, public accommodations, 5 M.R.S.A. § 4591 et seq.; 5 M.R.S.A. § 4681 et seq.; general assistance, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.; municipal ordinance required, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General assistance, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.; municipal ordinance required, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this chapter will have their common meanings. 
    30-day need means the sum of the household's prospective 30-day costs, from the date of application, for the various basic necessities. For the purpose of this calculation, the 30-day cost for any basic need shall be the household's actual 30-day cost for the basic necessity or the maximum 30-day cost for the basic necessity as established by this chapter, whichever is less. 
    Applicant means a person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized representative, an application for general assistance, or who has, in an emergency, requested assistance without first completing an application. 
    Application form means a document in a form prescribed by the administrator on which a person indicates a desire to receive general assistance and states the necessary facts on which a determination of eligibility can be made. 
    Back bills means any charges for goods or services received prior to application. A bill that is due in the same month in which an application is made is not a back bill. 
    Basic necessities means food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, nonelective medical services as recommended by a physician, nonprescription drugs, a telephone where it is necessary for medical reasons, property taxes when a tax lien is placed on the property and foreclosure and subsequent eviction is imminent and it is the most cost-effective measure, and any other commodity or service determined essential by the administrator. The term "basic necessities" does not include security deposits for rental property, except in situations where no other permanent lodging is available unless a security deposit is paid and a waiver, deferred or installment arrangement cannot be made between the landlord and tenant to satisfy the need for the immediate payment of the security deposit or payment in full or the administrator determines it is in the financial interest of both the city and the applicant. 
    Case record means an official file of forms, correspondence and narrative records and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient. The term "case record" must include all signed applications, determinations of initial or subsequent eligibility, reasons for decisions and actions by the general assistance administrator, and types of assistance provided each recipient. 
    Categorical assistance means all state and federal income maintenance programs. 
    Claimant means a person who has requested a fair hearing. 
    Deficit means the difference resulting from subtracting a household's net income from the overall maximum level of assistance for the appropriate household size. 
    Disabled person means a person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due to a physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit. The city will not pay rent to a building owner or landlord when that building has been placarded or condemned, is unlicensed, or is in violation of any other city ordinance. 
    Earned income means income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant through wages, salary, commissions or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee, is to be included. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will be that available after taxes, social security and other payroll deductions required by state, federal and local law. Rental income and profit from produce sold fall into this category. The term "earned income" also includes under-the-table earnings. Income that is held in trust and unavailable to the applicant or the applicant's dependents will not be considered as earned income. Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, transportation to and from work, special equipment, and child care costs will be deducted from earned income. 
    Eligible person means a person who is qualified to receive general assistance according to the standards of eligibility set forth in this chapter. 
    Emergency means any life-threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of a person. 
    General assistance administrator means a city official designated to receive applications, make decisions concerning an applicant's right to receive assistance, and prepare records and communications concerning assistance. This term "general assistance administrator" includes a caseworker appointed to assist the administrator. 
    General assistance program means a service administered by the city for the immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their families. A general assistance program provides a specific amount and type of aid for defined needs during a limited period of time and is not intended to be a continuing grant-in-aid or categorical welfare program. 
    Household means an individual or a group of individuals who share a dwelling unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals, even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist between individuals residing in the dwelling unit, eligible applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata share of the actual costs of the shared basic needs of that household according to the maximum levels of assistance established in this chapter. The income of household members not legally liable or otherwise responsible for supporting the household shall be considered as available to the applicant only when there is pooling of income. The city shall presume pooling of income unless the applicant proves otherwise. 
    Income means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the household, including net remuneration for services performed, cash received on either secured or unsecured credit, any payments received as an annuity, retirement or disability benefits, veterans' pensions, workers' compensation, unemployment benefits, benefits under any state or federal categorical assistance program, supplemental security income, social security and any other payments from governmental sources unless specifically prohibited by any law or regulation, support payments, income from pension or trust funds and household income from any other source including relatives or unrelated household members. For repeat applicants, it also includes unverified expenditures or misspent money from the 30-day period prior to application. The following items shall not be considered as income or assets which must be liquidated for the purposes of deriving income: 
(1)  Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, or governmental entitlement specifically treated as exempt by state or federal law; 
(2)  Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such as taxes, retirement funds contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and from work, special equipment costs and child care expenses; or 
(3)  Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are fulltime students and who are not working fulltime. 
    Initial applicant means any person who has never before applied for general assistance, either directly or through a representative, in any municipality in the state. 
    Just cause means a valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying with one or more conditions of eligibility. 
    Lump sum payment means a one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of money issued to an applicant or recipient after an initial application. A lump sum payment includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or settlement portions of social security benefits, workers' compensation payments, unemployment benefits, disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or money received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards, property damage claims or divorce settlements. The term "lump sum payment" includes only the amount of money available to the applicant after payment of required deductions has been made from the gross lump sum payment. The term "lump sum payment" does not include conversion of a nonliquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary expenses. 
    Material fact means a fact that necessarily has some bearing on the determination of an applicant's general assistance eligibility, and which would, if disclosed to the administrator, have some determinable effect on the calculation of eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance. 
    Maximum levels of assistance means the amount of assistance as established by this chapter or the actual cost of any basic necessity, whichever is less. 
    Misconduct means conduct evidencing such willful or wanton disregard of an employer's interest as is found in deliberate violations or disregard of standards of behavior which the employer has a right to expect of his employee, or in carelessness or negligence of such degree or recurrence as to manifest equal culpability, wrongful intent or evil design, or to show an intentional and substantial disregard of the employer's interest or of the employee's duties and obligations to his employer. 
    Municipality of responsibility means the municipality which is liable for the support of an eligible person at the time of application. 
    Need means the condition whereby a person's income, money, property, credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for the individual and the individual's family are less than the maximum levels of assistance. In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the calculation shall be a 30-day period commencing on the date of the application. This prospective calculation shall not disqualify an applicant who has exhausted income to purchase basic necessities, provided that the income does not exceed the income standards established by the city. 
    Net general assistance costs means those direct costs incurred by the city in providing assistance to eligible persons according to standards established by this chapter. These do not include the administrative expenses of the general assistance program. 
    Net income. 
(1)  For initial applicants, net income includes the 30-day projected income excluding work-related expenses from earned income. 
(2)  For repeat applicants, net income includes the 30-day projected income excluding work-related expenses from earned income and income either misspent or not accounted for during the prior 30-day period. 
    Period of eligibility means the time for which a person has been granted assistance. The period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance; provided, however, in no event shall this period extend beyond one month. 
    Pooling of income means the financial relationship among household members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses. It shall be presumed that persons sharing the same dwelling unit are pooling their income. Applicants who are requesting that the determination of eligibility be calculated as though one or more household members are not pooling their income have the burden of rebutting the presumption of pooling income. 
    Real estate means any land, buildings, homes and mobile homes and any other things affixed to the land. 
    Recipient means a person who has applied for and is currently receiving general assistance. 
    Resident means a person who is physically present in a municipality with the intention of remaining in the municipality in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no other residence. 
    Resources include any program, service or other sources of support which are an alternative to or supplement for general assistance. The following are the two kinds of resources: 
(1)  Potential resources. The term "potential resources" means programs, services, nonliquid assets or trusts which typically require people to apply in writing or wait a period of time before eligibility is determined or the potential income is released. The term "potential resources" includes, but is not limited to, any state or federal assistance program, employment benefits, governmental or private pension program, available trust funds, support from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and jointly held resources where the applicant's or recipient's share may be available to the individual. The term "potential resources" includes temporary assistance for needy families (TANF), food supplement program, fuel assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing and similar programs. 
(2)  Available resources. The term "available resources" includes resources which are immediately available to the applicant or which can be conveniently secured by the applicant without delay, such as cash on hand or in bank accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and available market, or support from relatives which is being made available at the time of application and which the applicant does not have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g., relocation beyond the immediate region). The term "available resources" also includes the services, commodities or facilities made available by private organizations when the applicant voluntarily agrees to utilize such services, the city has established a contractual relationship with the private organization to provide services or commodities when requested, the city is able to secure the services of commodities needed by an applicant from the private organization for any consideration acceptable to both the organization and the city, or the service is available and offered at no cost to the applicant and deemed necessary by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or rehabilitation specialist. Charities may be considered private organizations which are available resources only if the charity places no unreasonable requirements on the applicant which violate the applicant's fundamental rights. 
    Unmet need means the household's 30-day need as established by section 24-121 less the household income as calculated pursuant to section 24-122, provided such a calculation yields a positive number. If the household income is greater than the household's 30-day need, the household does not have an unmet need. 
    Work requirements means those obligations the municipal administrator places on applicants for general assistance as authorized by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent such obligations ensure a continuing potential eligibility for general assistance when complied with, result in disqualification when violated, and are not merely optional, discretionary or advisory. The term "work requirements" includes registering for work, looking for work in good faith, accepting all suitable job offers, performing workfare, and participating in training, educational or rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in securing employment. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. II, §§ 2.1, 2.2)) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301. 
Sec. 24-20. - Policy. 
(a)  The city administers a program of general assistance available to all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in accordance with the standards of eligibility as provided in this chapter and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq. 
(b)  Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant and to encourage self-reliance. The program will help each person achieve self-maintenance and will encourage the work incentive. When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other than financial through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. General assistance will promote strengthening the family, especially with regard to the care and protection of children. 
(c)  The general assistance program will place no restrictions on the personal rights of the applicant or recipient, nor will there be any unlawful discrimination based on sex, age, race, disability, religion or political affiliation. The applicant or recipient will be informed of his rights and responsibilities under the general assistance program. The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each applicant and recipient. These records are confidential. 
(d)  The administrator will post a notice stating the days and hours the administrator, or other designated person, will be available. The administrator or other designated person will be available to take applications in the event of an emergency at other times when necessary. A copy of this chapter and the state statutes governing general assistance will be readily available to any member of the public upon request. Notice to this effect will be posted. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. I)) 
Sec. 24-21. - Confidentiality of information. 
(a)  Generally. Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient of general assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general public, unless the applicant or recipient states in writing what information is to be released. 
(b)  Release of information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the right to review their case records. No record will be released to a third party, however, unless the general assistance administrator receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly authorizing the release of his records to the specified parties. Whenever the administrator releases any information, he will make a notation in the applicant's file stating to whom the record was released and the date. The administrator may charge a reasonable fee for the reproduction of any records. 
(c)  Availability of records to fair hearing authority. If an applicant requests a fair hearing (see division 3 of this article), the fair hearing authority will be given copies of the record prior to the hearing. The claimant will have access to information that is available to the hearing authority. 
(d)  Information from other sources. Information furnished to the city by the state department of human services or any other agency or institution pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential. The general assistance administrator will also comply with laws relating to the confidentiality of vital statistic records such as those concerning birth, marriage and death (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706). Any representative of a financial institution or any employer of a general assistance applicant who, upon receipt of a written release signed by the depositor and a written request from the administrator, refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator in order to verify an applicant's eligibility must state in writing the reason for the refusal. Effective November 1, 2017: national banks are also obligated to disclose deposit information to the administrator upon receipt of a written request and release signed by the depositor. Additionally, effective November 1, 2017, when a municipality or its agents are acting in accordance with [22 M.R.S.A.] § 4313(2) to verify eligibility for funeral or cremation benefits, an officer of a financial institution must disclose the amount deposited upon receipt of a written request from the municipality or its agents and a notarized affidavit signed by the overseer of the municipality or its agents stating that the named depositor is deceased. Any such person who refuses to provide information, without just cause, may be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00. Any person, including the applicant, who knowingly and willfully makes a false representation of a material fact to the administrator is committing a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4314, 4315). 
(e)  Refusal to provide information. Any person who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator in order to verify an applicant's eligibility must state in writing the reason for the refusal. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. III, § 3.1); Ord. No. 12-10162017, 11-6-2017) 
State Law reference- Records and confidentiality, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4306. 
Sec. 24-22. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  Purpose. The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general assistance records. These records are necessary to: 
(1)  Provide a valid basis of accounting for city expenditures; 
(2)  Document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and 
(3)  Ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or judicial review of a decision by the general assistance administrator. 
(b)  Contents of case records. 
(1)  The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record for each applicant or recipient. Each case record will include at least the household's applications, budget sheets, information concerning the types and amounts of assistance provided, narrative statements describing the nature of the emergency situation whenever general assistance is granted in amounts greater than the applicant's unmet need, written decisions, any requests for fair hearings and the fair hearing authority decisions. The record will also include a narrative history documenting the need for general assistance, the results of home visits, collateral information, referrals, changes in status, the reasons for the release of confidential information, adjustments in aid and suspension or termination of eligibility. Workfare participation will also be recorded, as will any cash repayments to the city. 
(2)  Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant to an applicant's or recipient's application or to the general assistance administrator's decisions. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. III, § 3.2)) 
State Law reference- Records and confidentiality, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4306. 
Sec. 24-23. - Annual adjustment of maximum benefits. 
(a)  Each year the Maine Municipal Association provides for the city three appendices providing maximum benefits applicable for the period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 as mandated by state law and based on certain federal values effective on October 1 of each year, as follows: 
(1)  Appendix A, a listing of overall maximum levels of general assistance relating to all Maine municipalities. 
(2)  Appendix B, a listing of maximum levels of assistance for food. 
(3)  Appendix C, a listing of maximum levels for heated and unheated housing. 
(b)  The portion of these annual appendices applicable to the city, as adopted each year by the city council, are made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein and a copy thereof is available in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 11072011-02, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 03-07162012, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 12-10072013, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 05-08042014, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 09-10202014, 11-30-2014; Ord. No. 14-10052015, 10-19-2015; Ord. No. 08-10032016, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 11-10162017, 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 06-10152018, 11-5-2018) 
Editor's note- The appendices referred to in this section are not codified but are available in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 24-24-24-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 24-50. - Persons who may apply; forms; acceptance. 
(a)  Persons who may apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of the family, any other responsible household member, or an authorized representative must apply in person, except in an emergency as provided in section 24-58 or except when the applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the city has made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter residents to be eligible for general assistance. The administrator may require a representative to present a signed statement documenting that he is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf of the named applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written application and any other required forms so that the administrator can determine eligibility. With notice, all members of the household receiving general assistance may be required to physically present themselves to the administrator. 
(b)  Application via telephone. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in person due to illness, disability, lack of child care, lack of transportation or other good cause, and he cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will accept an application by telephone. This application will be subject to the administrator receiving written verification via mail or visiting the applicant's home with his permission. 
(c)  Subsequent applications. Each request for assistance will be administered in accordance with the guidelines in this chapter. The administrator will make an independent determination of eligibility for general assistance each time a person applies. 
(d)  Application forms; acceptance of applications. Application forms will be available during regular business hours at the city office and when the general assistance administrator is conducting interviews with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where people may apply for assistance. Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only during the regular hours established and posted by the administrator. In an emergency, however, the administrator or other designated person will be available to accept applications for assistance whenever necessary. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.1)) 
State Law reference- Applications, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4308; eligibility, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4309. 
Sec. 24-51. - Personal interview. 
    Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each applicant personally before making a decision. The interview will be conducted in private, although the applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, a friend or family member. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.2)) 
Sec. 24-52. - Contents of application. 
    At a minimum, the application for general assistance will contain the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's name, social security number, date of birth, address and phone number. 
(2)  Name, social security number and date of birth of other household members for whom the applicant is seeking assistance. 
(3)  Total household number of individuals in the building or apartment where the applicant is residing. 
(4)  Employment and employability information. 
(5)  All household income, assets, resources and property. 
(6)  Household expenses. 
(7)  Types of assistance being requested. 
(8)  Applicant's permission to verify information. 
(9)  Signature of applicant and date. 
(10)  Penalty for providing false information. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.3)) 
State Law reference- Applications, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4308. 
Sec. 24-53. - Responsibilities of-Administrator; application information. 
(a)  Eligibility requirements. At the time of application, the general assistance administrator will make every effort to inform the applicant of his rights and responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with applying for and receiving general assistance, including: 
(1)  Application requirements. 
(2)  Eligibility guidelines. 
(3)  The income standard of need. 
(4)  The applicant's ongoing use-of-income, work-related and resource-related responsibilities. 
(5)  The financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending household income on nonbasic necessities. 
(6)  The disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud, failure to demonstrate that he is performing an active work search, failure to complete any workfare assigned by the city, failure to accept employment, job termination, or failure to make a good faith effort to secure potential resources when the requirement to attempt to obtain those resources has been requested of the applicant in writing. 
(b)  Additional information. 
(1)  The administrator will also be responsible for informing the applicant about his responsibility to: 
a.  Make use of all available resources, including, but not limited to, other government benefit programs and liable relatives of sufficient means; and 
b.  Participate in a rehabilitation program, when appropriate, in order to diminish his need for general assistance. 
(2)  The administrator will inform the applicant about resources which may help to improve his standard of living and make appropriate referrals to other government benefit programs, private organizations, employment, educational and rehabilitative services, budget counseling, and other resources in the community. 
(c)  Reimbursement or recovery of expenses. The administrator will inform the applicant that he must reimburse the city for the amount of general assistance he has been granted in the event of a subsequent ability to pay. Services performed under the general assistance program by a welfare recipient are not furnished for remuneration or wages, but rather continued eligibility for receiving general assistance. In addition to seeking repayment from a recipient, the city also may recover the amount of assistance granted to a recipient during the previous 12 months from any relative legally liable for the applicant's support (spouses, or parents of persons under the age of 25) (see division 4 of the article). Whenever applicable, the administrator will explain the various liens the city may place against a recipient's real or personal property, such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the workers' compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI interim assistance agreement lien, as these liens are described in division 4 of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.4)) 
State Law reference- Applications, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4308; eligibility, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4309; recovery of expenses, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4318. 
Sec. 24-54. - Responsibilities of applicant at time of application. 
(a)  At the time of application for general assistance, the applicant shall provide accurate, complete and current information and verifiable documentation concerning his income, resources, assets and household employment, how the applicant has spent his income, the names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant's support, and any change in this information from a previous application that would affect his eligibility. 
(b)  In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation that shows the applicant: 
(1)  Has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without just cause or been discharged from employment for misconduct; 
(2)  Has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a parttime basis, has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has satisfactorily performed all workfare assignments or had just cause not to perform those assignments; 
(3)  Has made use of all available and potential resources when directed in writing to such a program by the administrator, including, but not limited to, other government benefit programs or the assistance of liable relatives of sufficient means; and 
(4)  Has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative program when appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program by the administrator, in order to diminish the applicant's need for general assistance. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.5)) 
State Law reference- Applications, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4308. 
Sec. 24-55. - Application-Action. 
(a)  Written decision required. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to the applicant concerning his eligibility within 24 hours after he submits a signed and completed application in writing and will furnish assistance to eligible applicants within that period. A written decision will be given each time a person applies, whether assistance is granted, denied, reduced or terminated. 
(b)  Contents of decision. The written decision will contain the following information: 
(1)  The type and amount of aid the applicant is eligible to receive or the applicant's ineligibility. 
(2)  The period of eligibility if the applicant is found to be eligible for assistance. 
(3)  The specific reasons for the decision. 
(4)  The applicant's right to a fair hearing. 
(5)  The applicant's right to notify the state department of human services if he believes the city has acted illegally. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.6)) 
State Law reference- Applications, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4308. 
Sec. 24-56. - Same-Withdrawal. 
    An application for general assistance is considered withdrawn if: 
(1)  The applicant requests in writing that his application be withdrawn; or 
(2)  The applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other form needed by the general assistance administrator. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.7)) 
State Law reference- Applications, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4308. 
Sec. 24-57. - Same-Temporary refusal to accept. 
    Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily refuse to accept applications for 24 hours. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  When the applicant's conduct is abusive, disruptive or harassing, or when the applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the applicant may be asked to leave, and if the applicant refuses to leave the police may be summoned. The applicant will be informed that an application will be accepted when his conduct is under control. 
(2)  When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant. That person may be required to provide written verification that he has been duly authorized to act as a representative for the applicant. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.8)) 
State Law reference- Applications, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4308. 
Sec. 24-58. - Emergencies. 
(a)  Assistance if insufficient income for emergency. Although they may be considered otherwise ineligible to receive general assistance, people who apply for assistance to alleviate an emergency will be granted assistance, except as provided in this section, if they do not have sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency need and have not had sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency. 
(b)  Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving general assistance due to a violation of sections 24-82 through 24-84, or section 24-119 is ineligible to receive emergency assistance. Dependents of a disqualified person may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes of this section, dependents are defined as a dependent minor child, an elderly, ill or disabled person, or a person whose presence is required to provide care for any child under the age of six years or any ill or disabled member of the household. If one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated as though the household is comprised of the dependents only, except that all household income will be considered available to them. 
(c)  Assistance prior to verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator that he needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending verification, the assistance within 24 hours, provided that: 
(1)  After interviewing the applicant the administrator has determined that he will probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information is completed; and 
(2)  The applicant submits documentation, when possible, to verify his need. The administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the applicant's statements about needing emergency assistance. No further assistance will be authorized until the applicant's eligibility is confirmed. 
(d)  Telephone applications. 
(1)  If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in person due to illness, disability, lack of transportation, lack of child care, or other good cause, and if there is no authorized representative who can apply for the applicant, the administrator will accept an application over the telephone. 
(2)  The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone application if the applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the information either by visiting his home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his eligibility through any other means. 
(e)  Limitation on emergency assistance. 
(1)  Applicants are not automatically eligible for emergency assistance. If applicants had income which could have been used to prevent all or part of an emergency, but spent that income on items which are not basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general assistance to replace that money. Applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator with verifiable documentation demonstrating that the applicant did not have sufficient income to avert the emergency situation. 
(2)  According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the amount of money necessary for the household to avoid the emergency and the amount of income available to the household during the applicable time period: 
a.  The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application for emergency assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was created by a negative account balance for a commodity or service (such as rent, mortgage or utility payments), and the negative account balance was created over a longer period of time. In such cases, the applicable time period shall be the consecutive length of time the account balance has been in the negative. 
b.  The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to the applicant's ability to provide for his basic necessities for the applicable time period. 
c.  The applicant shall provide evidence of all income and resources received over the applicable time period. 
d.  The administrator shall compute all costs for the household's basic necessities during the applicable time period, per month, in accordance with the maximum levels established by this chapter for the specific basic necessities or the actual monthly cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with averting the particular emergency situation for which the applicant is seeking assistance. 
e.  From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable time period, the administrator shall subtract the total income and lump sum payments available to the household for the applicable time period as well as the total general assistance actually received during the applicable time period. 
f.  The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the difference yielded by the computation in subsection (e)(2)d of this section, even when such a grant will not totally alleviate the emergency situation. 
g.  The administrator may waive the limitation on emergency assistance in life-threatening situations or for first-time applicants, that is, persons who have never before applied for general assistance in the state. 
h.  Notice of the authority to limit emergency assistance according to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(B) and this chapter shall be issued to all applicants. 
i.  Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting the administrator from electing to alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost-effective manner available, provided such a determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is in conformance with general assistance law. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.9)) 
State Law reference- Emergency benefits prior to full verification, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4310. 
Sec. 24-59. - Residence criteria. 
(a)  Persons not residing in any municipality. If a person who is not a resident of any municipality applies in the city first, the general assistance administrator will determine his eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance until he establishes a residence in another municipality. 
(b)  Relocation of applicants or recipients. The administrator will not move or transport an applicant or recipient into another municipality. 
(c)  Institutions within the city. The city will extend assistance to applicants residing in an institution in the city if the applicant has no residence prior to entering the institution. For purposes of this section, hotels, motels and similar places of temporary lodging are considered institutions if the city granted financial assistance for, makes arrangements for, or advises or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging. 
(d)  Institutions in other municipalities. If a resident of the city enters a facility located n another municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home or hospital) and requests assistance while there, the city will extend assistant to the applicant, if he is otherwise qualified, for a period of six months from the date of the request for assistance. Thereafter, continued assistance will be provided by the city but only if the applicant maintains a home within the corporate limits of the city to which he intends to return. 
(e)  Disputes regarding municipal responsibility. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another municipality but that municipality disputes its responsibility, the administrator will notify the state department of human services in Augusta. If the applicant applies in the City of Auburn first, the administrator will determine his eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance until the department has concluded which municipality is responsible for providing assistance. If another municipality was responsible, the department will recover the amount due from the other municipality. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. IV, § 4.10)) 
Secs. 24-60-24-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELIGIBILITY FACTORS 

Sec. 24-77. - Compliance. 
    A person will be eligible for general assistance if he is in need and has complied with the eligibility requirements set forth in this division. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. V)) 
State Law reference- Eligibility, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4309. 
Sec. 24-78. - Initial and repeat applicants. 
(a)  Initial application. For initial applicants, need will be the sole condition of eligibility. An initial applicant is a person who has not applied for general assistance in any municipality of the state. The exception to this applies to all applicants who are disqualified for a defined period for quitting employment without just cause or for being discharged from employment for misconduct. For purposes of this subsection, the term "need" means that the applicant's income (including prorated income, where applicable), property, credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall maximum level of assistance contained in section 24-123 or the applicant's 30-day need, whichever is less, and he does not have adequate income or other resources available to provide basic necessities. 
(b)  Subsequent applications. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat applicants. Repeat applicants are people who have applied for general assistance at any time in the past. Repeat applicants are also people on whose behalf a general assistance application was made at any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant was not a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be eligible for general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other eligibility requirements. The eligibility of repeat applicants may also be adversely affected to the extent they have not used their income and resources to secure basic necessities. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. V, § 5.1)) 
Sec. 24-79. - Persons eligible for categorical assistance. 
    Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general assistance, if he is otherwise eligible. Benefits received will be included as income when determining need, except that food supplement program and fuel assistance (HEAP, ECIP) will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken into consideration when determining need. Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within seven days after being advised in writing to do so by the general assistance administrator. Persons who, without just cause, make no good faith effort to receive a potential resource will be disqualified from receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the benefit. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. V, § 5.2)) 
Sec. 24-80. - Personal property. 
(a)  Liquid assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including, but not limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit or other marketable securities, will be eligible for general assistance unless and until he uses these assets to meet his basic needs and thereby exhausts them. 
(b)  Tangible assets. No person owning or possessing personal property consisting of more than one motor vehicle, or a boat, trailer, recreation vehicle or other assets that are convertible into cash and are nonessential to the maintenance of the applicant's household, will be eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may be made when a person is making an initial application and when reasonable efforts to convert assets to cash at fair market value are unsuccessful. Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment and other equipment used for the production of income are exempt from this category and are not considered available assets. 
(c)  Automobile ownership. Ownership of one automobile per household will not make a person ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for transportation to employment, medical care, rehabilitation or training facilities, or if it is essential to the maintenance of the applicant's household. Recipients of general assistance who own an automobile with a market value greater than $8,000.00 may be required, with written 30-day notice, to make a good faith effort to trade that automobile in to a reputable automobile dealer for an automobile with a market value of less than $8,000.00. Any income received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade down must be used for his basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or trade down the excess value of an automobile can result in disqualification. 
(d)  Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a noncontributory basis or that is required as a condition of employment will not be a factor in determining eligibility for general assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may be considered as a tangible asset when an applicant has received assistance for four weeks or more after the initial application. 
(e)  Transfer of property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general assistance will not be granted general assistance to replace the uncompensated value of the transferred asset. Assistance will be denied within a 120-day limit up to the uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a 120-day disqualification will issue. There will be a presumption that the applicant transferred his assets in order to be eligible for general assistance whenever property is sold for less than the fair market value or when the transfer occurred within 30 days prior to applying for general assistance unless the applicant can demonstrate the existence of an arms-length transaction. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. V, § 5.3)) 
Sec. 24-81. - Ownership of real estate. 
(a)  If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that occupied as the principal home, continued eligibility will depend on the applicant making a reasonable effort to: 
(1)  Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the property into cash which can be applied toward meeting present need; or 
(2)  Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present need. Applicants who transfer their excess property to someone solely to appear eligible for general assistance will be ineligible. 
(b)  If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital improvement payment, the city may claim a lien against the property. The lien will be enforceable at the time of sale of the property or upon the death of the recipient. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. V, § 5.4)) 
Sec. 24-82. - Work requirement. 
(a)  Acceptance of employment or rehabilitative services required. All unemployed applicants and members of their households who are 16 years of age or older will be required to accept any suitable job offer or opportunity for rehabilitative services, except as provided in this section. Applicants must demonstrate to the general assistance administrator that they are actively seeking employment. For purposes of this subsection, the term "suitable job" means any job which the applicant is mentally and physically able to perform. Applicants must make themselves available for work during normal business hours prevailing in the area. 
(b)  Verification of pursuit of employment. Unemployed applicants will be required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of employment at the time of each application. At a minimum, such documentation shall consist of a list of the employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the employer representative contacted. For purposes of this subsection, the term "pursuit of employment" means actually submitting a written application or applying for a job in person when reasonable, or an interview in response to submitting a written application or letter of inquiry to employers. The number of employer contacts shall be related to the number of hours in the week the applicant has available for work search activities after considering all the time the applicant must devote to existing employment obligations, workfare, and required classroom or on-site participation in job training, educational or rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will not be expected at the time of the initial application but will be a condition of eligibility for subsequent assistance. 
(c)  Disqualification for further assistance. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application, applicants will be considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they, without just cause: 
(1)  Refuse to register for employment with the state job service. 
(2)  Refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable and appropriate. Recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same places repeatedly will not be considered to be performing a diligent work search and will be disqualified. 
(3)  Refuse to accept a suitable job offer. 
(4)  Refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitation program that would assist the applicant in securing employment. 
(5)  Fail to be available for work. 
(6)  Voluntarily quit work or are discharged for misconduct connected with the applicant's work. Applicants who are employed are expected to remain on the job and not quit or lose their employment except for just cause. 
(7)  Refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the municipal work program. 
(d)  Establishment of just cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse to comply with work requirements of this section without just cause. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to establish the presence of just cause. Just cause will be considered to exist when there is reasonable and verifiable evidence that: 
(1)  The applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which prevents him from working. 
(2)  The work assignment pays below minimum wages. 
(3)  The applicant was subject to sexual harassment. 
(4)  The applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job tasks, or to meet piecework standards. 
(5)  The applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training or rehabilitation program and the job or program is not within reasonable walking distance (three miles) and it would be unreasonable for the applicant to move closer to the work site or program. 
(6)  The applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or disabled family members. 
(7)  There exists any reason found to be good cause by the state department of labor, or any other verifiable reason which the administrator considers reasonable and appropriate. 
Failure to fulfill any eligibility requirement due to incarceration as a result of an applicant's action after the requirement has been made shall not result in just cause. 
(e)  Regaining eligibility after disqualification. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated the work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they become employed at a bona fide job as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 et seq. or the performance of a service for an employer who withholds from an employee a social security tax pursuant to federal law or otherwise satisfies the administrator that they are complying with the work requirement by fulfilling the work requirement they violated. Persons who have been disqualified for 120 days for refusing to participate in the city's workfare program or for performing their workfare assignment in a substandard manner shall be limited to a single opportunity to regain eligibility. If a workfare participant fails to regain eligibility, without just cause, after being offered a distinct and separate opportunity to do so, the administrator shall enforce the 120-day disqualification for the term of its initial duration. 
(f)  Eligibility of dependents. Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the person's household who is not capable of working, including: 
(1)  A dependent minor child; 
(2)  An elderly, ill or disabled person; and 
(3)  A person whose presence is required in order to provide care for any child under six years of age or for any ill or disabled member of the household. 
If one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated as though the household is comprised of the dependents only, except that all household income will be considered as available to them. 
(g)  Exemptions. The work requirements in this section do not apply to any person who is elderly or physically or mentally ill in the household. Any person whose presence is required to care for any preschool-age child or for an ill or disabled member of the household is also exempt from these requirements. The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to interfere with an applicant's existing employment, ability to pursue a bona fide job offer, ability to attend a scheduled interview for possible employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma, classroom participation in a training program which is either approved or determined by the state department of labor to be expected to assist the applicant in securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program operated under the control of the state department of human services or department of labor. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. V, § 5.5)) 
Sec. 24-83. - Repayment obligation; application of workfare compensation. 
    Pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, individuals owing funds to the city for general assistance are obligated to repay the city when and if they become able. Persons performing workfare shall have the value of the workfare performed deducted from the general assistance debt, including general assistance liens (e.g., worker's compensation settlement, SSI retroactive payment, capital improvement, home mortgage) that may exist against their settlements, payments or other such property. 
Sec. 24-84. - Municipal work program. 
(a)  Generally; intent. 
(1)  Workfare first is a conditional requirement on current general assistance and workfare is a conditional requirement on future general assistance. 
(2)  Once a workfare assignment or work requirement is made, the applicant is responsible for completing the assignment. If subsequent actions by the applicant result in incarceration which results in the inability of the applicant to complete the assignment, just cause shall not be granted. Failure to fulfill any eligibility requirement due to incarceration as a result of an applicant's action after the requirement has been made shall not result in just cause. 
(3)  Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working may be required to perform work for the city, including work for a nonprofit organization, as a condition of receiving assistance. The work requirement provisions found in section 24-82 regarding just cause, dependents and exemptions also apply to the city's work program. 
(b)  Consent by applicant. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a form stating that they understand the requirements of general assistance and the work program. Prior to signing the form, the administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read it themselves. 
(c)  Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any amount of work that exceeds the value of the net general assistance that the person would otherwise receive under municipal general assistance standards. Any person performing work under this section shall be provided with net general assistance the value of which is computed at a rate of at least the state's minimum wage. In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this section replace regular city employees. 
(2)  In no case will work performed under this section interfere with an eligible person's: 
a.  Existing employment. 
b.  Ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer. 
c.  Attendance at a scheduled interview for possible employment. 
d.  Classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma. 
e.  Classroom participation or on-site participation in a training program which is approved or determined by the state department of labor to be reasonably expected to assist the person in securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program operated under the control of the state department of human services or the department of labor. 
(3)  In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40 hours per week. An eligible person who has fulltime or parttime employment shall be exempt from the work requirement to the extent that the work requirement in combination with his regular employment would result in the person working more than 40 hours per week. 
(4)  In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work beyond his capabilities. However, when an illness or disability is claimed, the administrator may require a doctor's statement to verify an applicant's illness or disability. The administrator will not require verification of medical conditions which are apparent or which are of such short duration that a reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention. 
(5)  In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need, i.e., a person in an emergency situation who has not been disqualified from receiving assistance for committing a program violation, be required to perform work under this section prior to receiving general assistance. The administrator shall meet immediate needs upon receiving written assurance from the eligible person that he is willing to work for the assistance received. 
(6)  The administrator may require a recipient of general assistance to perform a workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the general assistance benefit conditionally granted if there is determined to be no emergency. 
(d)  Payment of work-related expenses. Expenses related to work performed under this section will be added to the amount of net general assistance to be provided to the person. The city will provide any special clothes or equipment the recipient needs to perform his work assignment. 
(e)  Disqualification for assistance. Any person who willfully fails to perform or willfully performs below average standards the work assigned, without just cause, will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days. As soon as the administrator knows that a recipient failed to fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will notify the recipient that he is disqualified for 120 days unless the recipient can show just cause. The burden of demonstrating just cause failure to perform a workfare assignment falls on the workfare participant. 
(f)  Regaining eligibility after disqualification. 
(1)  Recipients who fall to complete the first municipal work assignment they have been given will be disqualified from receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although dependents in the household may be eligible. If during the 120-day disqualification period the recipient makes a timely and reasonable request to perform the work assignment which he failed to perform, the disqualified recipient will be given one opportunity to regain eligibility. The administrator will give the recipient a work assignment as soon as possible. If the recipient has an emergency need and cannot make up the work assignment in time to alleviate the emergency, the administrator will provide sufficient assistance to the recipient to avert the emergency, but the provision of such emergency assistance will not bar the administrator from subsequently enforcing the 120-day disqualification if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by satisfactorily performing the work assignment. The amount of emergency assistance granted will be considered in the computation of the total number of hours the recipient must work. 
(2)  Recipients who have asked to regain their eligibility during the 120-day disqualification period and who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously failed to perform and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their municipal work assignment will be considered to have acted in bad faith. In such a circumstance, the administrator will enforce the original 120-day disqualification. 
(3)  If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is subsequently disqualified within the initial 120-day period of disqualification for failing to comply with the municipal work program, that participant will be ineligible for a new 120-day period beginning with the new disqualification date, but with no opportunity to requalify. 
(4)  Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property or harms other employees by his actions and is discharged by the work supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by returning to the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise becoming employed and meeting the definition of need. 
(5)  For the purposes of regaining eligibility under section 24-82 and this section by becoming employed, the term "employment" shall mean employment by an employer as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 et seq., or a service performed for an employer who withholds from the employee's social security tax pursuant to federal law. 
(g)  Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been provided to persons who do workfare for the city in reports to the state department of human services. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. V, § 5.6)) 
Sec. 24-85. - Use of resources. 
(a)  Responsibilities of applicants and recipients. Persons who refuse or fail to make a good faith effort to secure a potential resource which may reduce the person's need for general assistance, after receiving written seven-day notice to do so, are disqualified from receiving assistance until they make an effort to secure the resource. Applicants are required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to secure the resource. 
(b)  Minors. 
(1)  A child under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has a dependent child will be eligible to receive general assistance only if such a child is residing in the home of a parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the entire household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this limitation on eligibility will be made when: 
a.  The minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home or other adult-supervised supportive living arrangement; 
b.  The minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of both parents are unknown; 
c.  No parent will permit the minor to live in the parent's home; 
d.  The minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one year before the birth of any dependent child; 
e.  The state department of human services determines that the physical or emotional health or safety of the minor or the minor's dependent child would be jeopardized if the minor and his child lived with a parent; or 
f.  The department of human services determines, in accordance with its regulations, that there is good cause to waive this limitation on eligibility. 
(2)  Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from his parents for general assistance will be informed that, until he reaches the age of 25, the person's parents are still legally liable for his support, and the city has the right to seek recovery from the parents of the cost of all assistance granted to such person, at least to the extent his parents are financially capable of repaying the city. With regard to any such application, the city may seek verification of the person's need for general assistance by contacting his parents. If the applicant's parents declare a willingness to provide the applicant with his basic needs directly, and there is no convincing evidence that the applicant would be jeopardized by relying on his parents for basic needs, the administrator may find the applicant to be in no need for general assistance for the reason that his needs are being provided for by a legally liable relative. 
(c)  Persons with mental or physical disability. Each applicant who has a mental or physical disability must make a good faith effort to utilize any medical or rehabilitative services which have been recommended by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or rehabilitation specialist, and which are available to the applicant, provided they would not constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to the individual. 
(d)  Notice to applicant; disqualification for assistance. The administrator will give each applicant written notice that he is required to utilize any potential resources. Any applicant who refuses to utilize potential resources, without just cause, after receiving a written seven-day notice will be ineligible for further assistance until he has made a good faith effort to utilize the resources. General assistance will not be withheld from the applicant pending receipt of a resource if the applicant has made a good faith effort to obtain the resource. 
(e)  Forfeiture of benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in benefits from another public assistance program due to fraud, misrepresentation, or a knowing or intentional violation of program rules will be ineligible to receive general assistance to replace the forfeited benefits. The worth of the forfeited benefits will be considered income that is available to the applicant for the duration of its forfeiture. To the extent the forfeitured benefits were provided not in the form of income but, rather, in the form of a specific, regularly issued resource of a calculable value, that resource, up to its forfeited value, need not be replaced with general assistance for a period of 120 days from the date of forfeiture. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. V, § 5.7)) 
Sec. 24-86. - Period of disqualification. 
(a)  Notice; right to hearing. No one will have his assistance terminated, reduced or suspended prior to being given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing. Each person will be notified in writing of the reasons for his ineligibility, and, if disqualified for not complying with this chapter, the period of disqualification. 
(b)  Noncompliance with work requirement. People who do not comply with a work requirement are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days unless they regain their eligibility. People who do not comply with the work requirement and are disqualified before the period covered by the grant of assistance expires shall be disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the assistance grant. People who do not comply with a work requirement and are disqualified after the period covered by the grant of assistance expires may be disqualified for 120 days from the date of the written notice of disqualification. The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to render a decision of disqualification. 
(c)  Fraud. People who commit fraud or false representation are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days. The administrator will notify recipients that they are disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to render a decision. If a disqualification for fraud is issued before the expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of disqualification shall commence on the day following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered after the period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the period of ineligibility will commence on the day of the written notice of disqualification, unless subsequently modified by the fair hearing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. V, § 5.8)) 
Secs. 24-87-24-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 24-116. - Recognition of dignity and rights. 
    Any determination or investigation into an applicant's eligibility will be conducted in a manner that will not violate the applicant's privacy or personal dignity or violate his individual rights. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.1)) 
Sec. 24-117. - Initial determination; redetermination. 
(a)  The general assistance administrator will make an individual, factual determination of eligibility each time a person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The administrator will make a redetermination of eligibility at least monthly, but may do so as often as necessary to administer the program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any application, the administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility on the basis of a 30-day prospective analysis, but may elect to disburse that applicant's assistance periodically, e.g., weekly, throughout a 30-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial eligibility determination. 
(b)  The administrator may re-determine a person's eligibility at any time during the period he is receiving assistance if the administrator is notified of any change in the recipient's circumstances which may alter the amount of assistance which the recipient may receive. Once a recipient has been granted assistance, the administrator may not reduce or rescind the grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient explaining the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient an opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.2)) 
Sec. 24-118. - Verification of eligibility. 
(a)  Responsibilities of applicants and recipients. 
(1)  Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility, at the time of application and continuing thereafter, to provide complete, accurate and current information and documentation concerning his need, income, use of income and expenses, and any changes in information previously reported on the application. The general assistance administrator will require documentation of the applicant's income, use of income, assets and resources, plus actual bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel, telephone, medical services and other basic necessities that are reasonably obtainable. The recipient is responsible for notifying the administrator of any changes in his household or income that may affect his eligibility. 
(2)  When determining an applicant's eligibility, the administrator will seek all necessary information first from the applicant. Information needed from other sources, with the exception of public records, will be gathered only with the knowledge and consent of the applicant. 
(b)  Time limit for providing information. If an applicant does not have the necessary information at the time of application, the administrator will give him the opportunity to provide the information prior to the expiration of the 24-hour period within which the administrator must act on the application. If all the necessary information has been provided and the applicant is eligible, assistance will be granted except when assistance is conditionally granted pursuant to the city's workfare first policy. If the applicant does not provide the required information needed within the 24-hour period, and the administrator cannot determine the applicant's eligibility, the applicant will be denied assistance for that reason. 
(c)  Denial of assistance. The administrator will not grant assistance to any applicant who refuses to supply necessary information and documentation concerning his needs, income and other resources, or who refuses to grant permission for the administrator to contact other persons to verify the information. If the administrator has attempted to verify the information but is unable to determine if the applicant is eligible because the applicant has refused to provide or allow the administrator to verify the necessary information, the applicant will be denied assistance until the necessary verification has been accomplished. 
(d)  Right to verify information. It is the administrator's responsibility to determine and verify the eligibility of each applicant. The administrator may seek and verify information from all appropriate sources, including, but not limited to, the state department of human services and any other department of the state having information that has a bearing on an applicant's eligibility, financial institutions, employers, landlords, physicians and legally liable relatives. The administrator will request the applicant's written consent, when necessary, authorizing the administrator to receive the necessary information. 
(e)  Penalty for refusing to release information or providing false information. Any person who is requested but who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator after it has been requested must state in writing the reasons for the refusal within three days of receiving the request. Any person who willfully renders false information to the administrator is guilty of a class E crime. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.3)) 
Sec. 24-119. - Fraud. 
(a)  Period of ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds that a person has knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts, either orally or in writing, for the purpose of making himself eligible for general assistance, the administrator shall notify that applicant in writing that he has been disqualified from receiving assistance for 120 days. For purposes of this section, a material misrepresentation is a false statement about an eligibility factor in the absence of which some or all of the assistance would not be or would not have been granted. The notification of disqualification issued by the administrator shall inform the applicant of his right to appeal the administrator's decision to the fair hearing authority within five working days of receipt. Unless modified by the fair hearing authority, the period of ineligibility shall commence on the day following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received or upon the date of notification of disqualification, whichever is later. 
(b)  Right to fair hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for making a false representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing authority. No recipient shall have his assistance reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being notified and given the opportunity to appeal the decision. 
(c)  Reimbursement of city. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair hearing authority determines that a recipient did make a false representation, he will be required to reimburse the city for any assistance received to which he was not entitled. 
(d)  Effect of disqualification on dependents. In no event will the disqualification of a person under this section serve to disqualify any eligible dependent in that household. If one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated as though the household is comprised of the dependents only, except that the entire household income will be considered available to them. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.4)) 
State Law reference- False representation, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4315. 
Sec. 24-120. - Period of eligibility. 
    The general assistance administrator will grant assistance to eligible persons for a period that is sufficient to meet their need, but in no event may a grant of assistance cover a period in excess of one month. The administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility on the basis of a 30-day prospective analysis. For reasons of administrative efficiency, however, the administrator may elect to disburse that applicant's assistance for shorter periods of time, such as weekly, throughout the 30-day period of eligibility. Subsequent grants of assistance during that 30-day period may be issued pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the applicant's financial situation or household changes substantially enough to warrant a redetermination of eligibility. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.5)) 
Sec. 24-121. - Determination of need. 
(a)  Generally. The period of time used to calculate need under this chapter will be the next 30-day period from the date of application. The administrator will calculate applicants' expenses according to the actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels for the specific necessities allowed in this chapter or the appendix, whichever is less. Applicants will not be considered eligible if their income and other resources exceed this calculation unless they qualify for emergency assistance. Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance if their income, property, credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for their household are greater than the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth in this chapter. The difference between the applicant's income/resources and the overall maximum levels or assistance established by this chapter is the applicant's deficit. Once an applicant's deficit has been determined, the specific maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity listed in this chapter or the appendix shall be used by the administrator to guide the distribution of assistance for which the applicant is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity are intended to be reasonable and sufficient to help recipients maintain a standard of health and decency. 
(b)  Income to be used for basic necessities. Applicants are required to use their income for basic necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant is eligible to receive assistance to replace income that was spent within the 30-day period prior to an application for assistance on goods and services that are not basic necessities. All income not spent on basic necessities will be considered available to the applicant and combined with the applicant's prospective 30-day income for the purposes of computing eligibility. Applicants who have sufficient income to provide basic necessities will not be considered eligible for assistance. Persons who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need assistance with other basic necessities will be eligible provided that their income does not exceed the overall maximum level of assistance. 
(c)  Use-of-income requirements. 
(1)  Except for initial applicants, anyone applying for general assistance must document their use of income to the administrator. This documentation can take the form of check stubs or receipts which demonstrate that the applicant has used his income for basic necessities. 
(2)  Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent or mortgage), the cost of heating fuel, electricity and food up to the maximum established in this chapter, telephone costs at the base rate if the household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the costs of nonelective medical services as recommended by a physician which are not otherwise covered by medical entitlement or insurance, the reasonable cost of essential clothing and nonprescription drugs, and the costs of any other commodity or service determined essential by the administrator. 
(3)  Cable television, cigarettes and alcohol, gifts purchased, costs of trips or vacations, court fines paid, repayments of unsecured loans, credit card debt, costs associated with pet care, etc., are not considered basic necessities and will not be included in the budget computation. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income requirements to any applicant, other than an initial applicant, who fails to use his income for basic necessities or fails to reasonably document his use of income. Those additional requirements will be applied in the following manner: 
a.  The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all of his income, at the time it becomes available, toward specific basic necessities. The administrator may prioritize such required expenditures so that most or all of the applicant's income is applied to housing (i.e., rent or mortgage), energy (e.g., heating fuel or electricity) or other specified basic necessities. 
b.  The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the specific use-of-income requirements placed on them. 
c.  If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how the applicant's income was spent, or it is determined that some or all of the applicant's income was not spent as directed and was also not spent on basic necessities, the applicant will not be eligible to receive either regular or emergency general assistance to replace that income. 
d.  If the applicant does not spend his income as directed, but can show with verifiable documentation that all income was spent on basic necessities up to allowed amounts, the applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant's eligibility and need. 
(d)  Computation of income and expenses. In determining eligibility, the administrator will subtract the applicant's net income from the overall maximum level of assistance. If the income is greater than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant will not be eligible except in an emergency. If the income is less than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a deficit. The city will provide assistance in an amount up to the deficit to the extent the applicant is in need of basic necessities. The city will not grant assistance in excess of the maximum amounts allowed by this chapter except in an emergency or when the administrator elects to consolidate the applicant's unmet need, as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Consolidation of deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their deficit, applicants will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity up to, but not exceeding, the maximum amount allowed for that necessity or the actual 30-day cost of the necessity, whichever is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may consolidate the applicant's deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity in an amount greater than the maximum established in this chapter for that necessity: 
(1)  The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a basic necessity in amounts greater than the maximum established in this chapter shall be the exception rather than the rule; 
(2)  The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit unless the applicant is in an emergency situation; and 
(3)  The need for the application of the recipient's consolidated deficit toward a basic necessity must not have been created by the recipient misspending his income or resources in violation of the use-of-income requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.6)) 
Sec. 24-122. - Determination of income. 
(a)  Calculation of income. To determine whether applicants are in need, the general assistance administrator will calculate the income they will receive during the next 30-day period commencing on the date of application and identify any assets or resources that would alleviate their need. For all applicants other than initial applicants, the administrator will also consider as available income any income that was not spent during the previous 30-day period on basic necessities, as well as any income that was spent on basic necessities in unreasonable excess of maximums established in this chapter for specific basic necessities. If their income exceeds the amount they need for basic necessities, up to the maximum levels contained in this chapter, applicants will not be considered in need. Exceptions will be made in emergency situations which may necessitate that the maximum levels be exceeded. To calculate weekly income and expenses, the administrator will divide the applicants' monthly income and expenses by 4.3. 
(b)  Types of income. Income which will be considered in determining an applicant's need includes: 
(1)  Earned income. 
a.  Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant through wages, salary, commissions or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee, is considered earned income. If a person is self-employed, total income will be computed by subtracting business expenses from gross income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will be that available after taxes, social security and other payroll deductions required by state, federal and local law. Rental income and profit from produce that is sold is considered earned income. Income that is held in trust and unavailable to the applicant or the applicant's dependents will not be considered as earned income. 
b.  Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, costs of transportation to and from work, costs of special equipment or work clothes, and child care costs will not be considered available income and will be deducted. 
(2)  Income from assistance or social services programs. State categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments, social security payments, VA benefits, unemployment insurance benefits and payments from other government sources will be considered as income, unless expressly prohibited by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits food supplement program and fuel assistance payments made by the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP and ECIP) from being considered income. The value of the food supplement program or fuel assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general assistance the applicant is eligible to receive, although applicants may have only a limited or reduced need for general assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently received HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or otherwise obviated an actual fuel-related cost over the prospective 30-day period. The administrator's obligation is to always compute the heating needs of an applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his total fuel costs. Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget for the household's heating energy needs according to actual usage, up to the maximums established in this chapter, but the administrator may, with written notice to the applicant, hold in reserve the heating energy portion of the applicant's deficit until such time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a demonstrable need for the disbursement of heating energy assistance, that is, the applicant no longer has a positive credit balance with his utility company. The city may not divert a recipient's heating energy allowance toward nonheating purposes solely on the basis of the recipient's receipt of HEAP/ECIP. 
(3)  Court-ordered support payments. Alimony and child support payments will be considered income only if actually received by the applicant. The general assistance administrator will refer cases where support payments are not actually received to the state department of human services' support enforcement location unit. 
(4)  Income from other sources. Payments from pension and trust funds will be considered income. Payments from boarders or lodgers will be considered income, as will cash or in-kind contributions provided to the household from any other source, including relatives. 
(5)  Earnings of son or daughter. Earned income received by sons and daughters below the age of 18 who are fulltime students and who are not working fulltime will not be considered income. The unearned income of a minor in the household will be considered available to the household. 
(6)  Income from household members. Income from household members will be considered available to the applicant, whether or not the household member is legally obligated for the support of the applicant, if the household members pool or share their income and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as to provide support to one another. 
(7)  Pooling or nonpooling of income. When two or more individuals share the same dwelling unit, but not all members of the household are applying for general assistance, the administrator shall make a finding under a rebuttable presumption that the entire household is pooling income. One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut the presumption that all household income is being pooled by providing the administrator with verifiable documentation affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of nonpooling for the duration of the shared living arrangement. Such documentation would include evidence of the entire household expenses as well as bank statements, check stubs, receipts, landlord statements or other vendor accounts clearly supporting a claim that the applicant has been and is presently solely and entirely responsible for his prorated share of household costs. If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the presumption that all household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire household will be determined based on total household income. If the applicant successfully rebuts the presumption that all household income is being pooled, the applicant's eligibility will be determined on the basis of his income and his pro rata share of actual household expenses. 
(8)  Lump sum income. A lump sum payment as defined in this chapter and received by a household prior to the date of application for general assistance will be considered as income available to the household, with the exception of any required payments (i.e., any third-party payment which is required as a condition of receiving the lump sum payment, or any payments of bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum payment was made) and any amount of the lump sum payment which the applicant can document was spent on basic necessities as described in this subsection. In the case where a lump sum payment was received by a household at any time prior to the date of application for general assistance, the administrator will assess the need for prorating an applicant's eligibility for general assistance according to the following criteria: 
a.  Identify the date the lump sum payment was received. 
b.  Subtract from the lump sum payment all required payments. 
c.  Subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can demonstrate was spent on basic necessities, including all basic necessities provided by general assistance in reasonable conformance with the specific maximum levels of assistance, per month, as provided in this chapter; any reasonable payment of funeral or burial expenses for a family member; any reasonable travel costs related to the illness or death of a family member, repair or replacement of essentials lost due to fire, flood or other natural disaster; or repair or purchase of a motor vehicle essential for employment, education, training or other day-to-day living necessities. 
d.  Add to the remainder all income received by the household between the date of receipt of the lump sum payment and the date of application for general assistance. 
e.  Divide the sum created by subsection (b)(8)c of this section by the aggregate maximum monthly allocation of general assistance available to the household pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.3-B. 
f.  The dividend remaining after following these guidelines represents the number of months from the receipt of the lump sum payment during which an income level equivalent to the maximum monthly allocation of general assistance for the household will be deemed available to that household. No portion of lump sum income can extend longer than 12 months from the date of application. Applicants who have been declared ineligible for reasons of lump sum proration will not be eligible for emergency general assistance during the period of proration. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.7)) 
Sec. 24-123. - Notice of decision. 
(a)  Written decision required. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to each applicant after making a determination of eligibility each time a person applies. The decision will be given to the applicant within 24 hours of receiving a signed application. 
(b)  Contents. The notice will state that the applicant: 
(1)  Has the right to a fair hearing, and the method by which he may obtain a fair hearing. 
(2)  Has the right to contact the state department of human services if he believes the city has violated the law. The decision will state the method for notifying the department. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.9)) 
State Law reference- Grant, denial, reduction or termination to be communicated in writing, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4321; right to fair hearing, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4322. 
Sec. 24-124. - Disbursement of assistance. 
    Except when determined impractical by the administrator, all general assistance will be provided in the form of a voucher or purchase order payable to a vendor or through direct city payment to a provider of goods or services. General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment to an applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash payment, in which case the administrator shall document the circumstances for issuing general assistance in the form of cash. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.10)) 
Secs. 24-125-24-146. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Maximum Levels of Assistance for Basic Necessities 

Sec. 24-147. - Overall maximum levels of assistance. 
    Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of assistance for specific basic necessities listed in this section, an applicant's eligibility for general assistance will be first determined by subtracting his income from the overall maximum level of assistance, which is 110 percent of the applicable housing fair-market rents as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for the applicable household size, pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A., § 4303-B. The difference yielded by this calculation shall be the applicant's deficit. Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the calculated deficit to the extent the applicant is unable to provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for general assistance unless they are in an emergency, in which case eligibility for emergency general assistance will be determined according to section 24-58. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-148. - General standards for specific needs. 
    The city will grant assistance to eligible applicants for basic necessities according to the maximum levels for specific types of assistance authorized by law. The general assistance administrator, in consultation with the applicant, may apply the amount of the applicant's deficit toward assistance with any one or a combination of necessities, not to exceed the total deficit. These maximum levels will be strictly adhered to, although if the administrator determines that there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is shown to exist, these absolute levels may be waived in order to meet immediate needs. In all cases, either the actual expense the applicant incurs for basic necessities or the maximum amount allowed in each category, as set forth in the appendix, whichever is less, will be used in determining need. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-149. - Common living expenses; bills issued to other persons. 
    The applicant's need for common living expenses for food, rent, utilities, fuel, etc., will be presumed to be reduced by an amount equal to the other household members' proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. This presumption may be rebutted by evidence that the other household members had no income with which to pay their share of common expenses. No applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any expense which, in fact, has been or will be paid by another person, or which has been incurred in another person's name. In addition, as a general rule, the city will not provide a benefit toward a basic need by paying a bill that is issued to a person not living with the applicant's household or that has otherwise been incurred by a person who has not been found eligible to receive assistance. Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the administrator in the following circumstances: 
(1)  A recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the household resulting in the sustained or permanent absence of a former household member in whose name the bill was customarily issued; 
(2)  The applicant and members of the applicant's household were or will be the sole recipients of the commodities or services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid with general assistance; and 
(3)  The applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the vendor to issue future bills in the name of the applicant or other responsible person residing in the household. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-150. - Food. 
(a)  The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible persons up to the allowed maximum amounts designated by the USDA Thrifty Food Plan for the appropriate household size. For this purpose, the city hereby incorporates by reference the USDA Thrifty Food Plan, as distributed by the state department of human services on or about October of each year (see appendix). In determining need for food, the administrator will not consider the value of the food supplement program an applicant receives as income. The city will authorize vouchers to be used solely for approved food products. 
(b)  The administrator may exceed the maximum when necessary for households having members with special dietary needs. The administrator may require a doctor's statement which verifies that there is a special dietary need that requires an expenditure for food which is greater than the maximums established in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-151. - Housing. 
    The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in this chapter have been derived from the fair market rental values developed by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and adjusted to disregard the current and averaged utility and heating allowances as developed by the state housing authority on or about November 1 of each year, which are hereby incorporated by reference (see appendix). It is the applicant's responsibility to find suitable housing, although the administrator may help the applicant find housing when appropriate. The administrator will inform the applicant of the allowed housing maximums to assist him in his search for housing. The allowed maximum for any applicant will be the categorical housing maximum representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary to adequately shelter the applicant's household. Applicants requesting assistance for housing that contains more bedrooms than are necessary for the number of household members will be provided assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms actually needed. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-152. - Rental payments-Relatives. 
    The city will not authorize any rental payment to an applicant's relatives unless the rental relationship has existed for at least three months and the applicant's relatives rely on the rental payment for their basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a relative is defined as the applicant's parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, siblings or parent's siblings, or any of those relatives' children. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-153. - Same-Private homes. 
(a)  When applicants are living in private homes or sharing dwelling units with other people who are not requesting general assistance, the amount allowed as the applicant's shelter expense will be the applicant's pro rata share of the actual total shelter cost, up to the maximum established in this chapter. 
(b)  Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a circumstance shall be issued, whenever reasonably possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most superior legal or equitable interest in the property. 
(c)  When the city issues in aggregate more than $600.00 in rental payments to any landlord in any calendar year, a 1099 form declaring the total amount of rental payments during the calendar year will be issued to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS regulations. 
(d)  Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments from the city on behalf of applicants renting rooms from the landlord's own residence must, at a minimum, obtain a lodging license from the state department of human services, division of health engineering, pursuant to 10-144A Code of Maine Regulations, chapter 201, as a condition of receiving future general assistance payments on behalf of his tenants. 
(e)  Subsidized housing will be considered as a resource. Applicants who voluntarily leave subsidized housing or are mandated to leave because of fraud, misrepresentation or a knowing or intentional violation of regulations of the housing authority shall be limited to the amount of shelter expenses experienced with the subsidized housing for a period of 120 days beginning with the date of leaving or the month after the eviction. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-154. - Mortgage payments. 
(a)  In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage payment, the general assistance administrator will make an individual factual determination of whether the applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In making this determination, the administrator will consider the extent and liquidity of the applicant's proprietary interest in the housing. Factors to be considered in making this determination include: 
(1)  The marketability of the shelter's equity. 
(2)  The amount of equity. 
(3)  The availability of the equity interest in the shelter to provide the applicant an opportunity to secure a short-term loan in order to meet immediate needs. 
(4)  The extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant's financial rehabilitation. 
(5)  A comparison between the amount of mortgage obligations and the anticipated rental charges the applicant would be responsible for if he were to be dislocated to rental housing. 
(6)  The imminence of the applicant's dislocation from owned housing because of his inability to meet the mortgage payments. 
(7)  The likelihood that the provision of housing assistance would prevent such dislocation. 
(8)  The applicant's age, health and social situation. 
(b)  These factors shall be considered when determining whether the equity in the shelter is an available asset which may be substituted for the assistance the city would otherwise be required to provide. If, after reviewing these criteria, the administrator determines that the payment of the mortgage is not necessary to meet the applicant's immediate shelter needs, the administrator may elect not to make any mortgage payment unless the applicant has been served a notice of foreclosure, although mortgage payments up to the maximum established in this chapter for housing will be budgeted as an expense. 
(c)  If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will pay the actual amount due, or up to the amount allowed according to the maximum levels listed in the appendix, whichever is less. After an initial application, assistance with such payments will be given only after the applicant has made all reasonable efforts to borrow against the equity of his home. If there is not sufficient equity in the home with which to secure a loan, and if the monthly mortgage payments are not realistically in line with the rental rates for similar housing in the area that could meet the applicant's needs, the administrator will inform the applicant that he is responsible for finding alternative housing within his ability to pay and will be obligated to make all reasonable efforts to secure such housing. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-155. - Lien for amount of assistance with mortgage payments. 
(a)  When the city makes a mortgage payment, it may place a lien on the property in order to recover its costs of granting assistance with mortgage payments. No lien may be enforced against a recipient except upon his death or the transfer of the property. Further, no lien may be enforced against a person who is currently receiving any form of public assistance or who would again become eligible for general assistance if the lien were enforced. 
(b)  The city will charge interest on the amount of money secured by the lien. The city council will establish the interest rate, not to exceed the maximum rate of interest allowed by the state treasurer. The interest will accrue from the date the lien is filed. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-156. - Property taxes. 
    If an applicant requests assistance with his property taxes, the administrator may consider using general assistance to meet this need only if: 
(1)  The property tax in question is for the applicant's place of residence; 
(2)  There is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature within 60 days of the date of application; 
(3)  As a matter of policy or practice it is reasonably certain that a tax lien foreclosure will result in subsequent eviction from the residential property and it is the most cost-effective means of assistance; and 
(4)  The applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property tax relief through the state resident property tax program, when available. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-157. - Utilities. 
(a)  Expenses for lights, cooking and hot water will be budgeted separately if they are not included in the rent. Applicants are responsible for making arrangements with the utility company regarding service, including entering into a special payment arrangement if necessary. 
(b)  Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill. The city is not obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits. Exceptions may be made in emergency situations pursuant to section 24-58. Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an emergency in all cases. The administrator will make an individual factual analysis to determine if the termination of utility service constitutes an emergency. The administrator will consider the household composition, the time of year, the health of the household members and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision. Applicants who had sufficient income, money, assets or other resources to pay their utility bill when it was received, but who spent all or part of their income on items which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to receive general assistance to replace those funds. Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their income for the applicable time period. The administrator will notify applicants in writing that they must give the administrator prompt notice if their utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel supply is low. It is the applicant's responsibility to attempt to make arrangements with the utility company to maintain the applicant's service and to notify the administrator if assistance is needed with a utility bill prior to service being terminated. 
(c)  The maximum amounts allowed for utilities, including lights, cooking and hot water, will be budgeted according to the actual need, provided such expenses are reasonable, but not to exceed the maximums (see appendix). 
(d)  In accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may allow as a budgetable expense the amount of an applicant's summer-loaded special payment arrangement (SPA) or budget payment arrangement (BPA), even when the arranged payment amount exceeds the maximums specified in this subsection (d) or actual usage, if: 
(1)  The SPA or BPA, when annualized, does not exceed the monthly maximums, when annualized, for nonelectrically heated dwelling units. 
(2)  The SPA or BPA, when annualized, does not exceed the monthly maximums and the fuel assistance maximums, when annualized, for electrically heated dwelling units. 
(3)  The administrator determines, in consultation with the utility, that the payment arrangement does not include in any part the installment payment of past debt unless the city guaranteed to the utility the allowance of such an arrangement as a condition of averting a disconnection. 
(e)  Pursuant to the use-of-income requirements in section 24-121, whenever the administrator budgets for SPAs or BPAs under this section, the recipient will be required to pay the SPA or BPA himself to the extent of the income capacity of the household. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-158. - Nonelectric utilities. 
    The allowed amount for water and sewer utility service will be budgeted at the actual 30-day cost for those services. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-159. - Fuel. 
(a)  Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the actual need for fuel during the heating season (September through May), provided such expenses are reasonable, and at other times during the year when the administrator determines the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and appropriate, but not to exceed the maximums (see appendix). 
(b)  Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill. The city is not responsible for back bills except in an emergency as provided in section 24-58. Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply. When applicants who have been informed of this responsibility run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just cause for failing to give the administrator timely notice of their need for fuel, the administrator shall find that the emergency was not beyond the applicant's control, and process the emergency request accordingly, pursuant to section 24-58. 
(c)  When fuel such as wood, coal or natural gas are used to heat, they will be budgeted at actual rates, if they are reasonable. No eligible applicant shall be considered to need more than seven tons of coal per year, eight cords of wood per year or 126,000 cubic feet of natural gas per year or 1,000 gallons of propane per year. When the dwelling unit is heated electrically, the maximum amount allowed for heating purposes will be calculated by multiplying the number of gallons of fuel (oil) allowed for that month by the current price per gallon. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-160. - Personal care and household supplies. 
    Expenses for ordinary personal and household supplies will be budgeted and allowed according to the applicant's actual need for these items, up to the maximums (see appendix). Personal and household supplies include hand soap, toothpaste, shampoo, shaving cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry supplies and costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper products such as toilet paper, tissues and paper towels, garbage and trash bags, and lightbulbs. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Sec. 24-161. - Other basic necessities. 
    Expenses falling under this section will be granted when they are deemed essential to an applicant's or recipient's health. Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be obtained through the utilization of available resources. 
(1)  Clothing. The city may assist a household with the purchase of adequate clothing. Before assistance will be granted for clothing, the general assistance administrator must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all available resources to secure the necessary clothing. In some circumstances, clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions to this would be, for example, if fire, flood or unusual cold weather makes extra clothing an immediate necessity, special clothing is necessary for the applicant's employment, or a household member is without adequate clothing as determined by the administrator. 
(2)  Medical expenses. 
a.  The city will pay for essential medical expenses, other than hospital bills, provided that the administrator is notified and approves the expenses and services prior to their being made or delivered. The city will grant assistance for medical service only when assistance cannot be obtained from any other source and the applicant would not be able to receive necessary medical care without the assistance. The applicant is required to utilize any resource, including any federal or state program, that will diminish his need to seek general assistance for medical expenses. The city will grant assistance for nonemergency medical services only if a physician verifies that the services are essential. The administrator may require a second medical opinion from a physician designated by the city at the city's expense to verify the necessity of the services. 
b.  The city will issue general assistance at the established Medicaid rates for medical services, prescriptions or other medical commodities. Before authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses, the administrator will inform the pharmacy or medical service provider of the city's intention to pay for the medical service at the Medicaid rate, and ask to be billed accordingly. 
c.  Ordinary medical supplies and nonprescription drugs will be budgeted at the actual amount when the applicant can demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable supplies include bandages, aspirin, cough syrup and other generic brands of nonprescription medicines. In addition, the basic monthly rate for telephone service will be budgeted when a telephone is essential to the health and safety of the household. In order for telephone service to be considered an allowable expense, the administrator may require a written statement from a physician certifying that the telephone is essential. 
(3)  Hospital bills. 
a.  In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the hospital must notify the administrator within five business days of the admission. Notification must be by telephone, confirmed by certified mail, or by certified mail only. If a hospital fails to give timely notice to the administrator the city will have no obligation to pay the bill. 
b.  Any person who cannot pay his hospital bill must apply to the hospital for consideration under the hospital's charity care program as provided in 22 M.R.S.A. § 396-F(1). Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital's charity care program may apply for general assistance. Applicants must apply for assistance within 30 days of being discharged from the hospital and provide a notice from the hospital certifying that they are not eligible for the hospital's charity care program. 
c.  Before the administrator will allow a hospital bill as a necessary expense, the applicant must enter into a reasonable payment arrangement with the hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon the Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant's eligibility, the city will budget the monthly payment to the hospital the applicant has agreed to pay. The applicant's need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered each time he applies by including the amount of the bill in the applicant's monthly budget, but the recipient will be responsible for making any necessary payments to the hospital pursuant to the use-of-income requirements found in section 24-121(c). 
(4)  Dental expenses. The city will pay for medically necessary dental services only. If full mouth extractions are necessary, the city will pay for dentures provided the applicant has no other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant will be referred to a dental clinic in the area whenever possible. The administrator will expect the applicant to bear a reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant's ability to pay or to make payment arrangements. 
(5)  Eye care expenses. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance for eyeglasses, an applicant must have his medical need certified by a person licensed to practice optometry. The general assistance administrator will provide assistance for eyeglasses to eligible persons only after the applicant has exhausted all other available resources. 
(6)  Work-related expenses. In determining need, reasonable and actual work-related expenses will be deducted from earned income. These expenses include transportation at the actual cost, not to exceed the city's rate per mile paid to city employees upon using their vehicle for city business, child care costs, and cost of work clothes and supplies. The applicant is required to provide documentation substantiating the costs and that the expenses were necessary. 
(7)  Travel expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which is not work-related will be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy the administrator that the prospective need for travel is necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly transportation to a supermarket will be considered, as will any medically necessary travel. The rate at which such necessary travel will be budgeted is the same rate paid to city employees upon using their vehicle for city business, and this rate shall be construed to subsidize all costs associated with automobile ownership and operation, including gas and oil, tires, maintenance, insurance, financing, licensing and registration, excise tax, etc. 
(8)  Burial or cremation expenses. 
a.  Generally. The city recognizes its responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of indigent persons under certain circumstances, provided that the funeral director gives timely notice to the city and the funeral director ascertains that there are no family members who are financially capable of paying some or all of the burial costs. The maximum amount of assistance for burial or cremation services represents the maximum municipal obligation for all costs associated with burials or cremations, including all funeral expenses (see appendix). 
b.  Notification of administrator by funeral director. In order for the city to be liable for a burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must notify the administrator prior to the burial or cremation or by the end of three business days following the funeral director's receipt of the body, whichever is earlier. It is the funeral director's responsibility to determine if the family or any other persons are going to pay all or part of the burial expenses. If family members or others are unable to pay the expenses and the funeral director wants the city to pay all or part of the expenses, he must make timely contact with the city general assistance administrator. In addition, the funeral director shall refer legally liable relatives to the administrator so that a timely determination of financial capacity may be accomplished. 
c.  Application for assistance. In cases where there are liable family members (father, mother, grandfather, grandmother, children, and grandchildren of the deceased), the family must apply for assistance so that the administrator can determine what resources are available to pay the costs of the burial. The city will not accept responsibility for burial expenses unless all responsible family members can demonstrate to the administrator's satisfaction their inability to pay in full or make a deferred payment arrangement with the funeral home. If there are no liable family members or others, the funeral director should apply on behalf of the deceased. The administrator may take up to eight days to give a written decision. If responsible family members refuse to allow the city to investigate their resources, the city will not grant assistance. 
d.  Deduction of other resources. Any other benefits or resources which are available, such as social security death benefits, insurance or contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the amount which the city will pay. 
e.  Application is created on behalf of deceased. Application for assistance shall be created on behalf of the deceased. For the purposes of determining residency, calculating eligibility and issuing general assistance for burial or cremation purposes, an application for assistance shall be created by the administrator on behalf of the deceased. 
f.  Residence criteria. With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for burial expenses shall be the municipality in which the eligible deceased person was resident at the time of death as residency is determined under section 24-59. 
g.  Financial responsibility of relatives. Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide information regarding their income, assets and basic living expenses, that information will not be construed as an application for general assistance, inasmuch as living persons are not eligible for burial assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally liable relatives have a financial responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of the relatives, that financial responsibility only exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are eligible for general assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal obligation to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives. For these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial or cremation purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the deceased. 
h.  Determination of family members' ability to pay. Any person who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator in order to verify an applicant's eligibility must state in writing the reason for the refusal. 
Grandparents, parents, children and grandchildren of the deceased whether or not living in or owning property in Maine, and the spouse or registered domestic partner of the deceased, are financially responsible for the burial or cremation of the deceased to the extent those relatives, individually or as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation either in a lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement with the funeral home. Accordingly, at the request of the administrator, all legally liable relatives must provide the city administrator with any reasonably requested information regarding their income, assets and basic living expenses. The administrator may also seek information from financial institutions holding assets of the deceased. Effective November 1, 2017, Maine law requires a financial institution to disclose the amount deposited in the corporation or association when the municipality or its agents are acting in accordance with [22 M.R.S.A.] § 4313(2) and provide a written request and a notarized affidavit signed by the overseer of the municipality or its agents stating that the named depositor is deceased. 
i.  Consideration of financial responsibility of family member. Generally, when the administrator can make a finding that one or more of the deceased's legally liable relatives have an obvious and demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, by lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement, the city will not grant the requested burial or cremation assistance. When the administrator is unable to make such a finding, proration of familial responsibility will be implemented as provided in subsection (8)j of this section. 
j.  Proration of familial responsibility. A proration of familial financial responsibility will be used when no legally liable relative possesses an obvious and demonstrable capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found to have a financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the administrator is unable to determine the financial capacity of one or more of such relatives. Under these circumstances, each legally liable relative is considered to be responsible for his pro rata share of the total city contribution that would exist if no legally liable relatives had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as long as all other eligibility factors have been satisfied, the city will provide as a burial or cremation benefit the aggregate of all pro rata shares less the share of any legally liable relative who refuses to cooperate with the administrator by providing information or documentation reasonably necessary to determine that relative's financial capacity, and less any share or part of a share attributable to a legally liable relative who can financially contribute or partially contribute toward the burial or cremation to the extent of that relative's share. 
k.  Time period for determining eligibility. The administrator may take up to eight days from the date of contact by the funeral director to issue a written decision regarding the amount of the city's contribution toward the burial or cremation. The eight-day eligibility determination period from the date of contact by the funeral director shall be used as necessary to make third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of legally liable family members and determine their respective financial capacities to contribute to the burial or cremation, contact the personal representative of the deceased's estate, if any, and other related administrative tasks. The administrator shall not use this eight-day period allowed by law to unreasonably delay the city's decision. 
l.  City's obligation to pay when legally liable relatives or others can contribute. The figures provided in the appendix are the maximum benefits provided by the city when no contributions toward the burial or cremation are available from any other source. To the extent any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be deducted from the maximum burial costs allowed by this section. In addition, any other benefits or resources that are available, such as social security burial benefits, veterans' burial benefits, or contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the maximum amount the city will pay. 
m.  Allowable expenses. 
1.  The administrator will use discretion regarding the wishes of liable family members as to whether the deceased is interred by means of burial or cremation. If relatives, other persons or other sources cannot cover the burial expenses of an indigent person, up to the maximum allowed in the appendix, the city will pay the difference, with additional payments, where there is an actual cost for a lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery and the opening and closing of the grave site. If the cemetery bylaws require vaults or cement liners, the general assistance administrator will pay the actual wholesale price. 
2.  Allowable burial expenses are limited to removal of the body from a local residence or institution, a secured death certificate or obituary, embalming, a minimum casket, necessary transportation cost from funeral home to grave site (when reasonable to the administrator) and a reasonable cost for overhead. Other costs will not be paid. 
3.  If relatives, other persons or other sources cannot cover the cremation expenses of an indigent person, up to the maximum allowed in the appendix, the city will pay the difference, with additional payments, where there is an actual cost, for the cremation lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery, a reasonable cost for a burial urn not to exceed the maximum allowed in the appendix, or transportation costs borne by the funeral director at a reasonable rate per mile for transporting the remains to and from the cremation facility. The administrator will use discretion regarding the wishes of the liable family members with regard to whether the deceased is interred by means of burial or cremated. When neither the administrator nor the funeral director is able to locate any family members, the administrator will issue burial assistance for cremation and ashes will be disposed of at the crematorium. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8); Ord. No. 12-10162017, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 24-162. - Capital improvements. 
    The costs associated with capital improvements and repairs (e.g., heating, water or septic system repair) will generally not be budgeted as a basic necessity. Exceptions can be made only when the capital improvement or repair has been pre-approved by the administrator as a necessary expense and the monthly cost of the capital improvement or repair has been reduced as far as reasonably possible by the applicant, for example, entering into an installment payment arrangement with the contractor or securing a loan, etc. The administrator may grant general assistance for capital improvements when the failure to do so would place the applicant in emergency circumstances, there are not other resources available to effect the capital repair, and there is no more cost-effective alternative available to the applicant or the city to alleviate an emergency situation. The city reserves the right to place a lien on any property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320 when general assistance has been used to effect a capital improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished in the same manner as for mortgage payments. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VI, § 6.8)) 
Secs. 24-163-24-192. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FAIR HEARING 

Sec. 24-193. - Right to fair hearing. 
    Within five working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination of assistance under this chapter, or within ten working days after any other act or failure to act, the applicant or his authorized representative shall have the right to request a fair hearing. The right to review a decision of the general assistance administrator is a basic right of the applicant to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a review of the decision. The state rules of evidence shall not apply with regard to information presented to the fair hearing authority. The standard of evidence is the standard set in 5 M.R.S.A. § 9057(2). 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VII, § 7.1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4322. 
Sec. 24-194. - Method of obtaining hearing. 
(a)  Response to complaints by administrator. Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that are not clear requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in writing by the general assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the adjustment or explanation, the administrator will make an entry in the case record and file any correspondence involved. 
(b)  Written request for hearing. To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his authorized representative, must make a written request, within five working days of receiving the administrator's decision to deny, reduce or terminate assistance, or within ten working days after any other act or failure to act. The administrator will make available a printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the claimant in completing it if necessary. On the printed form, the claimant will give the following information: 
(1)  The decision on which review is sought; 
(2)  The reasons for the claimant's dissatisfaction and why he believes he is eligible to receive assistance; and 
(3)  The relief he seeks. 
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has been withdrawn by the claimant. 
(c)  Scheduling of hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request, the fair hearing authority must meet and hold the hearing within five working days. The administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and where the hearing will be held. Arrangements for the date, time and place of the hearing will take into consideration the convenience of the claimant and the hearing authority. The claimant will be given notice early enough to allow preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary information about the hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his case. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VII, § 7.2)) 
Sec. 24-195. - Fair hearing authority. 
(a)  The city council may appoint a fair hearing authority, which will review decisions of the general assistance administrator when requested by any claimant or the claimant's authorized representative. The authority is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with the state law and local ordinance. 
(b)  The fair hearing authority may consist of the mayor and members of the city council, or one or more persons appointed by the city council to act as the hearing authority. In determining the organization of the fair hearing authority, the city officers will use the following criteria. The persons serving as fair hearing authority members must: 
(1)  Not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the appeal. 
(2)  Be impartial. 
(3)  Be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence and the facts necessary to make a fair determination. 
(4)  Be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the claimant the laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and interpreting to the administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear or inadequate policies, practices or actions. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VII, § 7.3)) 
Sec. 24-196. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time and place for the hearing in writing, he will also be given adequate preliminary information about the hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his case. The claimant shall be permitted to review his file prior to the hearing. All fair hearings will: 
(1)  Be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant, witnesses, legal counsel or others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance administrator, his agents, counsel and witnesses; 
(2)  Open with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority; 
(3)  Be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the requirements of due process; 
(4)  Allow the claimant and the administrator the option of presenting their positions for themselves or with the aid of others, including legal counsel; 
(5)  Give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or documentary evidence, offer rebuttal, question witnesses, and examine all evidence presented at the hearing; 
(6)  Result in a decision based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the hearing; and 
(7)  Be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to the claimant and filed with evidence introduced at the hearing. The fair hearing authority will allow the claimant to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any arguments without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair hearing decision or made part of the hearing record. Any material reviewed by the fair hearing authority must be made available to the claimant or his representative. The claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript if he wishes to pursue court action. 
(b)  The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VII, § 7.4)) 
Sec. 24-197. - Decision. 
(a)  The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within five working days after completion of the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the following: 
(1)  A statement of the issue. 
(2)  Relevant facts brought out at the hearing. 
(3)  Pertinent provisions in the law or this chapter related to the decision. 
(4)  The decision and the reasons for it. 
(b)  A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The hearing record and the case record will be maintained by the general assistance administrator. 
(c)  The written notice of the decision will state that, if the claimant is dissatisfied with the fair hearing decision, he has a further legal right to appeal the decision pursuant to the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. 
(d)  When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the claimant, that assistance will be provided within 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VII, § 7.5)) 
Secs. 24-198-24-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RECOVERY OF EXPENSES 

Sec. 24-218. - Voluntary repayment. 
    The city may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or his executors or administrators in a civil action. Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance, the city will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by notifying him in writing and discussing it with the recipient. The city will not attempt to recover such costs if, as a result of the repayment, the person would again become eligible for general assistance. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VIII, § 8.1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4318. 
Sec. 24-219. - Recipients anticipating workers' compensation benefits. 
    The city shall claim a lien for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump sum payment made to that recipient under the Workers' Compensation Act or a similar law of any other state. After issuing any general assistance on behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is receiving workers' compensation, the city shall file a notice of the municipal lien with the general assistance recipient and the office of the secretary of state, uniform commercial code division. The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form, which must be signed by the recipient of general assistance who has applied for or is receiving workers' compensation. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who is receiving workers' compensation benefits and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be found ineligible to receive general assistance until he provides the required signature. The city shall also send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient's workers' compensation attorney, if known, the applicant's employer or the employer's insurance company, and, at the administrator's discretion, to the workers' compensation board. The lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum workers' compensation benefit is issued. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VIII, § 8.2)) 
Sec. 24-220. - Recipients of supplemental security income. 
    All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of supplemental security income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and which therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to sign a statement on an interim assistance agreement form distributed by the state department of human services that authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI payment to the city or the state in repayment for the general assistance granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who may be applying for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and who refuses to sign the interim agreement SSI authorization form will be found ineligible to receive general assistance until he provides the required signature. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VIII, § 8.3)) 
Sec. 24-221. - Recovery from spouse or relatives. 
    The spouse of an applicant, the parents of an applicant under the age of 25, or the parents of an applicant of any age who is incapacitated from earning a living and without sufficient means, are liable for the support of the applicant. In addition, parents, grandparents, and children, grandchildren are liable for the burial costs of each other. The city considers these relatives to be available resources and liable for the support of their relatives in proportion to their respective ability. The city may complain to any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the behalf of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1998, § 1(art. VIII, § 8.4)) 
State Law reference- Liability of relatives for support, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4319. 
Chapter 26 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal police officers, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2671; special police officers, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2672; constables, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2673; municipal aid to other law enforcement agencies, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2674; wearing of uniforms or badges, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2675; enforcement of municipal ordinances by municipalities without organized police departments, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009-A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 26-19. - Police chief. 
    The head of the police department shall be the police chief, who shall be appointed by the city manager and have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  The efficient operation of the department. 
(2)  The enforcement of all law that comes under the jurisdiction of his department. 
(3)  The enforcement of all ordinances not otherwise provided for. 
(4)  The making of rules and regulations for the proper operation of the department. 
(5)  The performance of any other duties required of him by law or the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 15-1.1) 
Sec. 26-20. - Deputy chief. 
    The deputy chief of the police department shall manage the day-to-day operation of the police department under the supervision of the chief of police He shall perform any and all duties assigned them by the chief. In the absence or the disability of the chief, the deputy chief shall assume his duties unless otherwise directed by the city manager. 
Sec. 26-21. - Watch/division commanders. 
    The watch/division commanders of the police department shall perform any duties assigned them by the chief or his designee. In cases of need, and in the absence or the disability of the chief, deputy chief, and criminal investigation division administrator, the watch/division commanders shall assume the duties of such officers in accordance with department policy unless otherwise directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 15-1.3) 
Sec. 26-22. - Patrol supervisors. 
    Patrol supervisors of the police department, when on duty, shall, under the supervision of the shift commanders, have direct control over the patrol officers. 
(Code 1967, § 15-1.4) 
Sec. 26-23. - Patrol officers and corporals; detectives. 
    The patrol officers, patrol corporals and detectives of the police department shall perform all duties assigned them by their superior officers. In the absence of orders, they shall act intelligently and efficiently according to their best judgment. 
(Code 1967, § 15-1.5) 
Sec. 26-24. - Policy and procedure. 
    The chief of police shall promulgate policies and procedures for the police department in written form. 
(Code 1967, § 15-1.8) 
Sec. 26-25. - Constables. 
(a)  The city council may appoint persons to serve as constables in the city. The certificate of appointment shall state whether the constable is authorized to carry a firearm in the performance of his duties. 
(b)  In any case in which a person appointed as a constable is not a city employee and is appointed solely for the purpose of enabling him to serve civil process within the city, the certificate of appointment shall state that he is not an agent or employee of the city or entitled to hold himself/herself out as such, and is not authorized to carry a firearm in the performance of his duties, and that his authority to act as a constable is limited to private employment as a process server. In any such case, the city council may condition the appointment upon presentation of satisfactory proof that the applicant has liability insurance presently in force with liability limits satisfactory to the city manager in which the city is a named ensured with the right of notice of cancellation. The city manager may also require the applicant to sign an indemnification agreement as a condition of appointment indemnifying the city against any claims which may arise against it in the course of the applicant's performance of his duties as constable. 
(c)  Any such appointment as a constable may be revoked for cause after notice and hearing by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 15-1.9) 
State Law reference- Appointment of constables, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2673. 
Chapter 28 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 30 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances generally, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2701 et seq.; abatement, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2702; common nuisances, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2741 et seq.; miscellaneous nuisances, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2802; municipality authority regarding certain nuisance trades, employment and manufacturers, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2803; dangerous buildings, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2851 et seq.; municipal authority to abate nuisances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3104; waste dumping as nuisance, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3352. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Graffiti means an unauthorized inscription, work, signature, symbol, design, or other marking which is etched, engraved, written, painted, drawn, or applied in any other way to a structure, building, or property. 
    Motorcycle means an unenclosed motor vehicle, having a saddle for the use of the operator, with two or three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor scooters and minibikes. 
    Noise-creating device means any electrical, mechanical or chemical device or instrument, or combination thereof, that creates noise during its operation by a person. 
    Operation means actual control by a person. 
    Owner means a person who owns or is in possession of property. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, roadway, alley, sidewalk or other area deeded or dedicated for public travel or transportation purposes. 
    Straight pipe exhaust system means any muffler that does not contain baffles, including, but not limited to, glass packs, steel packs, straight pipes and drag pipes. 
    Unauthorized means without the permission of the owner of property. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(3), § 6.2) 
Secs. 30-2-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRAFFITI[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Liability of parents for graffiti by minors on school property, 20-A M.R.S.A. § 6805; criminal mischief, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 806. 

Sec. 30-21. - Placement of. 
    A person commits an offense if the person places graffiti on property. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(3), § 6.2) 
Sec. 30-22. - Failure to remove. 
    An owner of property commits an offense if the owner fails to remove graffiti from the owner's property, after notice from the city of the need to do so, if the graffiti is visible from public or private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(3), § 6.3) 
Sec. 30-23. - Notice and abatement by owner or city. 
(a)  Notice of citation or abatement. The city must notify the property owner of a violation of this article, and must give the owner the opportunity to remove the graffiti before issuing a citation or entering the property and doing the work necessary to remove or cover the graffiti and abate the nuisance. 
(b)  Waiver of notice. The property owner may waive the right to notice and the opportunity to remove the graffiti by filing a written statement with the police department giving the city permission to enter the property and abate the nuisance. 
(c)  Method of notice. Notice must be given in writing personally delivered to the owner, or by letter addressed to the owner's address as listed on the most recent tax rolls, or if personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's address is unknown: 
(1)  By publication in the official newspaper at least twice within ten consecutive calendar days; 
(2)  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each structure or building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
(3)  If the property does not contain any buildings, by posting the notice on a placard or sign attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(d)  Contents of notice. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the record owner; 
(2)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property upon which the violation is located; 
(3)  A statement describing the violation and the work necessary to correct the violation; 
(4)  A statement advising the owner that if the work is not completed within ten calendar days, the city may complete the work and may assess the cost of the work to the owner; 
(5)  A statement that if the city performs the work and the owner fails to pay the cost, a lien may be placed on the property; 
(6)  A statement that, within five calendar days after receiving notice of a violation, the owner may submit a written request to the code enforcement officer or designee for assistance in removing the graffiti; 
(7)  A statement that, within five calendar days after receiving notice of a violation, the owner may submit a written request to the code enforcement officer for an informal hearing to contest whether the violation exists; and 
(8)  A statement that the city may, at any time, file a city ordinance violation in district court with a maximum fine of $500.00 for each calendar day the violation exists, in addition to any other remedy provided by law. 
(e)  Time of notice. For purposes of this article, notice is deemed to have occurred: 
(1)  For personal service, on the day the notice was personally delivered to the owner; 
(2)  For mailed notice, three calendar days after written notice was mailed to the owner; 
(3)  For notice by publication, on the date that the second notice is published; or 
(4)  For notice by posting, the day of posting. 
(f)  Issuance of citation. A citation for a violation of this article may be issued ten calendar days after notice of the violation is received. 
(g)  Work by city. If the owner does not comply with this article by the 30th calendar day after notice is deemed received, or within such other time as the city may provide, the city may enter the property or authorize another to enter the property and do or cause to be done all work necessary to abate the graffiti. If the city performs or causes to be performed the abatement work, the city shall initially pay for the works done, and may, at its sole discretion, charge the expenses to the owner of the property. 
(h)  Liability for work. The city shall not be responsible for the color or quality of the paint or any damages done to the owner's property while abating the nuisance on the property. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(3), § 6.4) 
Sec. 30-24. - Informal hearing. 
    Within five calendar days after receiving notice, the property owner may file a written request with the city manager for consideration. The owner may provide evidence or testimony that a violation does not exist and abatement is not warranted. Failure of the property owner to timely request consideration constitutes a waiver of any right to challenge the abatement of the violation. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(3), § 6.5) 
Sec. 30-25. - Assessment of expenses; lien. 
    The city may assess expenses incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti against the real property on which the work was done. To obtain a lien against the property, the city shall file with the county clerk of the county a statement of expenses and a copy of the notice that the city provided to the owner. The lien is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten percent per annum on the amount due from the date of payment by the city. The lien is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(3), § 6.6) 
Sec. 30-26. - Assistance in removal. 
    If an owner is in need of assistance in removing graffiti from the owner's property, the owner may submit a written request for assistance within five calendar days after receiving notice. The city may in its sole discretion agree to provide assistance to the owner and may set reasonable terms and conditions with respect to the provision of such assistance, including terms and conditions related to the timing of the assistance, waivers of liability and other similar matters. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2007(3), § 6.7) 
Secs. 30-27-30-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Loud and unreasonable noise as disorderly conduct, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 501-A; municipal authority for regulation of noise generally by commercial or industrial development, 38 M.R.S.A. § 484; excessive vehicle sound system noise, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2079-A. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 30-56-30-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 30-84. - Purpose. 
    The city council finds that excessive noise on public ways may cause distraction to other drivers which impairs the safe operation of motor vehicles, unreasonably disturb the quiet and normal functioning of the city's residential neighborhoods, threaten and intimidate pedestrians, and project a negative image of the city, all to the detriment of the health, welfare and safety of city's citizens and guests. Accordingly, it is the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary, excessive, annoying or distracting noise on public rights-of-way within the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § A) 
Sec. 30-85. - Creation of certain noises upon public right-of-way prohibited. 
    No person, while occupying any public right-of-way in the city, shall operate any noise-creating device in such a manner that the level of noise causes the public's attention to be drawn to the source of the noise, subject to the exceptions hereafter provided. The prohibition of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following activity or conduct: 
(1)  Discharging fireworks or any exploding device. 
(2)  Firing a starter pistol or firearm. 
(3)  Sounding a bell or whistle, alarm or horn for so extended a period of time as to cause annoyance to others. 
(4)  Rapid throttle advance and/or revving of an internal combustion engine resulting in increased noise from the engine and exhaust system, including the practice of motorcycle blipping. 
(5)  Operation of an unmuffled motor vehicle. 
(6)  Operation of a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, that has a straight pipe exhaust system, an exhaust system with a cutout, bypass or similar device or an exhaust system that does not meet the requirements of state law, including, but not limited to, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 19. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § C) 
State Law reference- Mufflers required, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 1912. 
Sec. 30-86. - Vehicle sound systems. 
    A person may not operate a sound system in a vehicle on a public way at a volume that is audible at a distance of greater than 25 feet and that exceeds 85 decibels or that is greater than is reasonable with due regard to the location of the vehicle and the effect on persons in proximity to the vehicle. It is a prima facie violation of the section if the vehicle is located near buildings and the buildings or windows in the buildings are shaken or rattled by the sound of the sound system. With respect to penalties of this provision this ordinance shall supersede 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2079-A. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § C) 
State Law reference- Excessive vehicle sound system noise, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2079-A. 
Sec. 30-87. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to the following activities or conduct: 
(1)  Expression or communication protected by the United States Constitution, including the First Amendment, or the state Constitution. 
(2)  Any activity or conduct the regulation of which has been preempted by state statute. 
(3)  Any noise created by a governmental entity in the performance of an official duty. 
(4)  Any noise for which a permit has been issued by an authority having jurisdiction to issue the permit. 
(5)  The sounding of any signaling device permitted by law. 
(6)  Properly licensed common carriers and service vehicles in the performance of their customary duties. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § D) 
Sec. 30-88. - Penalties. 
    Violations of this division constitute civil violations, punishable by a fine of $50.00 for the first offense, $100.00 for the second offense, $200.00 for the third offense, and $500.00 for the fourth and all subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § E) 
Secs. 30-89-30-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY NUISANCES 

Sec. 30-120. - Fence or guardrail required adjacent to certain property. 
(a)  Whenever, upon complaint of the public works director or the building inspector, it is determined by the city council, after hearing and notice, that an owner or occupant of land abutting a public highway in the city has, through excavation or other means, caused the surface of his land to become lower than the grade of the adjacent street or sidewalk so as to create a danger to persons passing by on the sidewalk or vehicles upon the street, the council may order the owner or occupant of such land to erect a fence or guardrail according to specifications contained in the order or which shall be sufficient, in the judgment of the public works director, to protect the public from the danger created by the change in the grade of the lot. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing and of any resulting order issued by the council shall be given and any appeal therefrom taken in the same manner as is provided by state law with respect to the procedures adjudging buildings to be nuisances or dangerous. 
(c)  If no appeal is filed, the city may cause a proper fence or guardrail to be erected at the expense of the owner or occupant of the land. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.36) 
Chapter 32 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Maine Criminal Code, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 2 et seq.; requirement for adoption of municipal ordinances regarding discharge of firearms and bows and arrows, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3007. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Possession of alcoholic beverages on city school property. 
    No person shall have alcoholic beverages in his possession in school buildings or on schoolgrounds. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.39) 
Sec. 32-2. - Urination or defecation in public place. 
    No person shall urinate or defecate on any street, sidewalk or other public place or in any other unenclosed location which is immediately adjacent to and clearly visible from a public place. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.41) 
Sec. 32-3. - Loitering-Definitions; signs. 
(a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loitering means the act of standing or remaining idle in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area or that portion of private property utilized for public use. 
    Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the use of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also a public ground, areas and parks. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a "no loitering" sign or signs have been posted, to loiter, sit or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, or that portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or impede the passage of pedestrians or vehicles. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.34) 
Sec. 32-4. - Same-On city school property. 
    No person shall loiter on any schoolgrounds or city school property from sunset to 5:00 a.m. the following day where such grounds or property has been posted by the city school department as being closed to the public during such hours, except for the purpose of attending a meeting or other authorized function at the school or with the permission of an authorized representative of the school department. For purposes of this section, the term "loitering" shall not include the use of city schoolgrounds solely for the purpose of crossing between two points not located on city school property. The time of sunset shall be determined by reference to such times as computed for Augusta, Maine, by the Nautical Almanac Office of the United States Naval Observatory converted to the standard of time in force in the state on that day. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.37) 
Sec. 32-5. - Damaging property. 
    No person shall maliciously destroy or damage any public property, or any private property not his own. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.16) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 806. 
Sec. 32-6. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate the discharge of firearms within the city in order to promote and enhance the safety and welfare of its inhabitants. It is intended to protect the rights of landowners and the interests of persons who use firearms in work and recreation. 
(b)  Discharge prohibited in certain areas. No person shall fire or discharge any gun, revolver, pistol, air-operated or gas-operated gun or firearm of any description within the area as designated by the map attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived, except in cases where such act is expressly permitted by state law. A copy of such map is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to officers charged with the enforcement of law; to persons discharging firearms in the defense of person or property; to the discharge of firearms in duly authorized rifle ranges, pistol ranges, target ranges or shooting galleries; to the discharge of firearms during military exercises; to the discharge of firearms by members of veterans' organizations and other similar organizations in connection with public ceremonies; or to the discharge of blank cartridges for theatrical purposes or for signal purposes in athletic contests or sporting events. 
(d)  Enforcement. Police officers of the city shall have the authority to enforce this section. 
(e)  Shooting nuisance dogs or wild animals. Except in emergency circumstances under which a property owner is permitted by state law to kill dogs or wild animals found in the act of attacking or worrying that person's domestic animals or destroying that person's property, no person shall discharge firearms within the city limits for the purpose of shooting such nuisance dogs or wild animals without first notifying the police department of his/her intention to do so and of the approximate time and place where the shooting is to occur. In the emergency circumstances described in this subsection (e), any person shooting a dog or wild animal shall notify the police department immediately following such shooting. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.13) 
State Law reference- Requirement for adoption of municipal ordinances regarding discharge of firearms and bows and arrows, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3007. 
Secs. 32-7-32-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Prohibited acts by minors, 28-A M.R.S.A. § 2051 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 32-31-32-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 32-49. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew hours means 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. every day. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
    Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
Sec. 32-50. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
Sec. 32-51. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 32-50 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 32-50(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
Sec. 32-52. - Enforcement. 
    Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 32-51 is present. 
Sec. 32-53. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  When required by applicable law, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 32-50(a) and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
Secs. 32-54-32-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SYNTHETIC DRUGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-08192013, adopted Sept. 3, 2013, amended the Code by adding provisions numbered as § 13-7. In order to use multiple sections for this subject matter the editor has added the provisions of Ord. No. 10-08192013 as herein set out. 

Sec. 32-71. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the availability of products which are enhanced with synthetic chemicals, which chemicals mimic the effects of controlled substances on users, because these products are a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 10-08192013, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 32-72. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of interpreting this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Bath salts, synthetic cathinones, synthetic stimulants: Any crystalline or powder product in crystalline, loose-powder, block, tablet, or capsule form, or any stimulant-type product, when the label is in any way false or misleading. Street names for these products include, but are not limited to: Bliss, Blue Silk, Cloud Nine, Drone, Energy-I, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Meow Meow, Ocean Burst, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Knight, White Lightening, Blizzard, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Euphoria, Hurricane, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Pixie Dust, Posh, Scarface, Lovely Dovey, Aura, MDPV, MDPK, MTV, Maddie, Hurricane Charlie, Black Rob, Super Coke, PV, Peeve, Meph, Drone, MCAT. This definition shall include any product to which any synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound has been added which has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product whether or not the label meets the requirements herein. 
    Drug: An article that is intended to affect the function of the body of humans. 
    Illicit synthetic drugs: Spice, synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic marijuana, bath salts, synthetic cathinones, synthetic stimulants, and misbranded drugs as defined herein. 
    Misbranded drug: Any drug for which the label is in any way false or misleading. 
    Spice, synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic marijuana: Any aromatic plant material in granular, loose leaf or powder form, or in liquid or as a food additive, or any herbal-incense-type stimulant or hallucinogen product, when the label is in any way false or misleading, or which does not contain a label specifying (1) the identity of the commodity and (2) the name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor. Street names for these products include, but are not limited to: Bliss, Black Mamba, Bombay Blue, Fake Weed, Genie, Spice, Zohai, K2, K3, Smoke, PotPourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Serenity, Chronic Spice, Spice Gold, Spice Silver, Skunk, Mr. Nice Guy, Mr. Happy, K3 Legal, Sence, Smoke, Chill X, Earth Impact, Galaxy Gold, Space Truckin, Solar Flare, Moon Rocks, Aroma, Scope, Sky High, Atomic, G-20, Guerrilla Warfare, Makes Scents, g-I3, Tiger Shark, California Dreams, Dank, Bullet, Mind Trip, Voodoo Child, Jazz, Nightlights, Matrix, Hypnotiq, AK47, Maui Wowie, Cloud 9, Daylights, Joker, Dead Man Walking, Brain Storm, Soul Sence, Kush, Kush Mania, Dragons Fire, Lucid, Mad Hatter, Scooby Snax, D-ZL, OMG, Demon, Barely In, Pineapple Express, Hayze. This definition shall include any plant material to which any synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound has been added which has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product whether or not the label meets the requirements herein. 
    Synthetic chemical or Synthetic chemical compound: Any chemical or chemical compound whose molecular make up is similar to those substances listed as controlled substances in 17-A M.R.S. § 1101(16-A) (including any isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers, esters, and ethers of such substances) or to those substances listed in 17-A M.R.S. § 1102(4)(F) and whose intended use when introduced into the human body is to mimic or simulate the effects of a controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 10-08192013, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 32-73. - Prohibition of illicit synthetic drugs. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to possess, use, provide, sell, produce, manufacture, or distribute, or to offer, display, market, or advertise for sale, any illicit synthetic drug. 
(b)  In determining whether a product is prohibited by this article, statements on package labeling such as "not for human consumption" may be disregarded when other relevant factors (viewed alone or in totality) indicate that the product is intended to be consumed or ingested by humans, or is a product regulated by this article. Other relevant factors that may be used to determine whether a product or sale is prohibited by this article include, but are not limited to: verbal or written representations at the point of sale regarding the purpose, methods, use, or effect of the product; aspects of the packaging or labeling suggesting that the user will achieve a "high," euphoria, relaxation, mood enhancement, or that the product has other effects on the body; the cost of the product is disproportionately higher than other products marketed for the same use; the product contains a warning label stating or suggesting that the product is in compliance with state laws regulating controlled substances; the product's name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an illicit street drug; illicit or underground methods of sale or delivery are employed by the seller or provider; the product resembles an illicit street drug such as cocaine, methamphetamine, or marijuana. 
(c)  Defense. It shall be a defense to the prosecution of a violation of this article that a product is specifically excepted by, or regulated within and in compliance with, state or federal law. For the purposes of this section, it shall not be a defense that a product is not subject to regulation unless the product is specifically excepted from regulation; mere "non-regulation" by these acts without a specific regulatory exemption does not render a product exempt under this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-08192013, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 32-74. - Sale of certain products for human consumption prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to provide, sell, or offer for sale a product for human consumption when the product is labeled "not for human consumption" or contains similar warnings. 
(Ord. No. 10-08192013, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 32-75. - Violation and seizure. 
(a)  Each package shall be a separate violation. The fine for each violation shall be $500.00. 
(b)  Any products found in violation of this section may be seized and held as evidence to be used in any future proceeding and may be disposed of as appropriate after their use for evidentiary purposes is no longer required. 
(Ord. No. 10-08192013, 9-3-2013) 
Chapter 34 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal parks, trees and playgrounds generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3252 et seq.; designation of safe zones in areas frequented by minors, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3253; public shade trees, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3281 et seq.; appointment and duties of tree wardens, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3282; removal of trees, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3283; destruction or injury to trees prohibited, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3284. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park means any publicly owned area maintained by the city parks and recreation department for the pursuit and enjoyment of leisure and recreational activities, in addition to any one of the following areas within the boundaries shown on the records at the assessor's office: Middle School Park, Mount Apatite Park, Central Park, Moulton Park, Pulsifer Park, Auburn Municipal Beach, Pettengill Park, Union Street Gully, Raymond Park, Camp Exchange Day Camp, Riverfront Park and Bonney Park, West Pitch Park, Lakeview Park and Cleveland Field, Chestnut Street Park, Garfield Road Park, North River Road Boat Launch, Drummond Street Playground, Lake Street Playground, and Festival Plaza. 
Secs. 34-2-34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 34-21. - Appointment of parks and recreation director. 
    The parks and recreation director shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve as head of the parks and recreation department. 
Sec. 34-22. - Duties of parks and recreation director. 
    The parks and recreation director shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Does work involving responsibility for developing and administering a comprehensive program of community cultural, recreational and other leisure time activities. 
(2)  Performs responsible professional recreation and park duties in the planning, organizing and direction of a citywide park, athletic and recreational area maintenance and park capital improvement program, including Ingersoll Ice Arena; 
(3)  Prepares budget requests for recreation activities, park development and maintenance, capital equipment, the capital improvement program, the arena enterprise account and the special recreation activities account, and prepares grants for recreation programming and park development. 
(4)  Controls expenditures in order that they will be kept within appropriations. 
(5)  Coordinates the parks and recreation program with other public, private and quasi-public groups providing park and recreation opportunities for the community. 
(6)  Serves as the ex officio member of the parks and recreation advisory board and advises it on parks and recreation issues. 
(7)  Recommends to the city manager program and facilities fees and charges and negotiates contracts leading to the rental of the arena. 
(8)  Ensures that program objectives are met through the selection, assignment and supervision of professional, supervisory and other personnel assigned to the department. 
(9)  Performs other duties assigned by the city manager. 
Secs. 34-23-34-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-48. - Establishment of park rules and fees. 
    The director of the parks and recreation department shall recommend to the city manager and the parks and recreation advisory board and then to the city council rules and fees governing the use of parks and other public lands, which shall be posted on the city's website. An up-to-date copy of such rules shall also be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 18-1.6) 
Sec. 34-49. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of the rules and regulations in this article adopted by the parks and recreation department shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
Sec. 34-50. - Park season. 
    In general, all municipal parks are open yearround but are maintained for public use only from May 1 to November 30 annually, with the exception of Mount Apatite Park, which is open and maintained all year. 
Sec. 34-51. - Protection of park property. 
    Except with the permission of an authorized representative of the parks and recreation department, no person in a park shall: 
(1)  Willfully mark, damage or remove any building, structure, tables, benches, signs or other similar appurtenances or equipment. 
(2)  Dig up, disfigure or remove any soil or vegetation or make any excavation. This does not apply to the area of Mount Apatite Park known as the mines. Here, digging, sorting through and otherwise disrupting the exposed mineral resources, to a depth of not greater than two feet, for the purpose of amateur gem and mineral collecting will be permitted. Persons engaging in this activity shall use hand tools only. 
(3)  Construct any building or structure or run any public service utility into or across such park lands. 
(4)  Throw away or leave trash or refuse except in proper receptacles. 
Sec. 34-52. - Operation of vehicles. 
    No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Operate a motor vehicle except with a valid operator's license. 
(2)  Operate an unregistered motor vehicle. 
(3)  Fail to observe all traffic signs. 
(4)  Drive any vehicle except a bicycle on or in any area except paved park roads or parking areas as may on occasion be specifically designated by the parks and recreation department. This subsection (4) shall not apply to the operation of snowmobiles in Mount Apatite Park during periods when there is an adequate snow cover. 
Sec. 34-53. - Recreational activities. 
    No person in a park shall: 
(1)  Swim, bathe or wade in the waters of any park except in such places as are specifically designated for swimming and bathing purposes and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted by the parks and recreation department. 
(2)  Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife. 
(3)  Discharge firearms. 
(4)  Set up or erect tents, shacks or other temporary shelters except at such times and under such conditions as are permitted, in writing, by the parks and recreation department. 
(5)  Build or attempt to build any fires without the written permission of an authorized representative of the parks and recreation department, and without the proper permits from the fire department as may be required. 
(6)  Skateboard, inline skate or roller skate on any paved or unpaved surface, or within any playing court area, without the written permission of an authorized representative of the parks and recreation department. This subsection (6) shall not apply to the participation in or viewing of skateboarding, inline skating or roller skating on and within a designated skating area. 
(7)  Ride a bicycle or roller skates or roller blades on the grass or landscaped areas, on park stairways, or in a reckless manner anywhere within the park. Riding bicycles and using roller skates or roller blades on park stairways in a responsible manner, so as not to endanger other users or interfere with their enjoyment of the park, is permitted. 
(8)  Enter or engage in any activity after dusk and/or before dawn, without the written permission of an authorized representative of the department. This subsection (8) shall not apply to the participation in or viewing of authorized recreation activities in Pettengill Park under the lights up to the hour of 11:00 p.m. 
Sec. 34-54. - Alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs. 
(a)  No person shall have any alcoholic beverages in his possession in a park area except: 
(1)  In connection with a group outing at Camp Exchange Day Camp in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the parks and recreation department. 
(2)  At the Hasty Community Center on occasions where specifically permitted by and in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the parks and recreation department. 
(3)  In connection with any special event or activity as specifically permitted by and in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the parks and recreation department. 
(b)  No person shall have any illegal drugs or other illegal substances in his possession in any park at any time. 
Sec. 34-55. - Entering area closed to public. 
    No person in a park shall enter an area which has been posted as being closed to the public. 
Sec. 34-56. - Loitering. 
    No person in a park shall loiter in such a manner as to hinder the free passage of vehicles or pedestrians to any place or building within the park. 
Sec. 34-57. - Sales activities. 
    No person shall offer any article or thing for sale in a park without first obtaining written permission from an authorized representative of the parks and recreation department. 
Sec. 34-58. - Fishing in Gully Brook. 
    No person over the age of 15 years shall fish in that part of Gully Brook which flows through Pettengill Park. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.30) 
Chapter 39 - SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 39-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "City of Auburn Sex Offender Residency Restrictions Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 01-02062017, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 39-2. - Findings and purpose. 
    The city promotes and strives to create a safe environment for its citizens to live and raise families and considers the promotion of the safety and welfare of children to be of paramount importance. The city recognizes that sex offenders who prey upon children may have a high rate of recidivism. Notwithstanding the fact that certain persons convicted of sex offenses or sexually violent offenses are required to register pursuant to the Maine Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act of 1999, 34-A M.R.S.A. § 11201 et seq., as may be amended from time to time, the city finds that further protective measures are necessary and warranted to safeguard places where children congregate. The purpose of this chapter is to provide such further protective measures while balancing the interests and residential needs of sex offenders. 
(Ord. No. 01-02062017, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 39-3. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3014, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 01-02062017, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 39-4. - Definitions. 
    Setback. A 750 foot radius surrounding "restricted property." 
    Designated sex offender(s). Person(s) convicted of Class A, B or C sex offenses committed against persons who had not attained 14 years of age at the time of the offense, regardless of whether the offense was committed in the State of Maine or another jurisdiction. 
    Residence. The temporary or permanent occupation or use of a place, including, but not limited to a domicile, for the purpose of living, residing or dwelling. 
    Restricted property. 
(1)  The real property comprising a public or private elementary, middle or secondary school; and 
(2)  the real property comprising a municipally owned property or state-owned property that is leased to a nonprofit organization for purposes of a park, athletic field or recreation facility that is open to the public where children are the primary users. 
(Ord. No. 01-02062017, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 39-5. - Restricted property map; restrictions. 
(a)  The ICT department, with the assistance of the police department, shall prepare and file with the city clerk and police department an official map showing restricted property as defined by this chapter. Said map is hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter. The GIS department, with the assistance of the police department, shall by July 1 of each year recommend updates to the map to the city council to reflect any changes in the locations of any restricted property and setbacks. The city council may amend the restricted property official map by council order, and any amended official map shall be filed with the city clerk and the police department. 
(b)  No designated sex offender shall reside within the setback of any restricted property. 
(Ord. No. 01-02062017, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 39-6. - Exceptions. 
    A designated sex offender maintaining a residence within the setback of a restricted property is not in violation of this ordinance if the offender's residence was established and consistently maintained as the offender's residence prior to March 1st, 2017, the date of adoption of this chapter. A designated sex offender is not in violation of this chapter if the restricted property is created, moved or enlarged and such creation, movement or enlargement results in a designated sex offender residing within the setback of a restricted property, as long as the offender's residence[e6] was in place and consistently maintained prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 01-02062017, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 39-7. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A designated sex offender who, thirty (30) days after actual receipt of written notice sent by regular mail or hand-delivered from the city, acting by and through its police department, is in violation of this chapter shall be subject to an action brought by the city to enforce the requirements of this chapter. The city may file a legal action against the violator seeking any and all remedies to which it is entitled pursuant to state and local laws, including, without limitation, declaratory and injunctive relief. 
    The city may also seek a penalty in the minimum amount of $500.00 per day. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. In the event the city is the prevailing party in any action under this chapter, it shall be entitled to an award of its reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and the costs of any expert witness fees incurred by the city. All civil penalties shall inure to the benefit of the City of Auburn. 
(b)  Property owners who, 30 days after written notice from the city lease or rent any residence to a designated sex offender within the setback from a restricted property shall be subject to an action brought by the city to enforce the requirements of this chapter. The city may seek injunctive relief to require compliance with the provisions to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-02062017, 2-27-2017) 
Sec. 39-8. - Severability. 
    If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 01-02062017, 2-27-2017) 
Chapter 42 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Maine Traveler Information Services, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1901 et seq.; official business and directional signs, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1906; advertising on highways, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1153; removal of political signs, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1917-A; authority for municipal regulation of directional signs, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1922; advertising defined, 36 M.R.S.A. § 1752(1). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-19-42-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTIONAL SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Maine Traveler Information Services, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1901 et seq.; official business and directional signs, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1906; authority for municipal regulation, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1922. 

Sec. 42-40. - Purpose and policy. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide tourists and travelers with information and guidance concerning public accommodations, facilities, commercial services, and other businesses and points of scenic, cultural, historic, educational, recreational, agricultural, and religious interest. To provide this information and guidance, it is the policy of the city: 
(1)  To establish and maintain a system of official business directional signs; 
(2)  To prohibit and control the proliferation of roadside signs; and 
(3)  To provide a uniform procedure and criteria to govern their location and approval consistent with state laws governing official business directional signs. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5.1) 
Sec. 42-41. - Definitions. 
    Unless another meaning is given expressly or by clear implication, all terms used in this division shall have the meanings set forth in 23 M.R.S.A. § 1903. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5.2) 
Sec. 42-42. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply only to official business directional signs. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5.7) 
Sec. 42-43. - Eligibility. 
    Lawful businesses and points of interest and cultural, historic, recreational, educational, and religious facilities are eligible to contract with the state for the placement of up to six official business directional signs within the city, but only at the intersections or locations listed in section 42-44. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5.3) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1909. 
Sec. 42-44. - Location. 
    Official business directional signs shall be located in accordance with the provisions contained in 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 1911 and 1912 and chapter 200 of the state department of transportation administrative guidelines on approaches to or at the following intersections designated by the city council: 
(1)  Turnpike Connector/Lewiston Junction Road. 
(2)  Turnpike Connector/Washington Street. 
(3)  Turkey Lane/Washington Street. 
(4)  Route 122/Hotel Road. 
(5)  Beech Hill Road/Washington Street. 
(6)  Old Danville Road/Danville Corner Road. 
(7)  Merrow Road/Hotel Road. 
(8)  Turnpike Connector/Hotel Road. 
(9)  Rodman Road/Washington Street. 
(10)  Rodman Road/Poland Road. 
(11)  Rodman Road/Manley Road. 
(12)  Rodman Road/Hotel Road. 
(13)  Hotel Road/Minot Avenue. 
(14)  Upper Court Street/Minot Avenue. 
(15)  Fairview Avenue/Minot Avenue. 
(16)  Rotary. 
(17)  High Street/Minot Avenue. 
(18)  Broad Street/Mill Street. 
(19)  Riverside Drive/Mill Street. 
(20)  Court Street/Union Street Bypass. 
(21)  Court Street/Goff Street. 
(22)  Court Street/Western Avenue 
(23)  Court Street/Turner Street. 
(24)  Turner Street/Union Street Bypass. 
(25)  Center Street/North River Road. 
(26)  Park Avenue/Mt. Auburn Avenue. 
(27)  Gracelawn Road/Mt. Auburn Avenue. 
(28)  Center Street/Mt. Auburn Avenue. 
(29)  Youngs Corner Road/Hotel Road. 
(30)  Youngs Corner Road/Perkins Ridge Road. 
(31)  Lake Shore Drive/Route 4. 
(32)  West Hardscrabble Road/Lewiston Junction Road. 
(33)  Minot Avenue/Hatch Road (northerly direction only). 
(34)  High Street/Academy Street. 
(35)  Main Street/Academy Street. 
(36)  South Main Street/Mill Street. 
(37)  Lake Shore Drive/North Auburn Road. 
(38)  Center Street/Fair Street, Martin Street. 
(39)  Washington Street southbound Miami Avenue. 
(40)  Washington Street northbound Miami Avenue. 
(41)  Washington Street southbound Phil-O-Mar Street. 
(42)  Washington Street northbound Phil-O-Mar Street. 
(43)  Washington Street northbound Chasse Street. 
(44)  Washington Street southbound Chasse Street. 
(45)  Washington Street northbound Hackett Road. 
(46)  Park Avenue/Gamage Avenue. 
(47)  Perkins Ridge Road/Hatch Road (Welcomb's Corner). 
(48)  Center Street/Stetson Road. 
(49)  Fair Street/Oak Hill Road. 
(50)  Hotel Road/Manley Road. 
(51)  Summer Street/Youngs Corner Road. 
(52)  Riverside Drive/Penley Corner Road. 
(53)  Rodman Road/Twin Road. 
(54)  Washington Street northbound Adams Street. 
(55)  First Ave/Rotary Reverse Direction Connectors. 
(56)  Hackett Road/Broad Street. 
(57)  Center Street/Stanley Street. 
(58)  Center Street/Cross Street. 
(59)  Riverside Drive/Dunn Street. 
(60)  Turner Street/Gracelawn Road. 
(61)  Drummond Street/Main Street. 
(62)  Court Street/Pleasant Street (both directions). 
(63)  Minot Avenue/Elm Street. 
(64)  Pleasant Street/Elm Street. 
(65)  Millett Drive/Court Street. 
(66)  Minot Avenue/Millett Drive. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5.4; Ord. of 3-2-1998; Ord. of 12-6-1999(2); Ord. of 11-19-2001(2); Ord. of 5-2-2005(02); Ord. No. 05-07162012, 8-6-2012) 
State Law reference- Permitted locations, 3 M.R.S.A. § 1912. 
Sec. 42-45. - Design, installation and maintenance. 
    Official business directional signs shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 1901 through 1925 and chapter 200 of the state department of transportation administrative guidelines. Signs shall be nonreflectorized and no larger than 12 by 48 inches, except that a reflectorized sign of any permissible size may be permitted on an existing sign assembly displaying a reflectorized sign of the same size if such sign assembly was legally erected prior to October 7, 1985. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5.5) 
Sec. 42-46. - Application. 
    Application for an official business directional sign shall be made on forms furnished by the state department of transportation. Completed applications shall be submitted to the department of planning and permitting services for review. Upon receipt of the completed application, the department shall review the request to ensure that it conforms to the provisions of this article and shall approve, conditionally approve or reject the request based on its findings. If disapproved by the department, the reasons for disapproval shall be communicated to the applicant in writing. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the department may appeal to the county superior court within 30 days of receipt of the department's decision. If approved, the applicant may then forward the approved application and the license fee prescribed by the state law to the state commissioner of transportation for approval or disapproval. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5.6) 
State Law reference- Applications for state licensing, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1918. 
Sec. 42-47. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a civil infraction, and shall be subject to a fine of $100.00 to be paid to the city for each such offense. Each day that such violation is permitted to continue after notification by the department of planning and permitting services shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5.8) 
Secs. 42-48-42-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADVERTISING 

Sec. 42-68. - Banners over street. 
(a)  No person shall erect or suspend a banner or other similar device above a street without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city council. The permit shall specify the location of the banner or other device and the length of time during which it may remain in place, and may impose other conditions which the city council may reasonably deem necessary for the protection of the public. 
(b)  If the banner is to be hung across Court Street at the corner of Main Street, the city clerk shall issue the permit if: 
(1)  The application therefor is in writing. 
(2)  The applicant is a nonprofit organization. 
(3)  Written permission from the owners of the buildings from which the banner is to be hung is presented along with the application. 
(4)  Proof is provided in a form satisfactory to the city clerk that arrangements have been made to provide liability insurance in the amount equal to the maximum liability under the Tort Claims Act, 14 M.R.S.A. § 8101 et seq., for each occurrence insuring the city and its officers and employees against any claim which may arise in connection with the hanging of the banner. 
(5)  No more than one banner will be hung at that location at the same time. 
(c)  In any case in which the city clerk is in doubt as to whether the criteria for issuing the permit have been met, he shall refer the matter to the city council for a determination. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.12) 
Sec. 42-69. - Attaching advertising matter to motor vehicles. 
    No person shall attach any advertising material of any kind, such as handbills, cards or papers, to the door handle, windshield, windshield wiper or any other portion of any motor vehicle parked or standing in a street or public place, nor shall any person deposit any such material or samples of any kind within or upon any such vehicle so parked or standing. 
(Code 1967, § 25-3.2) 
Sec. 42-70. - Distributing advertising matter at night. 
    No person shall go about the streets or other public places for the purpose of distributing any poster, handbills, cards, samples of any kind, or other matter used for the purpose of advertising after 9:00 p.m. and before 9:00 a.m. 
(Code 1967, § 25-3.3) 
Sec. 42-71. - Attaching advertising matter to public property. 
    No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp, paste or otherwise affix any sign, advertisement or other matter upon any electric light or public utilities pole, or fire hydrant, or on any bridge, pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, public building or any property or thing belonging to the city or located in the public streets or other public places; provided that this section shall not be construed to prevent any public official from so doing for any public purpose. 
(Code 1967, § 25-3.5) 
Chapter 44 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Maine Hazardous Waste, Septage and Solid Waste Management Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 1301 et seq.; Maine Refuse Disposal District Enabling Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 1726-A et seq.; solid waste management and recycling, 38 M.R.S.A. § 2101 et seq.; municipal recycling, 38 M.R.S.A. § 2133; municipal landfill fees, 38 M.R.S.A. § 2204; municipal authority to abate nuisances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3104; municipal acquisition of public dumping grounds, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3351; prohibited dumping, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3352. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial activity means any property or service provider, which is required and/or has received a license from the city to conduct business and/or a structure used for commercial or business purposes including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Hotels, motels, bed and breakfast facilities, restaurants, warehouses; 
(2)  Markets, bakeries, grocery stores, food vendors; 
(3)  Manufacturing or industrial facilities; 
(4)  Business offices; 
(5)  Any business establishment adjoining or within a residential structure; 
(6)  Trailer parks and manufactured home parks; and 
(7)  Condominiums. 
    Commercial waste means solid waste generated by a commercial property or as a result of commercial activity. 
    Multiple-unit apartment building means an apartment building of four or more dwelling units. 
    Owner means the actual owner of the building. The term "owner" does not include any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a limited liability company, a limited liability partnership, or a limited partnership or a corporation. 
    Residential properties means any property, located in the city, upon which is situated a residential structure containing between one and three dwelling units and/or owner-occupied apartment buildings containing between four and seven dwelling units. To qualify as an owner-occupied apartment building, the owner would need to demonstrate through ownership documents and vehicle registration, driver's license or some other acceptable forms that he does in fact own the building and resides at that address. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2003, § A) 
Secs. 44-2-44-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 44-21. - Residential collection; fees. 
(a)  The city will provide for the collection of solid waste and recyclable material from all residential properties as defined herein. Fees for residential waste collection shall be in accordance with city costs on a per unit basis. 
(b)  Occupants of residential properties that receive city waste collection shall utilize suitable containers for the storage, transportation and disposal of solid waste. This includes all solid waste placed curbside for disposal. The weight of solid waste placed in each suitable container shall not exceed 30 pounds. 
(c)  All residents who live in residential structures receiving city waste collection shall separate recyclable material from their rubbish. Recyclable material must either be transported to the facility or be placed in suitable recycling containers for curbside collection. 
(d)  Recyclable material and solid waste are to be set curbside no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding regularly scheduled waste collection and no later than 7:00 a.m. of the day of waste collection as established by public works. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2003, § B) 
Sec. 44-22. - Collection from apartment buildings; fees. 
(a)  The city will collect solid waste and recyclable material from multiple unit apartment buildings for only those buildings owned by applicants who complete, submit and receive approval of an application to continue this service. 
(b)  All residential properties containing four to seven units, excluding owner-occupied, will be assessed a fee per unit for solid waste and recycling collection and disposal. To qualify for owner-occupied exemption the applicant must show proof of building residency. Fees per unit will be assessed and billed in accordance with the city's billing and collection policy. Failure to pay fee will result in termination of service. The city may adjust the fee annually to reflect city's costs. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2003, § C) 
Sec. 44-23. - Commercial collection excluded. 
    Solid waste and recyclable material will not be collected by the city from any commercial activity or property. 
(Ord. of 11-3-2003, § C) 
Sec. 44-24. - Time for setting out waste for collection. 
    No person shall put out waste for collection sooner than 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding the date on which waste is collected by the city in such location, and no person shall allow any waste containers to remain on any street or sidewalk for more than 24 hours after the collection of waste has been completed. Waste must be out for collection no later than 7:00 a.m. of the day on which waste is collected by the city in such location. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3.1) 
Sec. 44-25. - Standards for waste containers. 
    No person shall put out waste, including garbage, for collection by the city except in suitable, durable containers covered by a tight fitting cover or securely closed plastic bags designed for trash disposal, which are: 
(1)  Watertight and flytight; 
(2)  Free from sharp edges and not exceeding 30 pounds in weight, including contents; and 
(3)  No larger than 33 gallons in capacity. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3.3) 
Sec. 44-26. - Types of waste collected by city. 
    No person shall put out waste for collection by the city other than household waste, except that waste from construction repairs or household waste which is too large to fit inside standard containers may be put out for collection by special permission of the public works director. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3.4) 
Sec. 44-27. - Collection of leaves and yard waste. 
    The term "household waste," includes leaves, grass cuttings, weeds, branches and the like. Such materials, not to exceed four containers per week, must be contained, and branches and prunings shall not exceed two inches in diameter and 24 inches in length. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3.5) 
Sec. 44-28. - Disposal of ashes. 
    No person shall put out hot ashes for collection, and all ashes put out for collection shall be separated from all other kinds of waste and secured in a closed container. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3.6) 
Sec. 44-29. - Duties of landlords. 
    Every owner of rental property shall provide his tenants with a sufficient number of waste containers meeting the requirements of section 44-25 to meet their normal weekly requirements for waste disposal. Such containers shall be stored in a sightly manner on the premises at locations reasonably accessible to the tenants at all times when not legally upon the street or sidewalk for collection. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3.7) 
Sec. 44-30. - Right of city to refuse to collect certain waste. 
    The city may refuse to accept for collection any waste which has been put out for collection in a manner which does not comply with the requirements of sections 44-24 through 44-28, including sharp objects which could protrude from waste containers, such as broken glass and other sharp objects such as razors, hypodermic needles, etc., which materials shall be contained in a puncture-resistant container. The owner of such waste shall transport it or cause it to be transported to the municipal solid waste disposal facility at his own expense. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3.8) 
Sec. 44-31. - Unauthorized removal of waste set out for collection. 
    No unauthorized person shall remove any garbage or waste or any portion of any garbage or waste that has been placed for collection by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3.9) 
Sec. 44-32. - Accumulations of refuse. 
    No person shall allow any material to collect or lie on property which he owns, occupies or controls in such a manner that it attracts flies, annoys or interferes with the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public, emits odors, or is unsightly or is offensive. 
(Code 1967, § 25-2.1) 
Sec. 44-33. - Transporting offensive substances. 
    No person shall carry or convey through any street or public place any substance or any package or bag containing any substance in such a manner that it drips, leaks or drops and emits odors, or is offensive, nor shall such a conveyance or containers be left standing in any street or any public place. 
(Code 1967, § 25-2.2) 
Secs. 44-34-44-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING STANDARDS 

Secs. 44-55-44-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 44-84. - Designation of place. 
    The city manager shall designate a place as a public waste facility for the depositing of rubbish, ashes, cinders, tin cans, junk, and other household or commercial or industrial waste or refuse, and no person shall deposit such materials elsewhere than at such designated facility. 
(Code 1967, § 25-2.3) 
Sec. 44-85. - Unauthorized removal of materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take any materials of any kind or nature from or about any waste disposal facility without a permit from the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 25-2.6) 
Sec. 44-86. - Regulations for use. 
    Use of any waste disposal facility shall be governed by this article and by such regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article as the city manager may establish for this purpose. Notice of any such regulations shall be given by publication in a local newspaper and by conspicuous posting at the site of any waste disposal facility. The term "waste disposal facility," for purposes of this article, includes the waste facility located on Goldthwaite Road. 
(Code 1967, § 25-2.7) 
Sec. 44-87. - Fees for use of waste disposal facilities. 
(a)  The city manager may levy fees in accordance with a schedule adopted by Mid Maine Waste Action Corporation for disposal of nonresidential solid waste at the energy recovery plant upon those persons who generate such waste. The fees assessed shall also include the city's cost of administering the billing process. 
(b)  For purposes of this subsection (b), the term "nonresidential solid waste" means all industrial and commercial waste, including waste from multiunit apartment buildings in common ownership consisting of eight or more dwelling units. 
(c)  Contractors and utilities with prior credit approval will be billed on a monthly basis for services provided. 
(d)  Interest shall be due upon any disposal fees which remain unpaid for more than 30 days from the date of billing. The rate of interest shall be the same as that which has been currently established for unpaid municipal property taxes and may be amended from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1967, §§ 25-2.8, 25-2.9) 
Chapter 46 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate streets and sidewalks, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009; local highway law, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2701 et seq.; construction, maintenance and repair, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3052 et seq.; drainage and watercourses, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3251 et seq.; barriers, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3271; excavations, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3351 et seq.; emergency excavation permits, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3352; state uniform road numbering, 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 59, 1351. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of words and phrases as contained in section 46-145 are hereby made applicable to this chapter. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street includes highways, ways, avenues, courts, lanes, alleys, parks, squares, places, sidewalks and bridges. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with chapter 2, article VII. This section shall not apply to a violation of any section of this chapter which contains a specific penalty provision. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.33) 
Sec. 46-3. - Complete streets policy. 
(a)  Complete streets. The City of Auburn will plan for, design, construct, operate, and maintain an appropriate and integrated transportation system that will meet the needs of motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, wheelchair users, transit vehicles and riders, freight haulers, emergency responders, and residents of all ages and abilities. 
(1)  Transportation facilities that support the concept of complete streets include, but are not limited to, pavement markings and signs; street and sidewalk lighting; sidewalk and pedestrian safety improvements; Americans with Disabilities Act and Title VI compliance; transit accommodations; bicycle accommodations including intersection detection and appropriate signage and markings; and streetscapes that appeal to and promote pedestrian use. 
(2)  The system's design will be consistent with and supportive of local neighborhoods, recognizing that transportation needs vary and must be balanced in a flexible, safe, and cost effective manner. 
(b)  Projects. Those involved in the planning and design of projects within the public right-of-way will give consideration to all users and modes of travel from the start of planning and design work. Transportation improvements shall be viewed as opportunities to create safer, more accessible streets for all users. This shall apply to new construction, reconstruction, and rehabilitation. The complete streets committee shall be briefed on potential future projects of this nature during or immediately following the annual development of the city's capital improvement program. This will allow the committee to provide its views regarding complete streets policy early in the planning and design process. 
(c)  Exceptions. Exceptions to this policy may be made under the circumstances listed below: 
(1)  Street projects may exclude those elements of this policy that would require the accommodation of street uses prohibited by law; 
(2)  Ordinary maintenance activities such as mowing, snowplowing, sweeping, spot repair, joint or crack sealing, or pothole filling do not require that elements of this policy be applied beyond the scope of that maintenance activity; 
(3)  Ordinary maintenance paving projects may only exclude the elements of this policy that would require increasing pavement width. However, when such projects do occur, the condition of existing facilities supporting alternate transportation modes should be evaluated as well as the appropriateness of modifying existing pavement markings and signage that supports such alternate modes. This exception does not apply to street reconstruction projects; 
(4)  Street reconstruction projects and maintenance paving projects which involve widening pavement may exclude elements of this policy when the accommodation of a specific use is expected to: 
a.  Require more space than is physically available; or 
b.  Be located where both current and future demand is proven absent; or 
c.  Drastically increase project costs and equivalent alternatives exist within close proximity; or 
d.  Have adverse impacts on environmental resources such as streams, wetlands, floodplains, or on historic structures or sites above and beyond the impacts of currently existing infrastructure. 
(5)  In order for an exception to be granted under the conditions stated above and prior to finalizing the design and budget for the intended project, the city engineer and director of public works must first consult with the city planner and city manager. If the city manager concludes that an exception to the policy is warranted, the administrator or the staff representative to the complete streets committee shall consult with the committee regarding the project and the requested exception. If, after this consultation, a difference of opinion exists between the committee and staff regarding an exception that has been granted, the committee may forward its concerns to the city council for its consideration. 
(6)  The city council may grant such other exceptions as it sees fit. 
(d)  Intergovernmental cooperation. The city will cooperate with the City of Lewiston and with other transportation agencies including the Maine Department of Transportation (MDOT) and Androscoggin Transportation Resource Center (ATRC) to ensure the principles and practices of complete streets are embedded within their planning, design, construction, and maintenance activities. The two cities will specifically cooperate to ensure the transportation network flows seamlessly between the two communities in accordance with local and regional road, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian plans and mutually agreed upon design criteria. 
(e)  Design criteria. The city, through its public works department, shall develop and adopt design criteria, standards, and guidelines based upon recognized best practices in street design, construction, and operation. To the greatest extent possible, the city shall coordinate with the City of Auburn [Lewiston] to adopt the same standards with particular emphasis on pedestrian and bicycle markings and wayfinding signage. Resources to be referenced in developing these standards shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the latest editions of: American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, Guide for Planning, Designing, and Operating Pedestrian Facilities, and Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities; Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach; National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) Urban Bikeway Design Guide; U.S. Access Board Public Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines; Androscoggin Transportation Resource Center (ATRC) Complete Streets, A Guide to Best Management and Design Practice; Highway Capacity Manual and Highway Safety Manual; the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; and any applicable policies and guidance issued by the Maine Department of Transportation. 
    The cities will be permitted to consider innovative or non-traditional design options that provide a comparable level of safety and utility for users as those listed above. 
(f)  Community context. Implementation of this Policy shall take into account the goal of enhancing the context and character of the surrounding built and natural environments. Transportation facilities, including roads, should be adapted to fit and enhance the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(g)  Network. Special attention should be given to projects which enhance the overall transportation system and its connectivity. Specifically, high priority should be given to: 
(1)  Corridors providing primary access to one or more significant destinations such as a parks or recreation areas, schools, shopping/commercial areas, public transportation, or employment centers; 
(2)  Corridors serving a relatively high number of users of non-motorized transportation modes; 
(3)  Corridors providing important continuity or connectivity links to existing pedestrian or bicycle networks; 
(4)  Projects identified in regional or local bicycle pedestrian plans prepared by organizations such as the ATRC and other associated groups. 
(h)  Performance measures. The city administrator and/or designee shall report to the planning board and city council on an annual basis on the transportation projects undertaken within the prior year and planned within the coming year and the extent to which each of these projects has met the complete streets ordinance. 
(i)  Implementation. This policy will be primarily implemented through planning comprehensive complete streets networks regionally and within each city. 
    Additional implementation activities will include, but not be limited to: developing project checklists that incorporate complete streets elements in the cities' overall design processes; annual review of capital improvement plans and unified planning work programs; establishing design manuals that clearly set forth the complete streets standards; and directing the planning boards to evaluate changes to the cities' respective land development codes that will extend the complete streets concept into private developments through appropriate subdivision and site plan regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-03062017, 3-20-2017) 
Cross reference- Complete streetss committee, § 2-482.2 et seq. 
Secs. 46-4-46-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET AND SIDEWALK USE 

Sec. 46-23. - Awnings. 
    No person shall place or establish or maintain any awning, shade or other thing over any part of any street or sidewalk, unless the awning, shade or other thing is safely made, fixed, supported and maintained, and unless the lowest part of the awning, shade or other thing is at least eight feet in height above the sidewalk or street. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.4) 
Sec. 46-24. - Cellar doors and similar openings. 
    No person shall erect, construct, maintain or keep any cellar door or passageway into any cellar or basement, or excavation of any kind, extending into or occupying any part of any street, townway, sidewalk or public passageway, unless such doorway, passageway or excavation is kept covered with a suitable and substantial plank covering or grate, level with the sidewalk or street. No person shall suffer any such cellar door or passage from the sidewalk into any cellar to be kept open when not in immediate use, or in any case after sunset. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.9) 
Sec. 46-25. - Obstructions. 
    Unless otherwise legally authorized, no person shall place or keep or cause to be placed or kept any article on any street or sidewalk except for immediate conveyance across the street or sidewalk. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the necessary use of the streets by any vehicles operated by the city or by any public utility. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.11(a), (b)) 
Sec. 46-26. - Planter and tree restrictions; prior approval required. 
(a)  Plants, trees shrubs or flowers, whether real or artificial, placed in a suitable pot or container, and trees, displayed or located on any sidewalk or street for the purpose of beautifying the street are permitted, provided that no sign or device containing any advertising shall be attached to any such display. No such display shall be permitted until it has been certified by the chief of police that it will not interfere with or constitute hazard to pedestrian or motor traffic, and by the city planner to be in good taste and to add to the attractiveness of the place where it is to be located. 
(b)  Plans for any such display, in such detail as the chief of police or city planner may require, shall be submitted to each before such approval is given. Any such display may be required to be removed on ten days' written notice signed by the chief of police and the city planner certifying that continuance of such display would not be in the best interests of the city. If such display is not removed within ten days after notice to do so, the city may remove it at the expense of the abutting owner and dispose of it in any practicable manner without any liability to the abutting owner or the owner of the display for so doing. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.11(c)) 
Sec. 46-27. - Permit required for display of goods on street or sidewalk; procedure. 
(a)  No person engaged in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise shall deposit, pile, place or display for purposes of sale, or cause or permit to be deposited, piled, placed or displayed for the purpose of sale, any such goods, wares or merchandise upon or overhanging any sidewalk or street without first obtaining a permit as provided in this section. Application for a permit for sale of goods shall be made to the city clerk on a form provided by the clerk and accompanied by a permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a petition for permission to display and sell goods, wares or merchandise upon any part of the public street, including the sidewalk, setting forth such information regarding the proposed sale as is necessary to process the request for a permit, the city clerk, upon consultation with the chief of police or his authorized representative may issue a permit for such sale after determining that the public safety and convenience will not be adversely affected. 
(c)  The permit shall specify the general nature of the sale, the items to be offered for sale, the business days (not more than ten per calendar year) and the hours during each day in which such sale will take place, the location in which the sale is to be held, and the name of the permit holder. 
(d)  Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be canceled by the city clerk or his authorized representative for a violation of its terms. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.11(d), (e)) 
Sec. 46-28. - Playing in streets and on sidewalks and trails. 
    No person shall play any ball game or engage in any other play activity within the limits of any street so as to constitute a safety hazard or interfere with the convenient and free use of the street, sidewalk or trail by persons or vehicles traveling thereon, except on such streets, sidewalks or trails as may be designated as play streets, sidewalks or trails by the city manager, and then only for such period as is specifically designated. A police officer, when satisfied that a person has ridden or propelled a skateboard or inline skates in violation of this section, may, after first offering him the option of being summoned to court, impound the skateboard or inline skates for a period not exceeding ten days for the first offense, 20 days for the second offense, and 60 days for any subsequent offense. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.14) 
Sec. 46-29. - Obstructing drain or watercourse. 
    No person shall place any obstruction in any ditch or watercourse by the side of any street in the city without providing a sufficient culvert for the passage of the water that shall be acceptable to the public works director, and then only with the approval of the public works director. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.18) 
Sec. 46-30. - Painting on sidewalks. 
    No person shall paint or cause to be painted any sign, advertising or other matter upon the public sidewalks, or apply paint thereto for any purpose, in any manner, except such paint as may be applied under the direction of a public official or employee for public purposes. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.19) 
Sec. 46-31. - Protection of public safety when raising or lowering objects. 
    No person shall raise anything from, or lower anything to, any street or public place by means of a rope, chain, pulley or similar device without first providing protection satisfactory to the police chief for pedestrians or vehicles using the street. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.22) 
Sec. 46-32. - Damaging or removing barricades or warning devices. 
    No person shall damage, interfere or meddle with, remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or public place any lamp, lantern, flare or other light, barricade or danger signal erected and placed therein for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places or giving warning or notice thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.25) 
Sec. 46-33. - Depositing snow on street or sidewalk. 
(a)  Any person who shall place or cause to be placed any snow or ice upon the surface of a city maintained road or sidewalk resulting in an obstruction to vehicles traveling and parking or to pedestrians passing shall be in violation of this section and subject to penalties as provided herein. 
(b)  Exemption from the requirements of this section may be extended only in writing issued by the public works director or his designee. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding a written warning for the first offense, $50.00 fine for the second offense, and $100.00 fine for the third and all subsequent offenses. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.26; Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 4.4a) 
Sec. 46-34. - Use of space under sidewalk. 
    No person shall use or appropriate any space under a sidewalk for cellars or other underground uses without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.27) 
Sec. 46-35. - Allowing water to drain onto sidewalk. 
    No owner of any building, lot or premises shall allow rainwater or drain water to drain from such building, lot or premises onto a sidewalk or allow ditches, leaders, ducts or drainpipes to empty onto a sidewalk. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.28) 
Secs. 46-36-46-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NAMES AND NUMBERING 

Sec. 46-59. - Building numbers. 
(a)  The city engineer shall establish in writing systematized rules for assigning numbers to all houses and commercial buildings in the city and to each such house and commercial building. 
(b)  Odd numbers shall be assigned on the right side and even numbers on the left side of streets, beginning with the lowest number and proceeding in sequence with higher numbers. 
(c)  The owner of every house or commercial building shall, within ten days of receiving notice from the city engineer of the number assigned to such house or commercial building, affix to its main entrance fronting on the street a metallic or other suitable number at least three inches in height. If such house or commercial building possesses no entrance fronting on the street, such number shall be placed on some other conspicuous portion of the building. 
(d)  The city engineer may for good cause revise from time to time the rules under which house numbers are assigned, and shall give notice of the change to persons affected in the same manner that notice is given of numbers originally assigned. The owner of every house or commercial building shall, within 60 days of receiving notice from the city engineer of the new number assigned, affix such number to such house or commercial building in the manner provided for by subsection (c) of this section with respect to numbers originally assigned. 
(e)  No person shall remove, obliterate, mar, deface or destroy any house or building number attached to or painted on such house or building as required to be displayed. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.17) 
Sec. 46-60. - Tampering with street name signs. 
    No person shall injure, damage, deface, break, take down or remove or in any manner interfere with any street name sign placed in a street under authority of the city council, except a public official or employee for repair or replacement purposes. No person shall place any street name signs on any street except by authority of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.23) 
Secs. 46-61-46-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Underground Facilities Protection Act, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3360-A. 

Sec. 46-79. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide a trackable process to manage excavations within the city limits that will be in conformance with the Protection of Underground Facilities Act as described in 23 M.R.S.A. § 3360-A. Excavation and restoration standards are required to preserve the integrity, operational safety and function of the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 46-80. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person making written application to the city engineer for an excavation permit. 
    Base course means the layers of specified or selected material of designated thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface course. 
    Business day means any day other than Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. 
    Emergency excavation means an excavation which is required by necessitous circumstances. The burden shall in all cases be upon the applicant for a permit to demonstrate the existence of necessitous circumstances requiring immediate excavation necessary to prevent injury, death or loss of an existing vital service, and lack of foreseeability of the need for the excavation to the satisfaction of the city engineer or his designee. 
    Excavation means any operation in which earth, rock or other material on or below the ground is moved or otherwise displaced, by means of power tools, power equipment or explosives, including digging, ditching, grading, trenching, drilling, auguring, tunneling, scraping and cable or pipe driving, excluding tilling of soil and gardening for any agricultural purposes, and except installation and maintenance of signs performed by the state department of transportation. 
    Excavator means any person proposing to make, making or contracting for an excavation. 
    Newly constructed, reconstructed or repaved streets means any street which has been newly constructed, reconstructed or repaved within the past five years. 
    Permittee means any person who has obtained a permit as required by this article and has agreed to fulfill all the terms of this article. 
    Person includes any person, partnership, firm, association, utility, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Street means a public street, public easement, public right-of-way, public highway, public alley, sidewalk or public way accepted or maintained by the city. 
    Structures means culverts, catchbasins, manholes, walls, sewers, sewer services, water mains and services, gas mains and services, electric lines and services, telephone lines and services, under drains, cellar drains, hydrants, traffic signal loops, streetlight circuits, fire alarm conduits, railroad signal wires, oil lines, etc. 
    Underground facility means any item of personal property buried or placed below ground for use in connection with the storage or conveyance of water, sewage, electronic, telephonic or telegraphic communications, electric energy, oil, gas or other substances, including but not limited to pipes, pipelines, tubes, mains, services, traps, vents, vaults, manholes, meters, gauges, regulators, valves, conduits, wire towers, poles, pole lines, anchors, cables, junction boxes or any other materials, structures or objects of any kind or character, whether enumerated in this definition or not, which is or may be lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under or over any public place. 
    Utility means any company, corporation or quasi-municipal organization, which may or may not be under the direction of the public utilities commission. 
Sec. 46-81. - Penalties; payment of expenses caused by improper work. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Alternatively, such violations may be processed in accordance with the citation system established in chapter 2, article VII. 
(b)  If the work or any part thereof mentioned in this article of repairing and backfilling the trenches or excavation shall be unskillfully or improperly done, the city shall cause, through private contract, the work to be skillfully and properly done, and shall keep an account of the expense incurred by the city with an additional amount of 50 percent. Bills rendered in accordance with this section shall be due and payable by the permittee immediately upon receipt thereof. If a permittee shall not pay any such bill within 30 days of receipt, the city shall promptly take action to exercise the performance bond of the permittee for the purpose of recovering all expenses incurred by the city. 
(c)  Any person or utility who continues to violate any section of this article shall receive no further permits until such time as the city engineer is satisfied that the person or utility shall comply with the terms of this article. 
Sec. 46-82. - Fees and charges. 
    Fees and charges under this article shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule. Such charges are hereby established as being not in excess of the reasonable cost of inspection and monitoring of street and sidewalk openings and entrance permits under this article. 
Sec. 46-83. - Billing. 
    Upon completion of excavation work, a measurement shall be made by the city of the size of the opening, inclusive of the six-inch cutback as required in section 46-104(b), and a bill will be mailed to the permittee. The cost of monitoring and inspecting of the opening will be a product of the total number of square feet multiplied by the rate as provided for in this article. Bills rendered in accordance with this section shall be due and payable by the permittee immediately upon receipt thereof. If a permittee shall not pay any such bill within 30 days after receipt, the city shall issue no further permits to any such permittee until it receives payment of such outstanding bill. 
Sec. 46-84. - Liability of city; work on unaccepted streets. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of the excavation work for which an excavation permit is required under this article; nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized under this article, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any excavation work. 
(b)  In the case of an unaccepted street or way, this article shall not be construed as authorizing any action which is inconsistent with any private rights in the street or way, nor shall the issuance of any permit under this article be construed as an acceptance of the street or way by the city for highway or any other purposes. 
Sec. 46-85. - Application for permit; appeals. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued under this article unless a complete written application on a current form provided by the city is submitted to the office of the city engineer. The written application shall include a minimum of the following: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. For all major projects, the applicant shall provide a viable means of contact 24 hours a day. 
(2)  Detailed location, by street number or proximity to an intersecting street, where work is to occur. 
(3)  Purpose of excavation (if applicable). 
(4)  Proposed start and completion date. 
(5)  Applicant's public liability insurer and amount of coverage. 
(6)  Proof that the applicant has notified the city electrical department, fire department and police department, by listing the name of the contact person and the time and date the person was contacted. 
(7)  Approved Dig Safe authorization number. 
(8)  Method of compaction. 
(9)  Signature of applicant and date when signed. 
(10)  Detailed traffic control plan if required by the city engineer or his designee. 
(b)  Application forms shall be available from, and submittals shall be given to, the office of the city engineer. 
(c)  In the case of entrance permits, the application shall be accompanied by plans or sketches showing the proposed entrance locations, width and arrangement; distance between entrances; setback of buildings, gasoline pumps, etc., in relation to the centerline of the traveled way; length, size and location of existing pipes, culverts, catchbasins or manholes, curbing, gutters or sidewalks; and the proposed location of new pipes, culverts, catchbasins or manholes, curbing, etc. 
(d)  Any person shall have the right to appeal to the director of public works from a denial of an application for an excavation permit under the provisions of this article. Such an appeal may be granted only if the intent of this article or the regulations legally adopted under this article has been incorrectly interpreted. If the decision of the director of public works is not satisfactory to the applicant, he may appeal on the same grounds to the city manager, whose decision shall be final. 
Sec. 46-86. - Required permits; standards for drive entrances. 
(a)  Private property excavation permits. A private property excavation permit shall be required for any excavation performed on any private property within a gas danger zone indicated on an official map approved by the city council and displayed in the office of the city engineer. 
(b)  Public property excavation permit. A public property excavation permit shall be required for any excavation, by hand or machinery, performed within any public right-of-way on which the city performs any highway maintenance operations. 
(c)  Drive opening permit. A drive opening permit shall be required for any construction, alteration or relocation of any driveway, entrance or approach or other improvement within any city right-of-way. Drive opening permits shall be issued only for the purpose of securing access to property. Drive opening permits shall be issued to the property owner or his representative, and shall not preclude any other necessary permits. The location, design and construction of any entrance permitted shall be in accordance with all local, state and federal laws and regulations and shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following requirements: 
(1)  Sight distance. All entrances should be so located that vehicles approaching or using the entrance will have adequate sight distance in both directions along the street and to maneuver safely without interfering with traffic. Whenever a new or modified entrance creates a potential hazard for the traveling public, the city engineer may require "blind drive" signs or other warning signs to be posted at the expense of the owner. 
(2)  Grade. The grade of entrances shall be in accordance with the standard details provided by the state department of transportation and may be modified at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(3)  Number of entrances. Frontages of 75 feet or less shall be limited to one driveway. No more than two entrances or exits shall be permitted to any single property tract or business establishment. Additional driveways may be permitted where the frontage exceeds 600 feet and only after showing of actual convenience and necessity. 
(4)  Sidewalk and curbs. When sidewalk, curbing or curb and gutter is to be removed, it shall be replaced at the expense of the owner at the break points of the entrance. Appropriate terminal curb sections shall be placed at the sides of the entrance. All removed granite curbing remains the sole property of the city and shall be transported by the permittee to a storage site selected by the city engineer. 
(5)  Drainage. Drainage in roadside ditches shall not be altered or impeded, and suitable approved drainage structures shall be provided at all entrances. Surface drainage shall be provided so that all surface water on the areas adjacent to the road shall be carried away from the road. At no time will the city be responsible for surface water that flows from the city right-of-way onto private property or liable for damages therefrom as a result of poor design or construction of drive entrances. 
(6)  Distance from intersection. 
(7)  Width of opening. 
Sec. 46-87. - Insurance. 
    The applicant for a permit under this article, prior to permit approval, shall provide the city engineer or his designate satisfactory evidence in writing that he has in effect commercial public liability insurance, without underground explosion or collapse exclusion clause, during the duration of the excavation work, covering his operation and his agents in the following amounts. The insurance coverage is to be in effect for the period covered by the permit. 
(1)  Public property: 
a.  Property damage liability: $500,000.00 each occurrence. 
b.  Bodily injury liability: $300,000.00 each occurrence. 
(2)  Private property: 
a.  Property damage liability: $300,000.00 each occurrence. 
b.  Bodily injury liability: $100,000.00 each occurrence. 
    Under unusual or special circumstances, higher limits may be required. 
Sec. 46-88. - Bond. 
    Before a public property excavation permit is issued, the applicant (nonutility) shall deposit with the city engineer a surety bond, certified check, cashier's check or irrevocable letter of credit from a bank in the amount of $1,500.00. 
Sec. 46-89. - Time limit for commencing work. 
    Excavation work must be started no later than 60 days from the date the permit was issued. After 60 days the permit shall become null and void and must be renewed. A minimum fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this Code shall be charged for each permit that is voided. 
Sec. 46-90. - Excavation placard. 
    The city engineer or his designate shall provide each permittee, at the time a permit is issued under this article, a suitable placard indicating the name of the contractor, the location of the excavation, and other pertinent information. It shall be the duty of the permittee to keep the placard posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the excavation work. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such placard at or about any excavation not covered by such permit or to misrepresent any information on the placard. 
Sec. 46-91. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Prior to beginning any excavation adjacent to or being used by the traveling public, the permittee may be required, depending on the size and duration of the excavation, to submit a traffic control plan indicating the type and placement of all traffic control devices to be used within the work area. All traffic control devices shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The permittee shall continuously maintain the traffic control devices in their proper position, clean, legible and in good repair throughout the duration of the work. If notified that the traffic control devices are not in place or not properly maintained, the permittee may be ordered to immediately suspend work until all deficiencies are corrected. 
(b)  The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that, during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. 
(c)  The permittee shall in general maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicular traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than 200 feet. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a passageway of at least one-half the sidewalk width open along such sidewalk line. 
(d)  At certain designated areas there shall be a traffic control plan, as provided in chapter 52, pertaining to traffic, that first must be approved by the chief of police or his designee. The chief of police or his designee shall review the traffic control plan and decide whether police traffic control will be needed for this area. The cost of the police traffic control will be at the expense of the persons or companies applying for the permit. 
(e)  The city engineer may, with the approval of the city police and fire departments, permit that the street or a portion thereof be temporarily closed to traffic during the progress of the work. Such permission may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. Upon completion of the construction work, the permittee shall notify the city engineer and the city police department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made. 
(Ord. of 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 46-92. - Breaking through pavement. 
    All excavations on paved streets and sidewalks shall be pre-cut in a neat straight line with pavement breakers or saws. Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the city when the use endangers existing substructures or other property. Cutouts of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line. 
Sec. 46-93. - Trenches in streets. 
(a)  No opening or excavation in any arterial or collector street shall extend beyond the centerline of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street temporarily restored. In certain cases steel plates may be allowed at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(b)  No opening or excavation shall extend more than 200 feet longitudinally in any street at any time for pavement removal, excavation, construction, backfilling, patching or any other operation without the written approval of the city engineer. 
Sec. 46-94. - Protective barriers and warning devices. 
    A permittee under this article shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the city streets or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. During hours of darkness, warning lights shall be placed on vertical panels, drums, barricades and barriers. 
Sec. 46-95. - Protection of utility facilities. 
    A permittee under this article shall not interfere with any existing utility facility without the written consent of the city engineer and the owner of the facility. If it becomes necessary to relocate or remove an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner. No facility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee unless he makes other arrangements with the owner of the facility. In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure, the permittee shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the person owning them, and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this section that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to facilities, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such facility damage and such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility. The city shall not be made a party to any action because of this section. 
Sec. 46-96. - Abandonment of substructure. 
    Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, the person or utility owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the city a written statement giving in detail a description (i.e., type, size and condition) and the location of the substructure so abandoned. If such abandoned substructure is in the way, or subsequently becomes in the way, of an installation of the city or any other public body, the owner of such substructure, after having been contacted by the excavator, shall establish if the substructure is abandoned and, if necessary, make the first cut or tap before allowing the substructure to be removed by the excavator. 
Sec. 46-97. - Protection of public and private property. 
(a)  Generally. A permittee under this article shall at all times and at his own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain written permission from the owner of such private property for such purpose. The permittee shall, at his own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from his failure to properly protect and carry out such work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after trenches have been backfilled as required in this article. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area free of debris and excess earth and in a condition as nearly as possible the same as that which existed before such work began. 
(b)  Curbing. No person or utility shall remove, damage, haul away or cause misalignment of any granite curbing, including radius curb and catchbasin stones, for any reason whatsoever without first receiving written permission from the city engineer. Permission shall be granted only upon the condition that any curb missing, damaged or misaligned shall be replaced or aligned by the permittee. Replacement or realignment shall be done in a manner and under specifications prescribed by the city engineer and be subject to inspection. The work shall be completed within a period of 90 days of the date the permit was issued. The permittee shall for a period of one year thereafter be fully liable for all defects in materials and for a period of three years thereafter be fully liable for all workmanship relating to improvements or repairs and shall promptly repair or replace the work upon notice of the city engineer and to the satisfaction thereof. All granite that is removed with the permission of the city engineer shall be transported by the permittee to a storage site selected by the city. All excavated granite curbing remains the sole property of the city. 
(c)  Trees and shrubs. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in the street area without first obtaining the consent of the appropriate city department or city official having control of such property, or in the case of private property the property owner. 
(d)  Monuments and markers. The permittee shall not disturb or remove any monuments of concrete, granite, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey benchmark without first obtaining written permission from the city engineer. Permission shall be granted only when no alternate route for the proposed substructure or conduit is available. If the city is satisfied that no alternate route is available, permission shall be granted only upon the condition, by agreement in writing, that the person or utility applying for such permission shall pay all expense incident to the proper replacement of the monument by the city. 
Sec. 46-98. - Care of excavated material. 
(a)  All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, the city engineer shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites. 
(b)  When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll, flow or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the material to be removed from the street within eight hours after deposit. The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from his failure to so provide. 
Sec. 46-99. - Protection of watercourses and drains. 
    A permittee under this article shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the watercourses, sewers and drains in as good condition as he found them or shall make such provisions for them as the city engineer may direct. The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any street, but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface water. 
Sec. 46-100. - Control of noise, dust and debris. 
    Each permittee under this article shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris, and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the city engineer or in case of an emergency as otherwise provided in this article, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
Sec. 46-101. - Trench subgrade. 
    The bottom of trenches shall be prepared to provide a firm foundation for the pipe or facility in accordance with the bedding conditions specified for the type of pipe or facility to be installed. The subgrade of the trench shall be kept free of standing water. Where the trench subgrade material is found to be unsuitable and does not afford a solid foundation, the contractor shall excavate to such depth as necessary to construct a stable foundation. A stable foundation shall be constructed by placing crushed rock or other approved material. 
Sec. 46-102. - Backfilling of excavation. 
(a)  The city engineer must be notified by the permittee under this article no less than four working hours prior to the beginning of backfilling unless other arrangements have been made with the city engineer. 
(b)  Backfilling shall be so placed that the pipe will not be displaced or damaged. Backfill material to be placed between the bottom of the trench and one foot above the crown of the pipe or structure shall be fine, readily compressible soil or granular material, at or near optimum moisture content, and shall not contain stones larger than three inches, frozen lumps, broken pavement, debris or any other objectionable material. The material shall be uniformly distributed in layers of not more than eight inches, loose measure, and each layer thoroughly compacted by use of approved compacting equipment before successive layers are placed. Layers that are hand tamped shall not exceed four inches in thickness. Operations shall be so conducted that the fill is always at approximately the same elevation on both sides of the structure. Water shall be added when necessary to increase the moisture content of the backfill material to obtain compaction. 
(c)  Backfill material to be placed between the one foot lift above the structure to within the subbase course of the pavement structure may be material originating on the job, provided that such material does not contain stones larger than three inches, frozen lumps or any other objectionable material. In most cases, the backfill material shall closely conform to type, condition and depth of that which existed prior to excavation and shall be carefully replaced in kind (i.e., in the same manner and order in which it was removed). The selected material shall be uniformly distributed in layers of not more than eight inches, loose measure, and each layer thoroughly compacted by use of approved mechanical compacting equipment. The city engineer may require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in his opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such tests must indicate that the backfill material meets or exceeds the minimum requirements as prescribed by the city engineer. The cost of such tests shall be borne by the permittee. 
(d)  Backfilling by means of water settlement or jetting will not be allowed unless specifically authorized by the city engineer. 
(e)  The permittee, during winter or spring of the year when freeze/thaw cycles are present, and in cases where adequate compaction cannot be achieved, may be required to place diggable concrete or other such unshrinkable material that the city engineer may deem necessary in order to prevent damage to public or private property or to minimize inconvenience to traffic. 
Sec. 46-103. - Prompt completion of work. 
    After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street as specified in this article. The permittee shall perform such restoration work so as not to obstruct, impede or create a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
Sec. 46-104. - Surface restoration of streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  A permittee under this article shall restore the surface of all streets and sidewalks broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work, to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the city engineer. The permittee shall notify the city engineer no less than four working hours prior to making the final restoration. 
(b)  Prior to final restoration, pavement shall be removed to at least six inches beyond the outer limits of the subgrade to be disturbed. Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the centerline of the trench to allow for proper compaction within the entire trench area 
(c)  Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and over-breaks and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench. 
(d)  Whenever a part of a block, square or section of curb, concrete sidewalk or driveway is broken or damaged by the permittee, the entire block, square or section shall be removed to the score, groove or saw cut line and replaced or reconstructed. Where the line of cut would be less than two feet from an existing expansion or weakened plane joint, the concrete shall be removed to the joint. 
(e)  The permittee shall not be required to pay for repair of pavement damage existing prior to the excavation unless his cut results in small floating sections that may be unstable, in which case the permittee shall remove the unstable portion and the area shall be treated as part of the excavation. 
(f)  When three or more street openings are made in sequence 15 feet or less, center to center, between each adjacent opening, or when less than three feet of pavement remains between any two street openings, the permittee shall neatly cut and remove the area of pavement between these adjacent openings and the area shall be treated as one excavation. As an alternative, the permittee may choose to strip overlay the work area. 
(g)  All exposed vertical pavement edges and final layer bases shall be coated with an approved tacking or bonding agent prior to paving. 
(1)  Temporary resurfacing. The top surface of backfill shall be covered with three inches compacted depth of bituminous temporary resurfacing material by the permittee. Such temporary paving material shall be cold mix, except that the permittee may use or the city engineer may require hot bituminous concrete. All temporary paving material shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic to pass safely over it and be placed in such a manner as not to be a nuisance to the traveling public. The permittee shall maintain the temporary paving for a period not to exceed six months, at which time the permittee shall make a permanent restoration. If it is not possible to maintain the surface of the temporary paving in a safe condition for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the permittee shall maintain barriers and lights where required in this article until a permanent restoration has been made. 
(2)  Permanent resurfacing. The pavement replacement shall be constructed of an approved hot bituminous concrete mixture and shall be compacted with approved equipment in layers not exceeding two inches of compacted depth. The wearing or surface layer shall have a thickness of not less than one inch and not more than 11/2 inches. The minimum total compacted depth of replaced pavement shall be three inches on residential and minor collector streets, five inches on arterial and major collector streets and two inches on sidewalks. Where deemed necessary by the city engineer, the thickness of pavement may be increased to that which best satisfies the condition. The final layer of pavement should match the grade of the adjacent pavement area. 
(h)  Replacement of Portland cement concrete pavements shall be with an approved Portland cement concrete mixture and with reinforcement and thickness equal to that which was removed during the opening. Applicable grading specifications mentioned in this article shall be required. 
(i)  If the city engineer finds that paving surfaces adjacent to the street opening may be damaged or distressed as a result of excavating, or where a number of cross trenches are laid in close proximity to one another, or where the equipment used may cause such damage, he may require that the permittee make arrangements for the resurfacing in place or patching of such street. 
(j)  Any person or utility making bar holes in the street or sidewalk of any public place shall, immediately upon completion of the work, fill the bar holes. If the permittee fails to plug bar holes immediately upon the completion of work, the city shall issue no further permits to the permittee until such work has been completed. 
Sec. 46-105. - Guarantee period. 
(a)  A permittee under this article shall, for a period of three years thereafter, be fully liable for all defects in materials and workmanship relating to such resurfacing and shall promptly repair or replace the resurfacing upon notice from the city engineer. 
(b)  If any distortion or settlement of one inch or greater over ten percent of the total surface area repaired should appear within the guarantee period, the permittee may be required to remove the paved surface, shim with gravel and replace the pavement, or may be required to grind or mill the entire surface to a depth of not less than one inch and repave with an approved hot bituminous surface layer. The permittee shall repair or cause to be repaired any settlement or defects in a restored area within 15 calendar days. If the defect creates a hazardous situation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the permittee shall repair or replace the defect with a temporary or permanent patch as soon as possible, but within 24 hours. If it is not possible to correct the defect within 24 hours, the permittee shall maintain barriers and lights where required in this article until a temporary or permanent patch can be made. Upon completion of the permanent patch, the permittee shall again, for a period of three years thereafter, be fully liable for all defects in materials and workmanship relating to such resurfacing. 
Sec. 46-106. - Repairing and backfilling by city. 
(a)  If the work or any part thereof mentioned in this article for repairing or backfilling the trenches or excavations shall be unskillfully or improperly done, the city shall cause the work to be skillfully and properly done and shall keep an account of the expense thereof, and in such case such person or utility shall pay the city an amount equal to the whole of the incurred expense by the city with an additional amount of 50 percent. Thereafter, upon completion of the work and the termination of the cost therein, the city shall not issue any new permits to any person or utility until it shall receive payment of such outstanding bill. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for three years after it has been restored to its original condition. 
(c)  Any person or utility who continues to violate this section shall receive no further permits until such time as the city is satisfied that the person or utility shall comply with the terms of this article. 
Sec. 46-107. - Tunneling and boring. 
    Tunneling or boring shall be permitted and may be required by the city engineer. 
Sec. 46-108. - Emergency work. 
    In the event of any emergency in which a conduit, pipe or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such facility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit under this article, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of individuals. Such person owning or controlling such facility shall notify the city engineer's office, prior to starting excavation, of the location and approximate time of the excavation, and shall apply for an excavation permit no later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the city engineer's office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit under this article. 
Sec. 46-109. - Imposition of special conditions. 
    If the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require, the city engineer may order that work subject to this article be performed only during certain hours of the day, or that work be expedited by being performed on an around-the-clock basis, or impose such other conditions upon the performance of the work as he may deem necessary under the circumstances presented. Where feasible, any such conditions will be set forth in or attached to the permit. 
Sec. 46-110. - Excavation during winter. 
    No person or utility shall be granted a permit to excavate or open any street or sidewalk from November 15 of each year to April 15 of the following year unless an emergency condition exists. Any person or utility wishing to obtain a street opening permit between these dates shall first explain fully in writing the emergency situation existing to the city before issuance is granted. If a hazardous condition exists which could endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual, excavation work shall not be delayed by this section. 
Sec. 46-111. - Excavation on reconstructed streets. 
    Whenever the city has developed plans to pave, repave or reconstruct a street, the city or its representative shall give notice thereof to all abutting property owners, to the city departments, and to all public utilities which have or may wish to lay pipes, wires or other facilities in or under the highway. Upon receipt of such written notice, such person or utility shall have 60 days in which to install or lay any such facility. If an extension of time is needed by a person or utility for the installation of such facilities, the person or utility shall make written application to the city engineer, explaining fully the reasons for requesting such an extension of time. After such street has been paved or repaired, no permit shall be granted to open such street for a period of five years unless an emergency condition exists. 
Sec. 46-112. - Inspections; authority to prescribe additional regulations. 
    The city engineer shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this article. The city engineer shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. Inspection fees shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 46-113. - Filing of maps of substructures. 
    Every person or utility owning, using, controlling or having an interest in substructures under the surface of the public way used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication, sewer, water, steam or oil in the city shall file with the city engineer a copy of construction plans drawn to a scale adequate to show in detail the plan, location, size and type of installation, if known, of all new or renewed substructures, except service lines designed to serve single properties. These maps shall be provided to the city engineer's office no later than 60 days after the completion date of construction. 
Sec. 46-114. - Submission of annual work program by utilities. 
    Each year, on or before March 31, for the purpose of coordinating construction programs, each utility shall submit to the city engineer its planned short range (one- to two-year), and, if available, its planned long range (five- to ten-year) work program. Thereafter, no permit shall be issued to a utility for excavations not contained within its planned work program, except for emergencies and house service lines, until a written utility location application has been submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
Secs. 46-115-46-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-142. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of the standards set forth in this article is to ensure the adequate and proper installation of improvements within the city; promote the safety and efficiency of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; minimize user costs and the long-term costs of maintenance and repairs to public improvements; encourage efficient use of the land; protect the environment, including provisions for the necessary and adequate control of groundwater levels, stormwater runoff and soil erosion; and ensure an accurate and permanent record of the public improvements, thereby promoting the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 46-143. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all improvements within the city constructed subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, other than those called for in a final plan previously approved by the city planning board. 
(b)  The city engineer may grant a written waiver of strict compliance with the standards set forth in this article after receipt of a written application requesting a waiver by the property owner, developer or authorized representative in any case where the city engineer has determined that such waiver will not create a traffic or safety hazard or otherwise impair the integrity of this article and where the applicant can demonstrate that a specific hardship is created by the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  In any case in which the standards as set forth in this article are inconsistent with those established by other city ordinances, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
(d)  A determination that any section of this article is invalid shall not necessarily result in the invalidity of any other section. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 46-144. - Adoption and amendment of standards. 
(a)  The city engineer may propose new standards and amend existing standards for improvements. All new and amended standards shall become effective only after a public hearing before the city council. Such standards shall be additional to and consistent with the provisions of this article, shall be necessary and reasonable, and shall be in accordance with sound engineering practice. 
(b)  The city engineer shall maintain for public inspection current copies of the effective standards. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 46-145. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base course means the layers of specified or selected material of designated thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface course. 
    Bond means a surety bond or a form of security approved as to form and financial sufficiency by the finance director and city solicitor, including a letter of credit and escrow account. 
    City engineer means the city engineer, acting directly or through his duly authorized representatives. 
    Developer means any person, group of persons, organizations, etc., whose concern and desire is to improve land in accordance with the development regulations of the city. 
    MDOT specifications means the 2002 Maine Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, Highways and Bridges. 
    Passenger car equivalent means, at peak hour, the number of passenger cars, or, in the case of nonpassenger vehicles, the number of passenger vehicles that would be displaced by nonpassenger vehicles, that pass through an intersection or on a roadway under prevailing roadway and traffic conditions at that hour of the day during which the traffic volume generated by the development is higher than the volume during any other hour of the day. One tractor-trailer combination is the equivalent of two passenger cars. 
    Pavement structure means the combination of subbase, base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the street bed. 
    Private way means a privately owned and maintained street or road. 
    Reserve or spite strip means any strip of land along a right-of-way located for the purpose of preventing development of abutting land through deprivation of required frontage or control of access to the right-of-way. 
    Right-of-way means land, property or interest therein, usually in a strip, acquired for or devoted to a street or road. 
    Road means a public or private way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the right-of-way. For the purpose of this article, the term "road" shall refer to nondevelopment and rurally located public and private ways, usually of rural design. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of the street primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians, also referred to as a pedestrian way. 
    Special exception means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. Such a use may be permitted in such district as a special exception, if specific provision for such special exception is made in appendix A of this Code (the zoning ordinance) and reasonable restrictions imposed by the planning board are complied with. 
    Street means a public or private way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the right-of-way. For the purpose of this article, the term "street" shall refer to all developed public and private ways, of both rural and urban design. 
    Street way and roadway mean the portion of a street, or road including shoulders, for vehicular use. 
    Subbase course means the layers of specified or selected material of designated thickness placed on the subgrade to support a base course or surface course. 
    Subgrade means the top surface of a street bed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed or upon which the subbase course is constructed. 
    Surface course means one or more layers of pavement designed to accommodate the traffic load. The top layer may be referred to as the wearing course. The bottom layer may be referred to as the binder course or pavement base course. 
    Walkway means a pedestrian way other than a street sidewalk. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 4) 
Secs. 46-146-46-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 

Sec. 46-174. - Applicability. 
    For the purpose of this article, design requirements shall relate to the following street classifications: 
(1)  Street classification I. 
a.  Local street. A local street serves primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
b.  Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac is a local, industrial or commercial street with only one end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround; also referred to as a dead-end street. 
c.  Collector street. A collector street serves the internal traffic of the city, providing circulation within or through a development and connecting local streets to the arterial system. 
d.  Arterial street. An arterial street serves as a major traffic way for travel between and through urban centers and neighborhoods. The design and construction of arterial streets is not included in this article due to the significant special design considerations and uniqueness of each project. 
e.  Industrial and commercial streets. Industrial and commercial streets are streets within such zones and provide access to industrial and commercial users. 
f.  Private streets. Private streets are streets which may be constructed as part of a residential, planned unit, commercial or industrial development. Private streets receive no public funding; will never be maintained or improved by the city; and will remain private property. 
g.  Lanes. Lanes are streets providing access to ten or less lots in a residential subdivision or with average daily traffic (ADT) of 100 vehicles or less. A cul-de-sac providing for access to the same number of units or with the same ADT shall be considered a lane and shall meet the same standards. 
(2)  Street classification II. 
a.  Urban. Urban design standards shall be defined as paved streets with such appurtenances as curbs, esplanades, paved sidewalks and an enclosed under drain/stormwater conveyance system with catchbasins, manholes and associated piping. 
b.  Rural. Rural design standards shall be defined as paved streets with gravel shoulders and with side ditches and culverts for the transportation of groundwater seepage and stormwater. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-175. - Minimum street design and construction standards chart. 
    The minimum street design and construction standards chart is intended to show minimum widths and design standards for a particular classification of street. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, traffic use or geometric considerations for a street or any part of a street warrant modifications or a greater standard than listed on the chart, the city engineer may require such modifications and shall submit his reasons in writing to the planning board. 
Item Type of Street Lane Local Collector Industrial 
Commercial Average daily traffic (ADT) <100 < 500 500 > 1,500 > Right-of-way width (feet) 50 50 50 66 66 60 Pavement width (feet) 22 24 28 32 40 40 Curbing Vertical/sloped Vertical/sloped Vertical Vertical Sidewalk width (feet) - 5 5 5 5 5 Sidewalk esplanade (feet) - 5 5 5 5 5 Minimum grade (percent) 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 Maximum grade (percent) 8 8 8 6 6 5 Maximum grade within 75 feet of intersection (percent) 3 3 2 3 3 2 Minimum centerline radius (feet) 150 150 150 300 300 300 Minimum tangent between reverse curves (feet) - - - 300 300 300 Minimum pavement cross slope (inches/feet) ;3/83/83/81/4 1/4 1/4 Minimum angle of street 
intersection (degrees) 75 75 75 90 90 90 Design speed (mph) 25 25 25 35 35 35 K factor-crest vertical curve 20 20 20 35 35 50 K factor-sag vertical curve 30 30 30 40 40 50 Curb radii at intersection (feet) 20 20 20 30 30 30 Property line radii at 
intersection (feet) 20 20 20 20 20 20  
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-176. - Subsurface soil exploration. 
(a)  The purpose of the subsurface soils exploration is to determine the engineering properties and conditions of the soil and rock which exist below the ground surface in order to properly design streets and other improvements. 
(b)  A high intensity soil survey (also required in section 46-209(b)(1)e) shall be conducted by a certified soil scientist, meeting the standards of the National Cooperative Soil Survey, which identifies soil types down to one-tenth acre or less at a scale equivalent to the development plan submitted. The mapping units shall be the soil series. Single soil test pits and their evaluation shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil surveys. 
(c)  Test pit or boring locations shall be shown on the development plan. 
(d)  Soil profiles shall include seasonal high and existing groundwater elevations. 
(e)  The city engineer may request additional test pits or borings to determine the limits of unsuitable material or to provide additional information for adequate design of the pavement structure. 
(f)  If, during construction, subsurface soils vary from original classifications, the pavement structure design shall be modified to reflect the new soil types and submitted to the city engineer for approval. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-177. - Rights-of-way. 
(a)  The minimum width of rights-of-way for streets to be dedicated or established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall conform to the widths as shown in the minimum street design and construction standards chart as set forth in section 46-175. 
(b)  The city may require that additional rights-of-way width be provided for future extension of the street. 
(c)  The extension of an existing street, of the same classification as the existing street, shall be constructed at the same or greater width as required. 
(d)  Proposed developments along existing, dedicated or platted streets where rights-of-way are inadequate shall include additional land to meet the minimum standards. Land reserved for such purposes may not be used in satisfying setback, yard or area requirements of the zoning districts. 
(e)  Reserve or spite strips controlling the access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is placed with the city. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-178. - Arrangement and layout. 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets to be dedicated to the public and all private streets shall be considered in their relation: 
(1)  To existing and planned streets; 
(2)  To reasonable circulation of traffic within developments and on adjoining streets; 
(3)  To topographical conditions; 
(4)  To runoff of stormwater; 
(5)  To public pedestrian and vehicular convenience and safety; and 
(6)  To their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the areas to be served. 
(b)  Proposed streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan as adopted by the city. 
(c)  All streets shall be designed so that they provide for safe vehicular travel while discouraging the movement of through traffic over local streets. 
(d)  To the extent practicable, culs-de-sac shall be avoided in favor of loop streets, and if included in the development, shall be minimal in number. 
(e)  Developments generating 1,000 or more vehicle trips per 24-hour period will provide two or more separate points of vehicular access into and out of the site. 
(f)  Driveway access to collector or arterial streets shall be avoided to facilitate the free flow of traffic and minimize traffic hazards. 
(g)  Nonresidential developments will provide a clear route for delivery vehicles with the appropriate geometric design to allow turning and backing for WB-40 vehicles (i.e., tractor-trailer combinations). 
(h)  The layout and design of parking areas shall provide for safe and convenient circulation of vehicles throughout the lot and shall prohibit vehicles from backing out onto a street or road. 
(i)  Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning board may require: 
(1)  Marginal access streets (i.e., street parallel to arterial street providing access to adjacent lots); 
(2)  Reverse frontage lots (i.e., frontage on a street other than the existing or proposed arterial street) with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line; or 
(3)  Other such treatments as may be necessary for adequate noise reduction, visual screening and protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(j)  The proposed street layout shall be coordinated with the street and road system of surrounding areas. All streets shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of streets in surrounding areas and provide means of ingress and egress to surrounding acreage tracts. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-179. - Intersections. 
(a)  Traffic intersections and confluences shall encourage safe and efficient traffic flow. 
(b)  Streets intersecting an arterial street shall do so at a 90-degree angle. Streets intersecting collector or local streets shall not vary from 90 degrees by more than 15 degrees. 
(c)  At street intersections, the right-of-way lines shall be rounded by a circular arc having a radius as tabulated in the minimum street design and construction standards chart as set forth in section 46-175. A greater radius may be required for streets intersecting at an angle other than 90 degrees. 
(d)  Cross street intersections within residential areas shall be avoided. 
(e)  Intersections with more than four legs shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Minimum centerline offsets of adjacent intersections shall be as follows unless, in the opinion of the city engineer, a lesser length is necessitated by local conditions: 
Local to local 125 feet Local to collector 150 feet Local to arterial 250 feet Collector to collector 200 feet Collector to arterial 250 feet  
(g)  Horizontal curves shall be no closer than 135 feet to the center of an intersection unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(h)  Where new street intersections or driveway curb cuts are proposed, sight distances, as measured along the street or road onto which traffic will be turning, shall be based upon the posted speed limit and conform to the following table: 
Posted Speed Limit (mph) Sign Distance (feet) 25 200 30 300 35 350 40 400 45 450 50 500 55 550  
(i)  Where necessary to achieve required visibility, corner lots shall be cleared of all growth and sight obstruction, including earth excavation, and deed covenants shall be attached to prohibit future emplacement of sight obstructions. 
(j)  Vehicular access to developments shall be from streets or roads that have adequate capacity to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development. The level of service after development at intersections on major access routes to the development and at the intersection of any development access drive or proposed street shall be at a minimum at predevelopment levels of service. The developer shall mitigate development impacts that result in a reduced level of service. 
(k)  For developments subject to planning board review that will result in a reduction in the level of service, the planning board may waive the lower level of service restriction in subsection (j) of this section, subject to written recommendations of the director of community services, public works director and chief of police; also subject to input from the Lewiston-Auburn comprehensive transportation study, or their designees, and the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-180. - Culs-de-sac (dead-end streets). 
(a)  Local residential standards. 
(1)  In addition to the design standards for local residential streets, culs-de-sac shall be constructed to provide for a circular turnaround with minimum dimensions as follows: 
a.  Radii at circular turnaround with a center island: 
1.  Property line, 75 feet. 
2.  Outer edge of pavement, 66 feet. 
3.  Inner edge of pavement, 44 feet. 
b.  Radii at circular turnaround without a center island: 
1.  Property line, 60 feet. 
2.  Outer edge of pavement, 50 feet. 
(2)  At the end of temporary culs-de-sac, a temporary turnaround shall be constructed with an outside edge of pavement diameter of 90 feet or a backing space extending at least 30 feet beyond the edge of the street, and the end of the street extending at least 30 feet beyond the edge of the backing space. Pavement widths for backing spaces shall be identical to the type of street. 
(3)  Culs-de-sac shall be a maximum of 600 feet in length measured from the centerline of the feeder street to the center of the turnaround radius unless the planning board finds that a greater length will not create a hazard as based on the availability of hydrants, accessibility to firefighting equipment and anticipated use of abutting properties. 
(b)  Collector, industrial and commercial standards. Presentation of special design, discussion and written permission of the planning board shall be required for those conditions that may require culs-de-sac under the category of collector, industrial or commercial. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-181. - Alignment and grades. 
(a)  Alignment for local streets in residential areas shall be curvilinear, utilizing existing topography so as to discourage high speed. Insofar as possible, high cuts and fills shall be avoided. Caution shall be taken in the design of the alignment so that the safety of the facility is not reduced. 
(b)  Alignment and grades for collector streets or streets in industrial or commercial areas should be commensurate with the topography, but should be as direct as possible. 
(c)  Alignment and grades for all proposed streets shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(d)  Increases in maximum allowable grade may be allowed by the city engineer in cases of unusual circumstances. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-182. - Sidewalks and other walkways. 
    It is the policy of the city to encourage developers to construct sidewalks as part of all new residential and commercial projects in order to enhance the quality of life, area aesthetics and neighborhood integrity, and to promote alternative, nonmotorized modes of transportation. 
(1)  Sidewalks with esplanades shall be provided along one side of all local streets and both sides of all collector, commercial and industrial streets, and shall connect with the existing sidewalk network in the vicinity of the development. 
(2)  The planning board may require walkways in open space or recreation areas that are designed to link residential units with recreational and commercial facilities, other common facilities, school bus stops, and existing sidewalks and walkways in the vicinity. 
(3)  Sidewalks and walkways shall be clear and free of encumbrances. 
(4)  Areas within street rights-of-way which are reserved for future sidewalks and esplanades shall be designed and graded to the standards and specifications contained in this article. 
(5)  Esplanades shall be sloped at one-half inch per foot from the sidewalk to the street curb and shall be loamed, seeded and mulched in accordance with the city's design standards. 
(6)  The planning board may waive the requirement to build sidewalks under the following circumstances: 
a.  When the developer can demonstrate to the planning board's satisfaction that the nature of the development does not lend itself to pedestrian uses by the residents, employees or the public; 
b.  When the developer can demonstrate that the cost of building the sidewalk makes the project financially impossible (i.e., the developer has sufficient financing for the project except for the cost directly attributable to the construction of the sidewalks); 
c.  With respect to residential developments, if there are no existing sidewalks in the proximity of the development and the city has no plans to construct sidewalks that would connect to the proposed development, the planning board may waive the requirement at the developer's request. If the city does have plans to construct new sidewalks that would connect to the proposed development, then the planning board shall require the developer to place an amount in interest bearing escrow sufficient to fund the cost of constructing sidewalks within the development. If the city has not budgeted the new connecting sidewalk within five years after the development has been completed, at the request of the developer to the city manager, the city shall return the money held in escrow, plus interest. 
1.  Street names. 
(i)  Streets that join and are in alignment with existing streets shall bear the same name. Names of new streets shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of existing streets and roads within the city. Names of new streets to be accepted by the city shall be subject to the approval of 911 and the city council. Names of new streets that are not to be accepted by the city shall be subject to the approval of 911 and the planning board. 
(ii)  Initial street name signs shall be furnished and installed by the city with the cost of such installation being borne by the developer. 
2.  Traffic control devices. All initial signing and pavement markings required for the proper control of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular traffic within the development shall be paid for by the developer. The city shall furnish and install all such devices. The types and locations of all such devices shall be determined by the police chief and public works director, and shall be in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current revision. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-183. - Street construction materials. 
(a)  Generally. Street construction materials as specified in this article shall conform to MDOT specifications unless otherwise noted. 
(b)  Type and minimum allowable depth. Minimum requirements for materials are as follows: 
Minimum Requirements Lane Local (inches) Collector (inches) Industrial Commercial (inches) Street materials: Aggregate subbase course 15 18 18 Aggregate base course 3 3 3 Hot bituminous pavement: Total thickness 31/2 4 5 Surface course 11/2 11/2 11/2 Base course 2 21/2 1/2 Sidewalk materials: Aggregate subbase course 12 12 12 Hot bituminous pavement: Total thickness 2 2 2 Surface course 1 1 1 Base course 1 1 1 Driveway apron materials (within right-of-way of urban design): Aggregate subbase course 12 12 12 Hot bituminous pavement: Total thickness 3 3 4 Surface course 1 1 1 Base course 2 2 3 Curbing materials: Granite stone curbing, type 1 Bituminous curbing, type 3 Granite stone edging, type 5  
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.2) 
Sec. 46-184. - Street construction standards. 
(a)  Generally. All streets shall be constructed according to the specifications in this section as overseen by the city engineer. 
(b)  Clearing, grading, cuts and fills. 
(1)  Clearing. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable material and all trees not intended for preservation in accordance with MDOT specifications, section 201, Clearing Right-of-Way. Rights-of-way for rural design streets shall not be cleared in those areas that will enhance the natural appearance and attractiveness of the development while not conflicting with this article. 
(2)  Grading. All streets and roads shall be graded to their full width by the developer so that pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on parallel profiles. Due to special topographical conditions, deviation from such requirement will be allowed only with special approval of the city engineer. 
(3)  Subgrades. Subgrades shall be prepared in accordance with MDOT specifications, section 203, Excavation and Embankment, in particular subsection 203.17, Preparation and Protection of the Subgrade. 
(4)  Cuts. Cuts shall be in accordance with MDOT specifications, section 203, Excavation and Embankment. Tree stumps and other organic materials shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade. Rocks and boulders, when encountered, shall be scarified or removed to subgrade. 
(5)  Fills. Fills shall be in accordance with MDOT specifications, section 203, Excavation and Embankment. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the street site. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed 12 inches loose measure and compacted. 
(6)  Backfilling. Backfilling, to include utility trenches, shall be in accordance with MDOT specifications, section 206, Structural Excavation, and other applicable sections such as those that address backfilling of curbs, under drains, culverts and other typical street and road structures. Separate layers of backfill material of specified thickness shall be mechanically tamped. 
(7)  Side slopes. All side slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical unless provided for under subsection (g) of this section. All slopes shall be loamed, seeded and mulched in accordance with section 46-209(f)(4) through (6). 
(c)  Sanitary sewers, storm drains and other utilities. 
(1)  All utilities shall be located underground and as required in subsections (c)(2) through (11) of this section unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  Sewer mains shall be located approximately along the centerline of the street at a recommended average depth of eight feet. 
(3)  Sewer manholes shall be located on the street centerline at the crown of the road and the top surface of the manhole rim or cover shall be flush with the pavement surface. 
(4)  To the extent practicable, under drain/stormwater conveyance pipes shall be located along gutter lines on a line one foot in front of the toe of the face of the curb and with a minimum cover of four feet. 
(5)  Water mains shall be located under the sidewalk at an elevation greater (i.e., a depth less than) the sewer main and sewer service laterals and at a recommended depth of 51/2 feet. 
(6)  Hydrants shall be located one foot in back of the face of the curb. 
(7)  Gas mains shall be located under the esplanade on the same side of the street as the water main and with a minimum cover of 21/2 feet. 
(8)  Gas mains shall be installed after the installation of all other underground utilities. 
(9)  Telephone, electrical and cable television lines shall be located under the esplanade on the side of the street opposite the water and gas mains. Electrical lines shall have a minimum cover of 21/2 feet. Electrical lines for rural design shall be located in the gravel shoulder and shall have a minimum cover of three feet and be a minimum of two feet below cross culverts and ditch lines where applicable. All wiring shall be placed in PVC conduit and also encased in concrete where passing under the ditch line. Warning tape shall be placed above the conduit at a depth of one foot. 
(10)  All sanitary sewers, storm drains and underground utility mains and their services shall be installed within the street right-of-way prior to the placement of the aggregate base/subbase course unless a waiver in writing is obtained from the city engineer. 
(11)  All utility service laterals shall extend to the street right-of-way abutting the lot to be served, where they will be properly capped or terminated. An accurate record of each such utility service lateral, its location and its depth at the street right-of-way shall be kept by the developer and true copies of such record will be provided to the city engineer and the appropriate utility. Such location of the utility service laterals at the street right-of-way line shall be physically marked by the placement of a wooden stake, driven to the depth of the service, with enough of the stake exposed above the ground to be readily visible, and marked as to the type of service. 
(d)  Geotextiles, subbase and base, and pavement. MDOT specifications, section 620, Geotextiles, subsection 722.01, Stabilization Geotextile, section 304, Aggregate Base and Subbase Course, and section 403, Hot Bituminous Pavement, shall be applicable to this subject, except as follows: 
(1)  Geotextiles. The use of geotextiles under the aggregate subbase for the purpose of subgrade soil stabilization and increased tensile strength shall be as directed by the city engineer. 
(2)  Subbase and base. 
a.  Aggregate subbase course. Aggregate for subbase shall not contain particles of rock which will not pass the four-inch square mesh sieve. 
b.  Aggregate base course. Aggregate for base shall not contain particles of rock which will not pass the two-inch square mesh sieve. 
(3)  Pavement. 
a.  Streets shall not be paved until all underground utilities and their service laterals have been installed, nor until the aggregate base/subbase course has been inspected and approved by the city engineer. 
b.  Where pavement placed joins an existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut along a smooth line and to a neat, even vertical joint. Broken or raveled edges, or deviation from grade will not be permitted. 
c.  Gradation of aggregates for plant mix hot bituminous pavements shall be as specified in MDOT specifications, section 703.09, Aggregate for Plant Mix Hot Bituminous Pavement, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
d.  Proper drainage in curbed areas, especially transition approaches to catchbasins, sluiceways and paved outlet gutters, is of utmost importance. Before placing the surface (wearing) course in any urban area where the drainage is critical, the base (binder) course grade should be checked with a transit or level. 
(e)  Curbing. MDOT specifications, section 609, Curbing, shall be applicable to this subject, except as follows: 
(1)  Curbing, where required, shall be vertical curb type 1 (quarried granite stone) unless otherwise allowed in this article. 
(2)  Vertical curb type 1 circular shall be used for the radii at all intersections regardless of the curb type allowed on the remainder of the street. 
(3)  On local streets, bituminous curbing type 3, either vertical or sloped face, may be used, unless determined to be unsuitable by the city engineer. 
(4)  Curb type 5 shall be used for cul-de-sac center islands when granite curbing is required. 
(5)  Vertical curb reveal shall be seven inches for type 1 (granite) and six inches for type 3 (bituminous), unless otherwise indicated by the city engineer. 
(f)  Sidewalks. MDOT specifications, section 608, Sidewalks, shall be applicable to this subject. 
(g)  Guardrails. MDOT specifications, section 606, Guard Rail, shall be applicable to this subject. Guardrails may be required: 
(1)  On sections of street where side slopes are steeper than three horizontal to one vertical; 
(2)  Where the street is greater than eight feet above the bottom of the street side slope; 
(3)  At sudden changes of alignment; 
(4)  Where other street obstacles exist; 
(5)  On narrow bridges; or 
(6)  As otherwise determined by the city engineer. 
(h)  Temporary markers. The developer shall furnish, install and maintain all stakes, marks or temporary structures necessary for marking and maintaining the points, lines and grades for construction of the street and other improvements to the approved plan, profile and cross sections. 
(i)  Monuments. MDOT specifications, section 623, Monuments, and subsection 712.04, Stone Curbing and Edging, shall be applicable to this subject, except as follows: 
(1)  A minimum of three granite monuments shall be set at appropriate corners of the perimeter of the proposed development tract as determined by the city engineer. Also, granite monuments shall be set at all street corners, at all points where the street line intersects the exterior of the development, and at angle points and points of curvature or tangency in each street. 
(2)  Monuments shall be six inches above the ground except in lawns, drives and parking lots where they shall be flush. 
(3)  If there is ledge (rock) between one foot and three feet below the ground, a two-foot diameter concrete collar, with or without dowels, in accordance with MDOT specifications, shall be provided. If the ledge is less than one foot below the ground, an approved survey marker shall be grouted or embedded in the ledge. 
(4)  All granite monuments shall be four feet long, except where the ledge does not allow, and a square six inches on each side. The monuments shall be provided with a drill hole and a magnetic aluminum or brass marker, such as the Bernsten models, with the surveyor's registration number and the exact survey point engraved on the surface, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  No permanent monuments shall be installed until all improvements that might disturb or damage the monuments have been completed. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 5.3) 
Secs. 46-185-46-206. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL STANDARDS 

Sec. 46-207. - Intent. 
    An adequate drainage and erosion control system shall be provided, including temporary or permanent appurtenances as necessary, such as swales, ditches, mulch, hay bales, erosion control mesh, stone check dams, sedimentation/detention/retention basins, culvert/under drain/stormwater conveyance pipes, catchbasins and manholes, to ensure that stormwater and other surface flows are effectively conveyed from the development and that groundwater is intercepted and conveyed away from the street aggregate base/subbase in compliance with the guidelines contained in this division, current environmental regulations and all other requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 6.1) 
Sec. 46-208. - Classifications. 
(a)  Urban systems. 
(1)  Drainage facilities located within areas defined by this article standards as urban shall include an enclosed underground system capable of effectively removing stormwater and groundwater from the street and adjacent areas. Discharge of drainage shall be into natural drainage courses or approved connection to an existing system capable of handling the increased flows. 
(2)  Drainage systems conforming to the urban standards specified in this division may be constructed in areas defined by this article as rural at the option of the developer or if required by the city engineer. 
(3)  If conditions warrant, the planning board may allow a combination of rural and urban drainage standards or utilize rural standards entirely to include the appropriate right-of-way widths. 
(b)  Rural systems. Drainage facilities located within areas defined by this article as rural shall consist of a system of culverts and open drainage channels capable of effectively carrying stormwaters into natural drainage courses. 
(c)  Urban or rural systems. Drainage facilities located within areas defined by this article as urban or rural shall comply with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, as appropriate. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 6.2) 
Sec. 46-209. - Erosion and sediment control and stormwater management plans. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed in accordance with the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook For Construction: Best Management Practices (BMPs), current revision, prepared by the state department of environmental protection, and with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Application submitted pursuant to the subdivision or zoning chapters of this Code for projects that will disturb more than one acres must submit a stormwater management plan to the city engineering division for its review and approval. 
(3)  Stormwater quantity and quality. 
a.  Stormwater management plans shall show means whereby the peak discharge for the developed site shall not exceed the peak discharge for the undeveloped site for 24-hour storms of two-, ten- and 25-year frequencies for all projects that will result in three or more acres of impervious area or 20 or more acres of developed area. The peak flow of the receiving waters may not be increased as a result of the stormwater runoff from the site for 24-hour storms of two-, ten- and 25-year frequencies. The site runoff may not adversely affect designated 100-year flood elevations. Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided for storms in excess of the 25-year storm. Hydraulic calculation techniques and design standards for facilities to achieve such performance standard shall be of accepted methods and subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
b.  Stormwater quality. Stormwater management plans shall show means whereby sediment and other pollutants will be limited through appropriate management practices to prevent adverse downstream water quality impacts. Projects located within the direct watersheds of Lake Auburn or Taylor Pond shall comply with the standards as set forth in appendix A, section 5.7 of this Code (the phosphorus control ordinance). All other projects meeting the threshold criteria of 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-D, Stormwater Management, shall comply with the stormwater quality standards as set forth in the Maine Department of Environmental Protection Regulations, chapter 500, section 4, Stormwater Management (Code Me. R, ch. 500, § 1 et seq.). 
(4)  The developer shall maintain all components of the erosion and sediment control and stormwater management system unless the system is formally accepted by the city or is placed under the jurisdiction of a legally created property owners' association whose charter and powers require maintenance of the system, with adequate financing to carry out this responsibility. 
(5)  A special erosion control plan with additional upgraded measures shall be prepared for construction between September 15 and April 15, a vulnerable period when almost no vegetation can grow, freezing and thawing of soil occurs, and normal rainfall combines with snow melt to produce high amounts of runoff. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized within one week from the time it was last actively worked using temporary or permanent measures, such as placement of riprap, sod, mulch or erosion control blankets, or other comparable measures. 
(7)  If mulch is likely to be moved because of steep slopes or wind exposure, it shall be anchored with netting, peg and twine, or other suitable method, and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established over the entire disturbed area. 
(8)  In addition to placement of riprap, sod, erosion control blankets or mulch, additional steps shall be taken, where necessary, in order to prevent sedimentation. Evidence of sedimentation includes visible gully erosion, discoloration of water by suspended particles and slumping of banks. Silt fences, staked hay bales and other sedimentation control measures, where planned for, shall be in place prior to commencement of work, but shall also be installed whenever necessary due to sedimentation. 
(9)  Mulch or other temporary erosion control measures shall be maintained until the site is permanently stabilized with vegetation or other permanent control measures. 
(10)  Permanent revegetation of all disturbed areas, using native plant material wherever possible, shall occur within 30 days from the time the areas were last actively worked, or for fall and winter activities, by June 15, except where precluded by the type of activity (e.g., riprap, road surfaces, etc.). The vegetative cover shall be maintained. 
(b)  Checklist of required submissions. 
(1)  Map submissions. Map submissions shall include the following: 
a.  A location map with the boundaries of development clearly marked. 
b.  An USGS topographic map, or larger scale map when available or if necessary for clarification, with the boundaries of the site clearly marked and drainage areas used for stormwater management calculations noted. Total watershed above and below the project area shall be shown with: 
1.  Predevelopment drainage areas noted. 
2.  Post-development drainage areas noted. 
c.  A topographic map specifically for the project with: 
1.  Predevelopment contours noted. 
2.  Post-development contours noted. 
3.  Limits of clearing and grading noted. 
4.  Location of stormwater control structures. 
5.  Location of sediment and erosion control practices. 
6.  Predevelopment drainage patterns noted. 
7.  Post-development drainage patterns noted. 
8.  Flow lengths used in time-of-concentration calculations noted. 
d.  A SCS medium intensity soils map with the boundaries of development clearly marked and drainage areas used for stormwater management calculations noted. 
e.  A high intensity soil survey for the development site (also required in section 46-176(b)). 
(2)  Narrative submissions. Narrative submissions shall include the following: 
a.  A description of the development, including a description of the: 
1.  Nature of the development. 
2.  Present and post-development land use cover. 
3.  Areas that will be disturbed by the construction. 
4.  Adjacent areas that will be disturbed by construction. 
5.  Areas on-site especially vulnerable to erosion. 
6.  Soils found on-site. 
b.  A description of the stormwater handling, including: 
1.  A summary and analysis of existing stormwater movement. 
2.  An analysis of post-development stormwater movement. 
3.  Methods being proposed to control stormwater. 
4.  A notation of the method of calculation. 
c.  A description of erosion and sedimentation control. The practices and structures to be used shall be listed and described. The description shall indicate how: 
1.  Accelerated erosion will be minimized. 
2.  Sedimentation will be minimized. 
d.  A schedule of construction, including the schedule of installation/implementation of temporary and permanent sediment and erosion control structures and management practices. 
e.  A description of inspection and maintenance for sediment and erosion control measures. 
(3)  Design drawings and calculations. Design drawings and calculations shall include the following: 
a.  Detailed drawings of any structural practices used that are not referenced. 
b.  Calculations for stormwater management practices, including: 
1.  Worksheets showing assumptions used. 
2.  Detention basins. 
3.  Culverts. 
4.  Ditches and waterways. 
5.  Other information as required. 
c.  Calculations for sediment and erosion control practices, including: 
1.  Worksheets. 
2.  Sediment basins. 
3.  Diversions. 
4.  Ditches and waterways. 
5.  Worksheets used with the Universal Soil Loss Equation. 
6.  Other information as required. 
(c)  Checklist help sheet. This subsection (c) provides additional explanations for the items required in the checklist of required submissions for erosion and sediment control and stormwater management plans as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(1)  Map submissions. 
a.  A location map with the boundaries of development clearly marked. This is simply a small map locating the development in relation to identifiable landmarks. 
b.  An USGS topographic map with the boundaries of development clearly marked and drainage areas used for stormwater management calculations noted. This is a topographic map that clearly shows the whole watershed where the development is located. This is used to analyze patterns of water flow onto the property as well as away from it. This map shall indicate both the predevelopment drainage pattern as well as the post-development pattern. 
c.  A topographic map specifically for the project. This map is required by the city and shall have contour lines at intervals of two feet or at such intervals as the city engineer may otherwise require, based on USGS datum at mean sea level. The existing contours of the development shall be shown. Also, any proposed grading changes shall be indicated. Areas that are to be cleared and graded shall be clearly shown on the map. The location of both stormwater control structures and sediment and erosion control practices shall be drawn on the map. The existing drainage patterns on-site shall be shown on the map by indicating the watershed areas, the general direction of water flow and the longest flow length drawn on it. This flow length is used in calculations of travel time and time of concentration. Post-development drainage patterns shall be shown with any watershed changes noted, changes in direction of water flow indicated and modifications to the longest flow length shown. The existing tree lines, grassy areas and unique vegetation shall be shown on the map. Also, the areas that are especially vulnerable to erosion shall be highlighted in some way. 
d.  A SCS medium intensity soils map with the boundaries of development clearly marked and drainage areas used for stormwater management calculations noted. The development shall be outlined on a medium intensity soil conservation service map in a clearly legible manner so that the soil types present can be easily identified. Drainage areas shall be shown on this map. In cases where the medium intensity soils map must be enlarged for purposes of clarity and legibility, it shall be noted on the modified map that it has been enlarged and that the scale is no longer accurate. A reference to the source of the map shall be included as well. 
e.  A high intensity soil survey for the development. The city requires that a high intensity survey be done for the project and a copy of such map shall be included. Please remember that only a certified soil scientist shall prepare such a map. 
(2)  Narrative submissions. 
a.  Description of the development. A description of the nature and purpose of the land disturbing activity and the amount of grading involved shall be submitted. A description of the existing topography, vegetation and buildings shall be provided along with approximate areas of each. Adjacent areas, such as streams, lakes, residential areas, roads, etc., which might be affected by the land disturbance shall be described. A description of the soils on-site shall be provided, including the soil names and their extent. Finally, a description of the areas on-site that have potentially serious erosion problems shall be included. 
b.  Description of stormwater handling. The existing drainage patterns on-site shall be described as well as the drainage modifications that will occur during and after completion of the construction activity. A summary of the engineering analysis of predevelopment and post-development stormwater changes shall be submitted and the method of calculation noted. Actual calculations shall be submitted in a separate section. A description of the stormwater control practices proposed shall be included. 
c.  Description of erosion and sedimentation control. An outline and brief description of any structures or practices which will be used to control erosion and sedimentation on the development site shall be prepared. Both temporary and permanent measures to be used shall be described. When revegetation will be done, seed mixes, seeding rates, seeding dates, fertilizer, lime and mulch rates shall be specifically described. If critical erosion areas were identified, the plan shall be tailored for these areas. The location of temporary soil stockpiles shall be indicated on the plans; they shall be seeded if they will be needed for an appreciable length of time. The Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook For Construction: Best Management Practices, current revision, is an excellent reference for this section of the plan. 
d.  Schedule of construction. A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development and the proposed sequence of installation of stormwater structures, and erosion and sediment control measures shall be submitted. The sequence shall minimize the time and area that bare soil is exposed at any one time as per the requirements of subsections (a)(5) through (10) of this section. 
e.  Description of inspection and maintenance for sediment and erosion control measures. A schedule of regular inspections and repair of erosion and sediment control structures and stormwater control structures shall be set forth. A guarantee to reseed areas that do not have a successful catch shall be routinely included. 
(3)  Design drawings and calculations. 
a.  Detailed drawings. Detailed drawings shall be provided for any stormwater control structure or any erosion and sediment control measure which is proposed but not referenced to the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management Practices, or other local handbook. 
b.  Calculations for stormwater management practices. Whatever method is used to compute stormwater calculations, the associated worksheets and calculations shall be included for review. It is important to clearly identify the basic assumptions used for any set of calculations. The calculations for all proposed detention basins, culverts, ditches, waterways or other structures or measures proposed shall be submitted. 
c.  Calculations for sediment and erosion control practices. Worksheets used to determine sizing of proposed sediment basins, diversions, road ditches and waterways shall be included for review. Also, all computations of the Universal Soil Loss Equation shall be included as well. 
(d)  Resource publications. Resource publications (current revisions) for preparing erosion and sediment control plans are as follows: 
(1)  Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management Practices, prepared by the Cumberland County SWCD and the department of environmental protection. 
(2)  Stormwater Management Manual, prepared by the Greater Portland Council of Governments. 
(3)  Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds (TR-55), June 1986 (available from the National Technical Information Service (NTIS), U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA 22161, (703) 487-4650)). 
(4)  Other publications may be used subject to approval of the city engineer. 
(e)  General criteria for sediment and erosion control plans. General criteria for sediment and erosion control plans are as follows: 
(1)  All denuded areas shall be stabilized. 
(2)  All soil stockpiles shall be stabilized. 
(3)  Permanent vegetation shall be established. 
(4)  Adjacent properties shall be protected from sediment from the development. 
(5)  Adjacent properties shall not be subjected to erosion due to increased runoff water from the development. 
(6)  Cut and fill slopes shall be constructed and stabilized in a way to reduce erosion. 
(7)  On-site waterways and outlets shall be stabilized. 
(8)  Storm sewer inlets shall be protected from sediment. 
(9)  If working in or crossing live streams, the streams shall be protected during construction. 
(10)  Construction access routes shall be stabilized, to include dust control. 
(11)  Temporary sediment and erosion control structures shall be removed when the development is finished. 
(12)  Maintenance of stormwater, sediment and erosion control structures shall be adequately addressed. 
(f)  Appurtenances. 
(1)  Riprap. MDOT specifications, section 610, Stone Fill, Stone Blanket and Stone Ditch Protection, shall be applicable to this subject. 
(2)  Erosion control blankets. MDOT specifications, section 613, Erosion Control Blankets, shall be applicable to this subject. 
(3)  Sodding. MDOT specifications, section 616, Sodding, shall be applicable to this subject. 
(4)  Loam. MDOT specifications, section 615, Loam, shall be applicable to this subject. All esplanades, circular turnaround islands, ditch slopes and other planting strip areas at sides of streets shall receive at least four inches of loam. 
(5)  Seeding. MDOT specifications, section 618, Seeding, shall be applicable to this subject. Seeding Method Number 1 (Park Mixture) shall be used on areas specified in subsection (f)(4) of this section. 
(6)  Mulch. MDOT specifications, section 619, Mulch, shall be applicable to this subject. 
(7)  Geotextiles. MDOT specifications, section 620, Geotextiles, shall be applicable to this subject. 
(8)  Landscaping. MDOT specifications, section 621, Landscaping, and section 622, Transplanting Shrubs, Hedges and Trees, shall be applicable to this subject. 
(9)  Dust control. MDOT specifications, section 637, Dust Control, shall be applicable to this subject. Dust control shall be provided for all areas as necessary to prevent the visible emissions of dust in the air. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 6.3) 
Sec. 46-210. - Drainage system design standards. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  All development applications shall contain a drainage system plan, to include profiles, typical cross sections and typical detail drawings of drainage structures; and designed by a state registered professional engineer. The plan shall show under drain/stormwater conveyance pipes, catchbasins, manholes, ditches, culverts, easements and other proposed drainage system improvements with a statement in writing attached to the drainage system plan indicating that the proposed development will not create erosion, drainage or runoff problems either in the development or adjacent properties. Some of the drainage system plans may be combined with other plans in the development application, such as the street plans and profiles. 
(2)  Pipe inlet and outlet invert elevations shall be shown on profiles of the drainage system. Catchbasin inlet grate elevations shall be shown on the plans. 
(3)  All drainage systems within the development, except as required in subsection (c)(5)b of this section, shall be designed to meet the criteria of the performance standards for a 25-year storm based on rainfall data as available. Flows shall be computed by appropriate professional methods, with design computations being submitted for review by the city engineer. 
(4)  Upstream drainage shall be accommodated by an adequately sized drainage system through the proposed development for existing and future potential development in the upstream drainage area or areas tributary to the proposed development. 
(5)  Existing upstream and downstream drainage facilities shall be studied to determine the effect of the proposed development's drainage. The developer shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the storm drainage from the proposed development will not, in any way, overload or damage existing storm drainage systems upstream or downstream from the proposed development. 
(6)  Where open ditches (other than street side ditches), channels, streams, natural drainage courses or closed conduits are used to collect, discharge or transmit water through the development, an adequately sized, perpetual drainage easement shall be provided. Such easement shall be centered as closely as possible to the middle of the watercourse or conduit and shall be no less than 30 feet in width in order to allow adequate ingress and egress of maintenance equipment. 
(7)  Where a drainage easement is to contain an open ditch, channel, stream or natural drainage course, the following shall apply: 
a.  The easement shall be cleared of all trees and brush and all stumps shall be removed to the extent necessary to allow adequate drainage and to provide vehicular access for maintenance where determined necessary by the city engineer. 
b.  The channel shall be constructed according to a plan that will show the following: 
1.  The location and boundaries of the easement. 
2.  Contour lines depicting the shape and slope of the channel. 
3.  Typical cross sections of the channel showing how the channel will be constructed to prevent erosion. 
(8)  Where a drainage easement is to contain a closed conduit, a plan shall be provided showing the following: 
a.  The location and boundaries of the easement. 
b.  A profile of closed conduit with stationing and elevations of conduit invert at each full and half stations. 
c.  Typical cross sections of the channel showing how the channel will be constructed to prevent erosion. 
(9)  Drainage easements shall be private and adequate care and maintenance of the easements shall be a provision of the deeds and covenants of the respective private properties on which the easements are located unless otherwise decided by the public works director. 
(b)  Urban standards. 
(1)  Under drain shall be installed on both sides of curbed streets and will also constitute the major portion of the underground stormwater conveyance system. The city engineer may approve the installation of an under drain on only the uphill side of the street traversing a slope or on only one side of the street in a relatively flat area if the developer's engineer can demonstrate that street area surface water infiltration shall be quickly drained from the street aggregate base/subbase and that groundwater will not reach the street aggregate base/subbase once the development is fully developed. 
(2)  Minimum pipe size for any drainage pipe shall be 12-inches in diameter, except for type B under drainpipe, which shall be six inches in diameter. 
(3)  Design of storm drains shall be on the basis of flowing full at a minimum velocity of 2.5 feet per second. 
(4)  Three hundred feet shall be considered as a maximum length for carrying open stormwater in a street gutter prior to intake at a catchbasin, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  Catchbasin inlet grate elevations shall be recessed two inches below the gutter line grade with a minimum gutter line transition distance of ten feet upgrade and five feet downgrade of the inlet grate. 
(6)  No water shall be permitted to drain across a street or an intersection. 
(7)  Catchbasins or manholes shall be placed at all vertical and horizontal changes in the alignment of pipe, and at all junctions. However, in no case shall catchbasins or manholes be spaced at intervals exceeding 300 feet, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(8)  Drains shall be designed such that a minimum of four feet of cover over the pipe is provided within the right-of-way and in paved areas or three feet of cover is provided in unpaved areas outside the street right-of-way. 
(9)  House foundation perimeter drains and roof drains may be connected to the storm drainage system only if fitted with backflow checkvalves and upon written approval by and under the supervision of the city engineer. 
(c)  Rural standards. 
(1)  Street side ditches and outlet channels shall be of a configuration and size to carry the contributory stormwater and subsurface flows from the street way structure and street side embankments. In all instances, the invert of the ditch shall be a minimum of six inches below the subgrade of the street way extended to the shoulder, except in areas: 
a.  Of well drained native soils as approved by the city engineer; 
b.  Where the ditch line gradient is great enough to prevent the 25-year stormwater level from infiltrating the street aggregate base/subbase; or 
c.  Where subsurface soils are of a nature requiring an under drain system, in which case, subgrade may be constructed to direct subsurface water to the under drainpipes. 
(2)  Ditches shall drain in a positive manner. 
(3)  Street side ditches shall be a minimum grade of 0.5 percent or the grade required to handle the design flow, whichever is greater, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(4)  Ditch linings shall be provided to protect the side slopes and bottom from erosion and scour. Minimum channel linings for corresponding longitudinal slopes shall conform to the following: 
0.5-6.0 percent Loam and seed, protected by erosion control mesh. 6.0-8.0 percent Sod placed over loam. Over 8.0 percent Stone, masonry, bituminous concrete or metal linings.  
(5)  Culverts shall be required as follows: 
a.  Cross culverts. Culverts crossing under roads or streets shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches or be sized to pass a 25-year frequency storm from the contributing drainage area, whichever is greater, with a maximum hydrostatic head two feet above the culvert inlet invert or three inches below the outside edge of the shoulder, whichever is the greater elevation. 
b.  Driveway culverts. Culverts shall be installed under any proposed or existing driveway that interrupts natural or proposed longitudinal drainage along any street or road. Driveway culverts shall be of a size capable of passing a ten-year frequency storm from the contributing drainage area with a maximum hydrostatic head as specified in subsection (c)(5)a. of this section. Driveway culverts shall be of corrugated metal pipe, unless otherwise approved by the highway division superintendent, and have a minimum diameter of 12 inches. Final determination of culvert size shall be made by the city engineer. Driveway culverts shall be installed on the grade of the street side ditch line. 
c.  Cover. Minimum cover over culverts in roadway areas shall be 24 inches. Minimum cover over driveway culverts shall be 12 inches. 
d.  Ditch lines. Street side ditch lines shall be extended laterally and lowered to accommodate culverts with inlet or outlet inverts below the normal grade of the ditch line. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 6.4) 
Sec. 46-211. - Drainage system materials. 
    The following material shall be utilized for drainage system construction and shall conform to MDOT specifications unless otherwise noted: 
(1)  Reinforced concrete pipe. Reinforced concrete pipe shall meet the requirements of MDOT specifications, section 706, Non-Metallic Pipe. The classification of pipe shall be as required to meet soil and traffic loads with a factor of safety of 1.0 on the 0.01-inch crack strength with a class B bedding. Joints shall be of the rubber gasket type meeting ASTM designation C-443, or of an approved performed plastic jointing material such as Remnak. 
(2)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. PVC pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-278. All pipes shall be supplied with gasket type joints meeting the requirements of ASTM D-3212. Perforated pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-278 or ASTM F-949. Pipe shall be designed to withstand soil and traffic loads with a maximum deflection of five percent. 
(3)  Corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing for under drain. Such pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-252, slot-perforated, for diameters up to ten inches, and to AASHTO M-294 for diameters of 12-24 inches. Pipe to be used for under drain type C shall be perforated in accordance with the applicable perforation requirements of AASHTO M-36, type III, class 1 perforations. Coiled pipe shall not be used. All polyethylene tubing and pipe shall be smooth lined. 
(4)  Corrugated metal pipe. Corrugated metal pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of MDOT specifications, section 707, Metallic Pipe. Pipe gauge shall be as required to meet soil and traffic loads with a deflection of not more than five percent. 
(5)  Under drainpipe. Pipe for under drain may be of perforated corrugated metal pipe, perforated PVC pipe or corrugated polyethylene pipe for under drain meeting similar requirements to that of standard drainpipe conforming to MDOT specifications, section 605, Under Drain. 
(6)  Manholes. 
a.  Manholes shall be of precast concrete construction. Precast units shall conform to the requirements of ASTM designation C-478. Cones shall be truncated. Bases may be cast-in-place concrete, 3,000 pounds per square inch (psi), 28-day strength, or may be precast concrete. 
b.  Manhole steps shall be drop front type of cast aluminum conforming to federal specification QQ-A-200/8 aluminum magnesium silicide type alloy. All steps shall cast into the walls of the manholes so as to form a continuous ladder with a distance of 12 inches between steps. 
c.  Manhole frames and covers shall be either a M24 by 8 manhole or E24 by 5 manhole as manufactured by Etheridge Foundry of Portland, Maine, or an approved equal. Covers shall be solid diamond and marked "storm." 
d.  Manhole inverts shall be constructed of brick and shall be shaped to the crown of the pipe for sizes up to 18 inches and to the spring line for larger pipes. 
e.  Manholes shall have a minimum inside diameter of four feet in the barrel section and two feet in the cone or top slab ingress/egress opening. 
(7)  Catchbasins. 
a.  Catchbasins shall be of precast concrete construction conforming to the appropriate ASTM designations specified in subsection (c)(6) of this section. 
b.  Frame and grate castings shall be as directed by the city engineer. All catchbasins shall be provided with a curb face inlet unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
c.  Catchbasins shall have a minimum two-foot sump for the retention of waterborne solids. 
d.  Minimum inside diameters for catchbasins shall be as specified in subsection (c)(6) of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 6.5) 
Sec. 46-212. - Drainage system construction standards. 
(a)  Drainage system construction shall conform to MDOT specifications, section 603, Pipe Culverts and Storm Drains, section 604, Manholes and Catchbasins, and section 605, Under drain, unless otherwise noted. 
(b)  All trenching shall be accomplished in accordance with all appropriate state and federal safety requirements. 
(c)  Maximum trench width at the pipe crown shall be the outside diameter of the pipe plus two feet. 
(d)  Pipe, excluding culvert pipe and under drain, shall be bedded in crushed or screened stone with a minimum depth of six inches to provide class B bedding. The stone will be deposited in the trench and brought to proper invert grade. The maximum size of stone aggregate will be three-fourths of an inch. When the trench bottom has been excavated, it shall be filled and thoroughly compacted to grade before the utility pipe is placed. When the excavated trench bottom is not sufficiently firm to properly support the utility pipe, the city engineer may direct the developer to excavate below grade and bed the trench bottom with a specified depth of select material. Unless otherwise shown on the final plan, the stone shall be brought to the spring line of the pipe. Bedding materials other than those stated in this subsection may be used upon written approval from the city engineer. The approval shall include a description of materials that may be substituted. 
(e)  Pipe alignment shall be straight in both the horizontal and vertical directions unless specific approval of a curvilinear drain is obtained in writing from the city engineer. 
(f)  Catchbasins and manholes shall be founded below the frost line on a minimum depth of six inches of crushed or screened gravel compacted to a uniform density. 
(g)  All drain outlets shall be terminated in a concrete end wall or shall be riprapped to prevent erosion. Facilities for energy dissipation shall be provided. Culvert pipe inlets shall be constructed so as to prevent or decrease damage to the embankment or to improve efficiency of the culvert. All drain inlet flow control devices and trash racks shall be as required or approved by the city engineer. 
(h)  Type B under drain (six-inch diameter, for intercepting groundwater) shall be laid with perforations down on a minimum three-inch bed of granular material. Type C under drain (12-inch minimum diameter, for conveying surface stormwater and intercepting groundwater) shall be laid with perforations up. Granular material for backfill shall be as specified for type B under drain in MDOT specifications, section 703.22, Under Drain Backfill Materials. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 6.6) 
Secs. 46-213-46-232. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS STANDARDS 

Sec. 46-233. - Intent. 
    A traffic impact analysis shall be provided, to include a determination of the travel demand generated by the development, the identification of deficiencies in the existing and proposed transportation systems, and the identification of the improvements necessary to maintain acceptable levels of service, in order to help prevent deterioration in the quality of service of the city's existing transportation system and to ensure sufficient access to the development. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared under the supervision of a registered professional engineer with specific training in traffic and transportation engineering, and with experience related to preparing traffic studies for existing or proposed developments. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 7.1) 
Sec. 46-234. - Waivers and modifications. 
    The city engineer may waive or modify any of the requirements of this division if the developer's certified traffic engineer can demonstrate that they are not necessary because of size, type or location of the development or because other traffic impact analytical methods or procedures are equally effective, and may waive all requirements of this division if the developer's certified civil engineer can demonstrate that traffic impacts, such as changes in volumes, types and patterns, are negligible. The director of community services may waive all requirements of this division if the developer can demonstrate that traffic impacts, such as changes in volumes, types and patterns, are negligible. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 7.2) 
Sec. 46-235. - Procedure for conducting analysis. 
(a)  Inventory of existing and proposed land use. 
(1)  Existing land use. Site location and setting are important in determining the potential impacts of development on a given site. The site description shall include the following: 
a.  Exact physical location of the proposed development. 
b.  Physical characteristics, such as land configuration, unique features, water bodies, trees, developable acres and topography. 
c.  Existing land uses, such as the actual use, zoning and land use classification. 
d.  Land uses of adjacent property. 
(2)  Proposed land use. Adopted comprehensive plans, community development plans, long range plans or similar documents shall be checked as part of the inventory of proposed land uses. This will provide an indication of the type and direction of future development that is generally acceptable to the community and that may be facilitated by community facilities, such as streets, sewers and water lines. Quantification of trip generation shall also be developed. 
(b)  Inventory of existing and proposed transportation system. 
(1)  Existing transportation system. An understanding of the nature and function of the existing and proposed transportation system in the area near a proposed development site is essential for predicting traffic patterns, performing the traffic analysis and developing necessary improvement alternatives. The following information shall be provided: 
a.  Current and proposed street network, including functional classification, route jurisdiction and the number of moving traffic lanes. 
b.  Geometrics and characteristics, especially at critical intersections, including such items as curb parking and potential street improvements. 
c.  Intersection traffic control. 
d.  Signal timing and system operation at signalized intersections. 
e.  Existing or proposed intersection and development access points and configurations. 
f.  Existing and proposed rights-of-way. 
g.  Available hourly traffic counts. 
h.  Peak period turning movements at critical intersections. 
i.  Accident information. 
j.  Transit routes/headways. 
k.  Transit stops/station locations. 
(2)  Proposed transportation system. 
a.  Comprehensive transportation plan. 
b.  Future improvements, committed and planned. 
(c)  Forecasted nonsite traffic volumes. Nonsite traffic consists of through traffic volumes, having neither an origin nor a destination in the vicinity of the development, and traffic generated by developments adjacent to and affected by, or having an impact on, the proposed development. Methods used to determine nonsite traffic volumes shall include use of the following: 
(1)  Comprehensive transportation plans or related data projections; land use and socioeconomic information shall be checked. 
(2)  Typical annual growth rates; sufficient historic volume information shall be provided and factors shall be developed to apply to existing counts. 
(3)  Known site-specific development in planning/construction phases. 
(d)  Site related traffic. Site related traffic shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Divide activities associated with development into components. 
(2)  Identify trip generation units of measure and rates for components. 
(3)  Estimate development-generated units of measure and rates for components. 
(4)  Identify the critical hours of analysis, such as the adjacent street morning and evening peak hours or the proposed development peak hour of activity. 
(5)  The trips generated shall then be distributed to the transportation system on the basis of land use, population or employment, distance, accessibility and any local factors affecting distribution. The distribution should reflect conditions for the analysis year, and the methodology should be well documented. 
(6)  If the magnitude of the development is significant, a determination of the mode of travel may be necessary. The determination of trips generated is most likely in terms of vehicle trips; therefore, an assessment of vehicle occupancy shall be performed to convert vehicle-trips to person-trips. Then, the alternative modes of travel shall be analyzed as to their attractiveness to development-generated traffic. 
(7)  Trips for various transportation modes shall be assigned to existing and proposed transportation networks based on available system capacity, convenience and other relevant criteria. Traffic assignments shall reflect logical routing and realistic roadway capacity potential. 
(e)  Traffic analysis. 
(1)  Nonsite and site-related traffic shall be combined (i.e., the traffic volumes for the various stages of the proposed development and the determined analysis periods (morning, evening or development peak hours), estimated in previous steps, in order to obtain estimates of total projected traffic volumes). 
(2)  Capacity analyses shall be conducted for all critical intersections and access points during peak traffic periods. Critical intersections usually fall into the following categories: 
a.  All major intersections within a certain distance of the development as agreed to by the city engineer. 
b.  All affected intersections where development traffic would increase the volume to a level that would warrant improvements. 
c.  All affected intersections that operate or would, after development, operate below design levels of service. 
(3)  The results of the capacity analyses shall be used to identify street and road segments and intersections near the development that are or will, after development, be deficient in capacity, and to identify safety-related constraints. 
(f)  Street/road and access improvements. The information determined pursuant to subsection (e) of this section is then used to identify and evaluate improvements that can be made to maintain acceptable levels of service and to help decision-makers to determine whether the impact of the proposed development on the surrounding area is acceptable. Level of service D shall be considered appropriate for urban design unless otherwise indicated by the city engineer or as required in section 46-179(j) and (k). The following elements shall be addressed as applicable: 
(1)  External street/road system improvements. 
a.  Review of design vehicle requirements. 
b.  New streets/roads and lanes. 
c.  New or modified interchanges. 
d.  Additional through lanes. 
e.  Turn lanes, including storage lengths. 
f.  Acceleration/deceleration and bypass lanes. 
g.  New signals. 
h.  Modification of existing signals. 
(2)  Internal street system. 
a.  Review of design vehicle requirements. 
b.  Lane requirements. 
c.  Traffic control. 
d.  Driveway design. 
(3)  Evaluation of improvements. 
a.  Impact on operating characteristics. 
b.  Cost. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 7.3) 
Sec. 46-236. - Department of transportation traffic movement permit. 
(a)  The city has been given the authority by the state department of transportation to review and approve all development projects that meet the following threshold standards, provided, the applicant submits a traffic study with criteria as required in section 46-235: 
(1)  A project generating 100 to 200 passenger car equivalents at peak hour as described in 23 M.R.S.A. § 704-A(2) and (4). 
(2)  A project generating 200 or more passenger car equivalents at peak hour (provided there is no impact in any other municipality other than the City of Auburn) as described in 23 M.R.S.A. § 704-A(2) and (4). 
(b)  All development projects meeting the requirements of subsection (a) of this section must also receive approval from the city planning board in conformance with article 7, section 7.1 of appendix A of this Code (the zoning ordinance). 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 7.4) 
Secs. 46-237-46-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONSTRUCTION RECORDS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 46-266. - Records. 
(a)  After approval by the planning board of a development and prior to construction, the developer shall supply the city engineer with a complete set of engineering drawings on Mylar showing all streets, sanitary sewers, drainage facilities, utilities and all appurtenant work within the development at a scale of not more than one inch equals 50 feet. 
(b)  An accurate record of each utility service lateral, its location and depth at the street right-of-way, shall be kept by the developer and true copies of such record will be provided to the city engineer and the appropriate utility. 
(c)  The developer shall provide the city engineer with a complete and accurate list of any changes from the engineering drawings and a marked set of as-built, reproducible drawings prior to the release of the performance bond. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 8.1) 
Sec. 46-267. - Inspection of required improvements. 
(a)  Purpose of inspection. The primary purpose of inspection by the city is to protect the taxpayer's investment by observing and recording development construction activities to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article. The need for construction inspection is always present and the role of an inspector is often critical in ensuring a product of acceptable quality. 
(b)  Scope and conduct of inspections. 
(1)  An inspection shall include the monitoring of the construction process, inspection of materials and critical activities, and the coordination of sampling and testing events. 
(2)  The place, frequency and thoroughness of inspection may vary depending on the construction activity, the quality of work exhibited by the contractor and the availability of inspection personnel. 
(3)  Inspection by the city will not in any way hold the city liable for improvements, nor will it relieve the developer of the responsibility for quality control of the construction project or the need for the developer to provide engineering, surveying, grade control and technical personnel as required by this article or as may be necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Start of construction notice. Prior to the start of construction, the developer shall give written notice to the city engineer. The notice shall include the following: 
(1)  Type of improvements. 
(2)  Description and the amount of work to be completed. 
(3)  Starting date. 
(4)  Duration of construction. 
(5)  Construction schedule. 
Construction shall be scheduled continuously until the date of completion. 
(d)  Inspection fee. 
(1)  Prior to the start of construction, the developer shall pay an inspection fee as set out forth in appendix B to this Code. Improvements subject to fees include those that have public impacts relevant to this article, typically all improvements excluding structures permitted by the building inspector. 
(2)  The developer shall submit a list of all discrete improvement tasks, quantities and the related costs. The city engineer shall review the list to determine which improvements have public impacts relevant to this article. 
(3)  The fee shall cover inspection during regular city work hours as well as off hours, to include weekends and holidays, and the contracting by the city of inspection services when necessary. 
(4)  Fees prescribed in this subsection (d) shall be paid at the office of the engineering division. Checks shall be made payable to the city. 
(e)  Notice to proceed. Within 15 days of receipt of the written notice, inspection fee and bond as required in section 46-299, the city engineer shall issue a written notice to proceed. 
(f)  Stop work order. Upon notice from the city engineer that work on the development is being performed contrary to the provisions of this article or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the developer, the developer's agent or the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which the work will be permitted to resume, to include payment of a $250.00 fine and $250.00 for each day work continues in violation of the written stop work order. 
(g)  Testing. Testing, other than that provided by the developer, may be required by the city engineer in order to determine if materials and required improvements are in accordance with approved plans and specifications. Such testing shall be coordinated by the engineering division and paid for by the developer prior to final acceptance of the improvements. 
(h)  Failure to conform with approved plans. If the city engineer should find, upon inspection of the improvements performed before expiration of the bond, that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with plans and specifications as approved, he shall report such nonconformance to the city manager. The city engineer shall then notify the developer and, if necessary, the bonding company, and shall take all necessary steps to preserve the city's rights under the bond. 
(i)  Modification of location or design. If, at any time before or during construction of the required improvements, the developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city engineer that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design of such required improvements, the city engineer may authorize modifications, provided that the modifications do not amount to a waiver or substantial alteration of the function of any improvements required by the planning board. 
(j)  Maintenance of improvements. The developer or other responsible party shall be required to maintain all public improvements and provide for waste disposal and snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of such improvements by the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 8.2) 
Secs. 46-268-46-297. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND BOND 

Sec. 46-298. - Completion of improvements. 
    Prior to the release of the approved recording plat for subdivisions and the start of construction for all development, the developer shall file a bond as provided in section 46-299, and prior to the release of such bond the developer shall have completed all improvements, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following: 
(1)  All streets shall be graded in conformity with the requirements set out in division 2 of this article. 
(2)  On all streets a suitable hard surface permanent pavement shall be installed meeting the requirements set forth in division 2 of this article. 
(3)  Water, gas, sanitary sewer mains, storm drains and other below pavement structures shall be installed prior to the placement of aggregate base/subbase course, with all lots having sufficient stub outs to avoid the subsequent cutting of pavement. 
(4)  Sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed as required in division 2 of this article. 
(5)  Adequate stormwater and groundwater drainage shall be constructed subject to the provisions of division 3 of this article and in accordance with the approved project specifications. 
(6)  Monuments meeting the requirements as set forth in section 46-184(i) shall be installed at all angles and points of curvature in the right-of-way. 
(7)  All utility lines shall be placed underground unless otherwise approved by the city engineer and shall meet the requirements of division 2 of this article. 
(8)  Street lighting, if required, shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the city electrician. 
(9)  Public water supply, if required, shall be installed subject to the approval of the Auburn Water District and shall meet the requirements of division 2 of this article. 
(10)  Public sanitary sewer, if required, shall be installed subject to the approval of the Auburn Sewerage District and shall meet the requirements of division 2 of this article. 
(11)  Landscaping shall be completed as shown on approved plans both within the right-of-way and on private property. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 9.1) 
Sec. 46-299. - Bond. 
(a)  The bond required by section 46-298 shall be a surety bond, an irrevocable letter of credit or escrow account. An alternative form of security may be approved by the director of community services if the director of community services determines that the developer has a proven record of past performance and sufficient financial capability. Alternative forms of security must also be approved by the finance director and city solicitor as to financial sufficiency and proper form. 
(b)  Bonds shall be required to ensure fulfillment of all public improvements and improvements which have public impacts relevant to this article, including those required by section 46-298. Such bond shall specify the completion of the improvements required in the development within 24 months from the date of such bond. Furthermore, the bond shall be released only upon completion of all improvements and the tendering of a defect bond as required in subsections (d) and (e) of this section. 
(c)  The bond shall not exceed 100 percent of the cost of improvements as estimated by the city engineer and approved by the city manager. For special exceptions with improvements of $250,000.00 or more, the bond shall not exceed $250,000.00 or 50 percent of on-site improvements, whichever is greater, and 100 percent of the cost of off-site improvements. The developer of special exceptions may be entitled to one bond reduction with the amount to be justified by existing construction expenditures, satisfactory completion of work and risk assessment as determined by the city engineer. The developer of subdivisions shall not be entitled to bond reductions. The surety shall not be released from the bond except by a release in writing from the city manager upon recommendation from the city engineer and the director of community services. 
(d)  Upon satisfactory completion of the development's prescribed improvements, the developer shall file a defect bond (i.e., maintenance bond) prior to the city's acceptance of any and all streets or other improvements within the development. The defect bond shall ensure workmanship and the durability of all materials used in the construction of the roadways, curbing, esplanades, sidewalks, sanitary sewerage systems (including manholes and house drain laterals), storm drainage systems (including manholes, catchbasins and catchbasin drains), street lighting, landscaping and all other improvements which may become defective within a one-year period, all as determined by the city engineer. The developer shall give to the city, at the time of acceptance of the street as a public street, a warranty deed to the property within each street within the development. 
(e)  The defect bond shall be a bond equal in value to ten percent of the amount of the original bond. An alternative form of security may be approved by the director of community services if the director of community services determines that the developer has a proven record of past performance and sufficient financial capability. A bond that contains appropriate terms and conditions to cover both the performance and defect provisions as specified in subsections (a) through (d) of this section is an acceptable form of security. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2002, § 9.3) 
Secs. 46-300-46-316. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STREET CONSTRUCTION AND ACCEPTANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-317. - Petition by government official for street improvement or acceptance. 
    On the initiative of any public official of the state, county or city having to do with highways, roads or street, the city council may direct the laying out, improvement, construction, reconstruction or acceptance as a public street of the city any street or way, or portion thereof deemed necessary to serve major traffic needs, but only if the city council, on the recommendation of the planning board, finds and determines that the general public interest and the traffic needs of portions of the city larger than a single neighborhood or the traffic needs of some larger region embracing the city so require. 
Sec. 46-318. - Approval by city council after disapproval of planning board. 
    A proposal under this article that has been disapproved by the planning board may be enacted only by a four-fifths vote of the city council. 
Sec. 46-319. - Costs borne by city; exceptions. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, the entire cost associated with the proposal and petition and any construction arising therefrom, or such portion thereof as is determined by the council at public hearing, shall be borne by he city except that this provision shall not restrict any right the city may at any time have to assess upon others all or any portion of such costs. 
Secs. 46-320-46-341. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISIONS. 

Sec. 46-342. - Petition for approval; acceptance; procedure. 
    On petition to the city council, all or any portion of any street in a land subdivision of which a final plan has been duly approved, endorsed and recorded as required in by this Code shall be accepted by vote of the city council as a public city street, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The petition shall be accompanied by two prints of each of the duly approved and recorded plans, profiles and cross sections, if any, of that portion of any street offered for acceptance. 
(2)  Each print shall bear or shall be accompanied by a written certification by the city engineer that the portion of each street offered for acceptance has been in fact constructed to the previously approved plan, profile and cross sections and to the design standards and constructions specifications of this Code and that all utilities, curbs, sidewalks, street signs and street bounds have been in fact installed in accordance with the plan, profile cross sections, standards and specifications. 
(3)  The owner shall present to the city a deed for the property within the boundaries of the right-of-way and other areas as required at the time of the street's acceptance by the city council. 
Secs. 46-343-46-372. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STREETS OUTSIDE SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 46-373. - Applicability. 
    This division provides conditions for laying out, widening, construction or accepting street in the city other than street located in subdivisions. 
Sec. 46-374. - Recommendations and public hearing required. 
    No part of any street or way in the city not on a subdivision final plan approved as required by this Code shall not be laid out, widened, constructed reconstructed or accepted by the city until the city planning board and the city engineer shall have made careful investigation and shall have reported thereon to the city council with recommendations and the city council shall have held a public herein thereon. 
Sec. 46-375. - Persons who may submit proposal; submission to planning board. 
    All or any part of any existing or projected public street or way or any private street or way for vehicular travel serving more than two residential or business properties may be proposed by any owner of property within the city or any municipal official to be laid out, widened, constructed or reconstructed by the city or by others, or be proposed to be accepted by the city, but only in accordance with the conditions stated in this division. Any such proposal shall be directed and presented to the city council through the planning board. 
Sec. 46-376. - Written petition; abuttors signatures required. 
    Except when initiated by the state, the county or the city, each proposal under this division shall be made by written petition signed by two-thirds of the abuttors (both in number and in value assessed) along that portion of the street or way under petition. 
Sec. 46-377. - Contents of petition. 
    Each proposal and petition under this division shall contain or be accompanied by all of the following information: 
(1)  An explicit statement of the particular actions petitioned for; and 
(2)  Clear identification of the street or way or portion thereof that is the subject of the proposal and petition together with a sketch, approximately to scale, of the existing exterior lines of such street or way if of record and, if not of record, of the edges of the traveled width of such street or way. In addition, the sketch shall include an approximate profile of the existing centerline of such way. 
Sec. 46-378. - Waiver of damages required. 
    The petition shall also include the waiver by the abuttors of any land damages resulting from the laying out, improvement or acceptance of said street or way and any land damage resulting from any changes in the grade profile of elevations of such street. 
Sec. 46-379. - Notice to clerk of submission of proposal. 
    Written notice of the date of submission of the proposal shall be given by the petitioners by delivering or sending by certified mail to the city clerk a copy of a cover letter to the planning board form the petitioners listing the plans transmitted to the board for view. 
Sec. 46-380. - Preliminary review and report of city planner and engineer. 
    At the first regular monthly meeting of the planning board following the receipt of a proposal and petition submitted pursuant to this division, the city planner and city engineer shall make a preliminary report to the planning board. The preliminary report shall include: 
(1)  A preliminary evaluation of the relationship of the street or way to the other streets existing or proposed and to the city plan; 
(2)  A preliminary evaluation of the need or desirability of the action proposed, addressing any major consequences to be expected from the action such as impact on traffic flow, neighborhood safety, existing or future land uses, and city income and expense, as well as any other relevant areas of consequence; 
(3)  A preliminary listing of any major filling, grading, paving, drainage, utility and slope easement or retaining wall problems that may arise from the action proposed; 
(4)  A preliminary indication of the relative magnitudes of the construction costs involved; 
(5)  A preliminary indication of the street exterior lines proposed and the relationship of existing structures to the proposed lines; 
(6)  A preliminary evaluation of the amount and kind of land that might be taken or otherwise affected both as to front footage and depth at significant points. 
Sec. 46-381. - Informal meeting if further planning and engineering studies are not required. 
    If after the preliminary review and report the city planner, city engineer and the planning board have doubts as to the wisdom or desirability of further planning and engineering studies (considering full cost and benefit. The board's letter to the petitioners shall include an invitation for the petitioners and any other persons the board deems affected or interested, including other city officials, to meet informally with the planning board at a date and time certain for further discussion of the pending proposal and application. 
Sec. 46-382. - Notice that further planning and engineering studies are required. 
    If the preliminary review and report results in a consensus among the city plan, the city engineer and the planning board that a full and complete study of the petition is required, such decision shall be recorded in the minutes of the planning board and copies of such minutes shall be transmitted to the petitioners, the city council through the city clerk, the city manager and all other city officials or agencies prospectively involved. 
Sec. 46-383. - Preparation and submission of plan and profile. 
(a)  The city planner and the city engineer shall examine the street or way that is the subject of the proposal and petition. The city engineer shall prepare for review by the planning board an accurate plan and profile of the street or way in the same manner as for subdivision streets. The plan and profile and any accompanying information shall show: 
(1)  The length, width, lines, angles and grades, existing or proposed, of the streets or ways that are the subject of the proposal and petition. 
(2)  The relationship to structures existing on the abutting lands. 
(3)  The estimated cost of construction. 
(4)  The length of the frontage of each estate. 
(5)  The lands to be taken and the names of the owners thereof. 
(6)  The names of all property owners who are likely, in the opinion of the city engineer, to sustain damage by the action proposed and the amount of money damages that is proper and reasonable to be awarded to them. 
(b)  After review, the planning board shall transmit the plan, profile, exhibits and accompanying information to the city council together with the board's comments, if any. 
Sec. 46-384. - Notice of public hearing. 
    The city council shall appoint a time for hearing the matter and shall give not less than seven days' notice thereof by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by mailing reprints of the notice to all petitioners and parties deemed concerned. 
Sec. 46-385. - Conduct of hearing; determinations. 
    At or after the public hearing, the city council shall determine and adjudge whether public convenience and necessity require that the action that is the subject of the proposal and petition be taken. The city council shall also estimate the damage likely to be sustained by property owners affected by the action and shall vote such further orders as to property taking, damages, right-of-way lines, grades, and street construction as the council shall then determine. 
Sec. 46-386. - Resubmission after denial of petition. 
    No proposal and petition, duly presented, heard and acted upon by the city council, shall if turned down be again presented sooner than two years from the date of its last being heard by the city council except upon the recommendation of four-fifths of all of the members of the city planning board. 
Sec. 46-387. - Conformity with design standards and specifications required. 
    Any laying out, widening, improvement, construction or reconstruction of any portion of any street or way so voted shall conform to and fulfill the design standards and specifications of this Code. 
Sec. 46-388. - Cost of studies and construction to be shared by abuttors and city. 
    Two-thirds of all costs of preliminary and final studies and the actual construction of any such street layout or street improvement petitioned for shall be the obligation of all of the abuttors along that portion of the street or way so laid out or improved. 
Sec. 46-389. - Acceptance of street by city. 
    After fulfilling all of the procedure and other requirements of this division, and after completion of construction, if any, the city council may vote to accept as a public street of the city any portion of any street or way offered by petition for acceptance provided that the construction of such street way is certified by the city engineer as required herein and further provided that the petition for acceptance is accompanied by all of the prints and information required by this division. 
Sec. 46-390. - Clerk's endorsement; filing of copies. 
    If accepted, notice of the city council vote and date of acceptance shall be endorsed by the city clerk on a plan, profile and cross section of the street or way, together with a notice of the required certification of the city engineer. One copy so endorsed shall be kept with the records of streets accepted by the city. The other copy shall be kept in the planning board records. 
Chapter 48 - TAXATION[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation generally, 36 M.R.S.A. § 111 et seq.; property taxes generally, 36 M.R.S.A. § 201 et seq.; municipal property taxation, 36 M.R.S.A. § 501 et seq.; real property taxes, 36 M.R.S.A. § 551 et seq.; personal property taxes, 36 M.R.S.A. § 601 et seq.; powers and duties of tax collectors, 36 M.R.S.A. § 751 et seq.; delinquent taxes, 36 M.R.S.A. § 891 et seq.; sales and use taxes, 36 M.R.S.A. § 1751 et seq. 

Chapter 50 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities generally, 35-A M.R.S.A. § 2101 et seq.; cable television companies generally, 35-A M.R.S.A. § 8301 et seq.; municipal authority to franchise and regulate cable television systems, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3008; consumer rights and protection relating to cable television service, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3010. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION 

Sec. 50-19. - Purpose and scope of article. 
    This article provides for city regulation and use of the cable television system, including its construction, operation and maintenance in, along, upon, across, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the city, including poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, conductors and fixtures necessary for a cable television system, and provides conditions accompanying the grant of a franchise and providing for the city's regulation of cable television system operation. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.1) 
Sec. 50-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable television company and company mean any person owning, controlling, operating, managing or leasing a cable television system within the city. 
    Cable television system means any facility that, in whole or in part, receives directly or indirectly over the air and amplifies or otherwise modifies signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations, or originates its own signals produced through any of its community access channels, and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services. The term does not include any such facility that serves fewer than 50 subscribers or that serves only the residents of one or more apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or management and commercial establishments located on the premises of the apartment dwellings. 
    City means the City of Auburn, organized and existing under the laws of the state, and the area within its territorial limits. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.2) 
Sec. 50-21. - Cable television advisory board. 
(a)  Authorized. The municipal officers are hereby authorized to establish a cable television advisory board and to enter into an interlocal agreement with the City of Lewiston and other municipalities served by the cable system serving the city for the purpose of establishing a cable television advisory board. 
(b)  Membership. The municipal officers are hereby authorized to appoint up to six volunteer members to the cable television advisory board for the city. In addition, the city manager or his designee shall be an advisory member to the board. 
(c)  Duties. The cable television advisory board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Propose such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for monitoring the operation of the cable television system, such rules and regulations being subject to the approval of the municipal officers. All such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with those that have been or may be adopted by the Federal Communications Commission for the operation of such systems, but may, unless expressly preempted, be more detailed, more restrictive, or more strict than applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(2)  Make recommendations to the city and the cable television company concerning educational and local interest programming. 
(3)  Resolve complaints, disputes or disagreements between subscribers and the company. 
(4)  Advise and review the preparation of specifications for bids or requests for proposals for cable television franchises, and invite bids or issue requests for proposals for such franchises. Before issuing a request for proposals or soliciting bids, the cable television advisory board shall determine any special local needs or interests, whether by actively seeking to determine those needs or interests or by allowing a period for public comment on a proposed request for proposals. Upon receipt of bids or proposals, it shall study the bids or proposals and make recommendations on the awarding of a franchise, such recommendations being subject to the approval of the municipal officers. 
(5)  Oversee and administer the use and operation of local public, educational and governmental access facilities. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.7; Ord. of 4-28-1997) 
Sec. 50-22. - Franchise-Required. 
    No person shall install, maintain or operate within the city or any of its public streets or other public areas any equipment or facilities for the operation of a cable television system unless a franchise agreement authorizing the use of the public streets or areas has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this article and unless the franchise agreement is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.3) 
Sec. 50-23. - Same-Granting of application; revocation of. 
(a)  Authority to grant franchise. The municipal officers of the city may contract on such terms, conditions and fees as are in the best interest of the city and its residents with one or more cable television companies for the operation of a cable television system within the city, including the granting of nonexclusive franchise agreements for the operation thereof for a period not to exceed 15 years. 
(b)  Application fee. Applicants for a franchise agreement, including applicants for renewal of a franchise agreement, shall pay a reasonable fee to the city to defray the cost of public notices, advertising and other expenses relating to or incurred by the city in acting upon such applications. The amount of the fee is to be determined by the municipal officers. 
(c)  Contents of application. The application shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain such information as the city may require, including, but not limited to a general description of the applicant's proposed operation, a schedule of proposed charges, a statement detailing its previous two fiscal years, an estimated ten-year financial projection of its proposed system and its proposed annual city franchise fee or the basis for the fee, and a statement detailing the prior operational experience of the applicant in both cable television and microwave service, including that of its officers, management and staff to be associated with the proposed operation. 
(d)  Public comment. Prior to issuing a request for proposals to any cable television company for franchise agreements or renewals, the city shall hold a public hearing or conduct some other process to determine any special local needs or interests with respect to cable television service and shall allow for a period of public comment on the request for proposals. 
(e)  Applications to be public records. Franchise agreement applications, including renewal applications, and any submittals in response to a request for proposals or solicitation of bids and related documents, are public records. Upon the filing of such documents, the city shall provide reasonable notice to the public that such documents are open to public inspection during reasonable hours. 
(f)  Revocation of agreement. A franchise agreement may be revoked by the municipal officers for good and sufficient cause after due notice to the company and a public hearing thereon, with the sole right to appeal to the county superior court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.4) 
Sec. 50-24. - Same-Review of qualifications of applicant; public hearing. 
    Before authorizing the issuance of any franchise agreement under this article, including renewals, and approvals of any transfers of ownership, property or rights under franchise agreements, the municipal officers shall review the applicant's character and financial and technical qualifications and the adequacy and feasibility of its qualifications to operate a cable television system within the city, and shall conduct a public hearing thereon with at least seven days' advertised notice prior to the public hearing. Such public hearing shall provide a reasonable opportunity for public input on the proposed franchise agreement, renewal or transfer. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.5) 
Sec. 50-25. - Performance bond and insurance coverage. 
(a)  Upon the execution of any franchise agreement under this article, the cable television company shall file a surety company performance bond in the amount and in such form as is acceptable to the city. 
(b)  The city, in making this determination, may rely upon the advice of the municipal officers, the city manager, the city attorney and/or other appropriate city officials. The amount of the bond shall not be less than the estimated cost of performing any work specified in the franchise agreement and shall include the cost of dismantling the cable television system. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and full compliance with any laws, ordinances or regulations governing such franchise agreements. 
(c)  When the cable television company has completed construction of the system as set forth in the franchise agreement, and provided that the cable television company is otherwise in compliance with the terms of the franchise agreement, the municipal officers shall permit the company to reduce the bond to an amount sufficient to cover the cost of dismantling the system. 
(d)  The cable television company shall also, upon execution of any such franchise contract, provide evidence of such public liability, copyright infringement and other insurance coverage as the municipal officers may require. 
(e)  The municipal officers may opt to provide for a cash security fund in lieu of a performance bond and appropriately condition the security fund. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.6) 
Sec. 50-26. - Contents of franchise agreement. 
    Each franchise agreement between the city and any cable television company shall contain, but is not limited to, the following provisions: 
(1)  A statement of the areas to be served by the cable television company; 
(2)  A line extension policy; 
(3)  A provision for renewal, the term of which may not exceed 15 years; 
(4)  Procedures for the investigation and resolution of subscriber complaints by the cable television company; 
(5)  An agreement to comply with the requirements of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3010 regarding consumer rights and protection and any amendments thereto; 
(6)  Any other terms and conditions that are in the best interest of the city; and 
(7)  A provision for access to, and facilities to make use of, one or more local public, educational and government access channels. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.8) 
Sec. 50-27. - Powers and duties of city officers. 
(a)  The municipal officers of the city shall, either directly or through their designees: 
(1)  Adopt such ordinances, rules and regulations as they may deem necessary for regulating the operation of a cable television system. 
(2)  Make recommendations to the cable television company concerning educational and local interest programming. 
(3)  Resolve complaints, disputes or disagreements between subscribers and the company. 
(4)  Conduct public hearings and issue such appropriate orders as they may deem necessary to enforce the provisions of this article and any regulations, rules and orders and franchise agreements, including the revocation of franchise agreements and the assessment of penalties for violations, as well as to correct any deficiencies in the operation of the system. The municipal officers' decisions and findings shall be final and binding upon all parties, including the company, except that such decision or finding may be appealed to the county superior court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(b)  All such ordinances, regulations, rules and orders of the municipal officers shall not be in conflict with those that have been or may be adopted by the Federal Communications Commission for the operation of such systems, except that, unless expressly preempted, such ordinances, regulations, rules and orders may be more detailed, more strict or more restrictive than applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(c)  As part of the city's enforcement authority, the municipal officers have the authority to bring legal action for damages, penalties and injunctive relief. The city shall be entitled to recover its costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred in the enforcement of this article, the provisions of a franchise agreement, or any local rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.9) 
Sec. 50-28. - Compliance with applicable regulations. 
    Cable television companies shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances, codes and orders. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1996(1), § 1.10) 
Chapter 52 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles generally, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101 et seq.; authority of municipal officer to enact traffic ordinances, limitations, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009; traffic control devices, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2057; tampering with signs prohibited, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2107; parking, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068; municipal authority for removal of improperly parked vehicles, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2069; bicycles, toy vehicles and scooters, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2063; bicycle equipment, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2084. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-1. - Definitions. 
    The definitions regarding motor vehicles in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101 are adopted by reference and shall apply throughout this chapter. 
State Law reference- Traffic related definitions, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101. 
Sec. 52-2. - Adoption of state laws. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009, all statutes regarding the operation of motor vehicles as set out in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101 et seq. are made a part of this chapter and incorporated in this chapter by reference for the purpose of governing the operation of motor vehicles on the open, unaccepted streets in the city. The penalty for violation of any of the statutes adopted in this section by reference shall be a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.17) 
State Law reference- Authority for adoption of traffic ordinances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009. 
Sec. 52-3. - Applicability of chapter to public employees. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the federal government, the state, the county or the city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Code 1967, § 26-2.4) 
Sec. 52-4. - Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and stopping of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  A driver, when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may: 
(1)  Park or stop notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(5)  Proceed with caution past a stopped school bus that has red lights flashing, only after coming to a complete stop and when signaled by the school bus operator to proceed. 
(c)  The exceptions listed in this section shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Code 1967, § 26-2.5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2054. 
Sec. 52-5. - Applicability to nonmotorized vehicles. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway, and any every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1967, § 26-2.6) 
State Law reference- Animals on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2055(1). 
Sec. 52-6. - Motor vehicles and bicycles on city school property. 
    The school committee may establish regulations governing the parking, speed and manner of operation of motor vehicles and bicycles on schoolgrounds and accessways, or exclude motor vehicles and bicycles completely from schoolgrounds and accessways. Such regulations shall be filed in the office of the superintendent and the office of the police department and posted on the schoolgrounds or accessways to which they apply. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.38) 
Secs. 52-7-52-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-31. - Penalty. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law or this chapter, it shall be civil violation for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by any provision of this chapter and such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1967, §§ 26-2.3, 26-8.1) 
State Law reference- Traffic infractions, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 103; traffic violations, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2101-A et seq. 
Sec. 52-32. - Temporary and experimental traffic regulations. 
    The chief of police is empowered, without prior approval of the council, to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city, and to make and enforce temporary and experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. Such temporary or experimental regulations may remain in effect for 90 days unless sooner revoked by the city council. Such regulations shall be in writing, shall indicate the date and time at which they go into effect, and shall be posted or otherwise available for inspection at the city police station. In any case in which, at the conclusion of the 90-day trial period, the chief is uncertain whether the temporary regulation should become permanent, he may continue the regulation in effect for an additional period of up to 90 days, provided the date and time at which the extended ordinance will become effective and the date on which it will expire are posted or otherwise available for inspection at the police station. 
(Code 1967, § 26-2.2(a)) 
Sec. 52-33. - Authority of police and fire department officials to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the police chief are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. Members of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1967, § 26-2.1) 
State Law reference- Control of vehicle traffic at emergency scenes, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2091; emergency rule, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2078. 
Sec. 52-34. - Parades; funeral processions. 
(a)  Persons organizing funeral processions may obtain from the chief of police, as provided with respect to parades in subsection (b) of this section, a permit, except that, in the case of funeral processions containing less than 25 cars, no such permit shall be required, but the chief of police shall be given at least one hour's notice of the estimated size of the funeral procession, of the route it is to take, and of the estimated time of the procession's departure. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to parade on the streets of the city unless permission has been obtained from the chief of police, and they shall first present to the chief of police a request in writing for permission to use the streets of the city for the purpose of parading, together with the designated route the parade is to follow, and the time and duration of the parade. The chief of police may grant the permit provided it will not unreasonably interfere with traffic and will not create a disturbance upon the streets. The request for such permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia. 
(d)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1967, §§ 26-6.7, 26-6.8, 26-6.10) 
State Law reference- Funeral procession vehicle lights and lighting, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2054. 
Sec. 52-35. - Fire lanes on private property may be established by agreement. 
    The chief of police may enter into agreements with the owners of private property to which members of the public are invited regarding the establishment of fire lanes when the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions would be likely to interfere with the ingress or egress of fire department vehicles for the protection of persons and property. Such agreements shall be in writing and kept on file at the city police station so long as they remain in effect and shall specify the locations of the fire lanes in question. Fire lanes shall also be clearly identified with paint or signs prohibiting obstruction by motor vehicles or otherwise. Violations of the fire lane agreements shall be civil violations and shall be enforced by the city police department in the same manner as violations of city ordinances regulating on-street parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1967, § 26-2.7) 
Sec. 52-36. - Truck routes authorized. 
    Truck traffic routes, to be identified by signs and markings erected and maintained as directed by the city manager, may be established within the city limits. When established and posted, all persons driving motor vehicles into the city limits for the transportation of property through the city shall drive such vehicle over and along such established truck traffic routes. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.17) 
Secs. 52-37-52-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic control devices, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2057. 

Sec. 52-61. - Powers of police chief. 
(a)  Placement of traffic control devices. The chief of police is empowered, without prior approval of the council, to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, signs, signals and other traffic control devices which he deems necessary under the circumstances. The chief shall advise the city council every time he places or causes to be placed a sign, signal or traffic control device under this section. The council shall thereupon affirm the chief's action bypassing an ordinance, or shall order the chief to remove the sign, signal or other traffic control device. Prior to the council taking action, the sign, signal or traffic control device installed under the provisions of this section, and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law, shall be an official traffic control device. 
(b)  Marking of traffic lanes and parking spaces. The chief of police is authorized to make lanes for parking and for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable consistent with this chapter. 
(c)  Designation of loading zones. The police chief, with the approval of the city manager, may designate space as curb loading zones on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. The police chief shall cause such spaces to be designated by appropriate signs or curb markings or both. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such space when the space has been officially designated and appropriately marked, except for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, for a period not to exceed 30 minutes, or in loading or unloading materials for a period not be exceed 30 minutes. 
(d)  Designation of crosswalks. The chief of police is authorized to designate and maintain, by appropriate devices or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections and at such places as he may deem necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 26-2.2(b)-(e)) 
Sec. 52-62. - Obedience; placement required for enforcement of certain provisions. 
(a)  No provisions of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(b)  Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority. 
(c)  Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  The driver of any vehicle, the operator of a bicycle, and pedestrians shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Code 1967, § 26-3.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2057. 
Sec. 52-63. - Stop or yield signs. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the police chief to place and maintain, or have placed and maintained, a stop or yield sign on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals. Every such sign shall conform to the manual on uniform traffic control devices. 
(Code 1967, § 26-3.2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2057(7); right-of-way, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2053. 
Sec. 52-64. - Damaging, defacing or removing prohibited. 
    No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device, or any inscription shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 26-3.3) 
State Law reference- Tampering with signs, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2107; criminal mischief, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 806. 
Sec. 52-65. - One-way streets and alleys. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the chief of police shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.6) 
State Law reference- One-way roads, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2059. 
Sec. 52-66. - Reflective devices for persons riding horseback after dark. 
    No person shall ride horseback after dark on any public street unless wearing reflective clothing or some other reflective article or device which is clearly visible for at least 200 feet when illuminated by the headlights of traffic approaching from either direction on the highway. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.20) 
Secs. 52-67-52-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC CONTROL FOR CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 52-91. - Findings; policy and intent. 
    The city hereby establishes a policy regarding traffic control for construction, repair and/or improvement work which occurs on city or state owned rights-of-way within the city. The city finds that traffic safety is a concern for the health and welfare of the city residents and the traveling public. Safety issues along the city's major streets, roads and highways are of increased concern due to traffic speed and volumes. Construction, repair and/or improvements which occur within the travel ways of these streets represent a hazard to both the traveling public and personnel who must perform such activities. Therefore, the city establishes this policy to provide traffic control rules. 
Sec. 52-92. - Responsibility for administration. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the police chief and public works director, or their designees to administer this policy. Either the police chief or the public works director may extend the provisions of this policy when he believes it to be in the best interest and safety of citizens. 
Sec. 52-93. - Applicability. 
(a)  This division shall apply to all private contractors, vendors or service providers who operate within the public rights of way noted herein. The city and related public agencies are exempt from this division. Private contractors, vendors and service providers hired by a public agency are also subject to the provisions of this division. Private entities working in concert with a public agency may be exempt from this division at the discretion of the hiring public agency. For the purposes of this division public agencies include, but are not limited to, the city, Auburn Water and Sewer District, and Lewiston Water and Sewer Division. 
(b)  This division shall apply, but not be limited to, construction, repair, improvement, alteration, adjustment, excavation or demolition of property (private or public) within the publicly owned right-of-way. Examples of these activities include, but are not limited to, telephone, cable television, electrical, water, sewer, gas, or stormwater facilities and infrastructure maintenance or construction. 
(c)  This policy shall apply to the following streets, roads and intersections: 
(1)  Academy Street (Main to High). 
(2)  Broad Street (South Bridge to South Main). 
(3)  Center Street (Union Street to townline). 
(4)  Court Street. 
(5)  Elm Street at Spring Street. 
(6)  Great Falls Plaza Drive. 
(7)  Hampshire Street (Turner to Union). 
(8)  High Street (Academy to Minot). 
(9)  Hotel Road at Steven Mills Road. 
(10)  Hotel Road at Young's Corner Road. 
(11)  Hotel Road at Kittyhawk Avenue. 
(12)  Main Street. 
(13)  Manley Road at Rodman Road. 
(14)  Mill Street (Broad to Main). 
(15)  Minot Avenue. 
(16)  Mount Auburn Avenue (Center to Gracelawn). 
(17)  Turner Street (Court to Center) (Mt. Auburn to Auburn Mall). 
(18)  Union Street. 
(19)  Washington Street (north and south). 
(d)  The public works director and police chief or their designees may require the use of police department personnel for activities on streets or roads not specifically designated in or authorized by this division if, in their opinion, the nature of the activity, road characteristics or traffic volumes indicate a need for city supervised traffic control. Conversely, if the public works director or police chief determine that the nature of the activities, road characteristics or traffic volumes do not require city supervised traffic control then they may waive the application of this policy for the streets and roads listed in subsection (c) of this section. 
Sec. 52-94. - Notice required; police department to direct traffic. 
(a)  Entities and activities subject to this policy are required to utilize employees of the city police department for traffic control on the streets and roads listed below. Entities shall notify and coordinate with the city through the public works director or his designee and the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  Upon notification of required activities, the police chief or his designee shall assign department personnel in accordance with adopted policies and procedures of the police department. Applicable contractors, vendors and service providers shall reimburse the city for its costs of assigned traffic control in accordance with a fee schedule adopted, and as may be further amended, by the police chief. 
Sec. 52-95. - City to have no liability. 
    The city and its employees shall have no liability in the application and administration of this policy beyond that which is applicable to the city and its employees in the normal course of its responsibilities and duties. 
Sec. 52-96. - Conflict of laws, policies and contractual provisions. 
    The provisions of this policy may not supercede laws of the state, employee contracts or other agreements, ordinances or policies which take precedence. 
(Ord. of 9-17-2007) 
Secs. 52-97-52-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Rules of the road, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2051 et seq. 

Sec. 52-121. - Leaving key in unattended vehicle. 
    No person shall leave an unattended vehicle on a public street with an ignition key in the vehicle. In any such case, any police officer may, for the protection of the vehicle, remove the keys and leave written notice in or attached to the vehicle that the keys are being held for the driver at the city police station. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.19) 
Sec. 52-122. - Driving on sidewalk. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive or ride within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.11) 
Sec. 52-123. - Entering intersections or crosswalk when traffic is obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.15) 
Sec. 52-124. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction in the business district, and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.18) 
State Law reference- Turning at intersections, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2060; U-turns, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2072. 
Secs. 52-125-52-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SNOW REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Snow removal generally, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1001 et seq.; towns required to keep routes clear of snow, sanding, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1003, 3201; snow fences, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1005-A; liability of towns to state for expenses of keeping roads open, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1007; authority of town to regulate ice and snow on public ways, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009; placing or allowing snow or slush to remain on public way prohibited, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2396; authority for removal of parks vehicles interfering with snow removal, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2069. 

Sec. 52-147. - Duties of drivers on meeting snowplow. 
    The driver of any vehicle meeting a snowplow on a roadway in the act of plowing shall turn his vehicle as far to the right as necessary to avoid contact between his vehicle and the plow. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.12) 
Sec. 52-148. - Adequate tires. 
    No person shall cause an obstruction to traffic by reason of inability to move a vehicle being operated by him on any public street because of accumulations of snow, ice or freezing rain, when such vehicle has not been equipped with adequate tires. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.13) 
Sec. 52-149. - Interfering with snow removal. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be parked at any time on any public street or way so as to interfere with or hinder the plowing of snow or the removal of snow from the street or way by the city. The chief of police may cause any vehicle so parked on any street to be placed in a suitable parking space off of the street, at the expense of the owner of such vehicle, and without the City being liable for any damage that may be caused by such removal. 
(b)  For the purpose of facilitating the removal of snow, the public works director or police chief may cause to be placed properly marked signs along any streets as he shall from time to time deem necessary. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter upon, stop or park within the spaces indicated by such signs. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.12) 
State Law reference- Interfering with snow removal, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2069. 
Sec. 52-150. - Parking prohibitions during snow emergencies. 
    Whenever the chief of police or, in his absence, his designated representative, declares that an emergency exists because of existing snow or ice conditions, or that an emergency is imminent because of developing snow or ice conditions, all parking on city streets except by authorized city or emergency vehicles is prohibited beginning 30 minutes after the emergency is officially declared until the police chief or his designee announces that the emergency is over. All local radio stations shall be contacted promptly after the emergency is declared and requested to broadcast frequent announcements that the emergency is in effect. In addition to the other penalties provided for violations of this chapter, vehicles which have been parked or have not been removed in violation of this section may be towed away in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as are provided in section 52-204. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.22) 
State Law reference- Authority for removal of parks vehicles interfering with snow removal, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2069. 
Secs. 52-151-52-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking of motor vehicles, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009; municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068; municipal authority to remove improperly parked vehicles, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2069; certain parking as civil trespass by motor vehicle, 17 M.R.S.A. § 3853-C. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-167. - Exemption for city vehicles and public utility vehicles. 
    Vehicles operated by the city, or by public utility companies, used for installation, repair and maintenance purposes, while in the performance of their duties, may be exempted by the police chief from compliance with the requirements of this article, except that no such permission shall be required in an emergency when it would be impracticable to do so. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.14) 
Sec. 52-168. - Stopping or parking prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway or alleyway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(7)  Upon any bridge. 
(8)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any station within 75 feet of the entrance, when properly signposted. 
(9)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection and within 20 feet of any crosswalk on Union Street. 
(10)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(11)  Within 20 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(12)  On any railroad tracks. 
(13)  At any place where official signs or curb painting so prohibit. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.1) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068. 
Sec. 52-169. - Parking-Prohibited at all times on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.2) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068. 
Sec. 52-170. - Same-Time limited on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected in a particular block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the period of time specified in schedule II of appendix B of this Code between the hours specified (except on Sundays and holidays), or on the days specified, on any of the streets or parts of streets described in schedule II. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.3) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068. 
Sec. 52-171. - Same-Ban for snow management, road maintenance, and special events. 
(a)  The police chief or his designee shall be authorized to implement a citywide or partial city parking ban. During a parking ban, no person shall park any motor vehicle on any public right-of-way maintained by the city at any time in such a manner as to impede snow plowing, snow removal, special event or road surface treatment operations. 
(b)  Information regarding parked vehicles found impeding the operations by the city or independent contractors engaged by the city for purposes of snow plowing, snow removal, road maintenance or special events will be turned over to the police department for removal and impoundment. 
(c)  Any vehicle parked in violation may be authorized to be towed and stored by the chief of police or his designee. Any vehicles towed and stored can be released to the owner upon payment of the towing fee (established by the towing firms), impoundment fees and any outstanding parking violation fines. 
(d)  Any person violating the parking ban shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $50.00 for each offense in addition to any other costs associated with the removal of the vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.4; Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 4.4) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068; authority for removal of parks vehicles interfering with snow removal, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2069. 
Sec. 52-172. - Obstructing traffic. 
    No person shall stop, park or leave his vehicle on any street in such a manner or under such conditions so as to obstruct the free passage of other vehicles in either direction unless specifically permitted by a police officer, or so as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.5) 
Sec. 52-173. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.6) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068. 
Sec. 52-174. - Bus stops and taxistands. 
(a)  The city council is hereby authorized to establish bus stops, taxicab stands, and combinations thereof on such public streets, in such places and in such number as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. The police chief shall cause such spaces to be designated by appropriate signs or curb markings or both. 
(b)  No person shall stop or park a vehicle other than a bus or a taxicab in any such space when the space has been officially designated and appropriately marked. However, stopping or parking such vehicles in bus zones used exclusively by local city buses, but excepting combination bus and taxi zones, is permissible on Sundays and on other days at the conclusion of the last run by the local buses according to the prevailing schedule, if otherwise permitted by city ordinances. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop at a bus stop, taxistand, or combination thereof for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.7) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068. 
Sec. 52-175. - Stopping and parking of buses and taxicabs. 
(a)  The driver of a bus or a taxicab is hereby authorized to park the bus or taxicab in any such space established under section 52-174 without restriction as to time. 
(b)  The driver of a bus shall not stop or park the bus upon any street in any built-up area at any place other than at such a space, when the space has been officially designated and appropriately marked, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(c)  The driver of a taxicab shall remain in the driver's seat of the taxicab, except while actually engaged in admitting or discharging passengers or transporting their luggage, while the taxicab is in such a space. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.8) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068. 
Sec. 52-176. - Parking animal transport vehicles in residential areas prohibited. 
    A person commits an offense if a person parks or leaves standing any truck, trailer, or other vehicle that has been used for the hauling of livestock, animals, fish or fowl in a residentially zoned area of the city, whereas notified by the city's enforcement agents that such vehicle is creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 1-1-2007(02), § 14-42) 
Sec. 52-177. - Parking position; maximum distance from curb. 
    No person shall stop or park a vehicle on any street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement. Within the built-up area, the righthand wheels of a stopped or parked vehicle must be within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.9) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068. 
Sec. 52-178. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
    Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or vehicle within a distance of 500 feet, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with lights, which lights shall be displayed. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked or stopped vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.10) 
State Law reference- Lights on parked vehicles, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2067(3). 
Sec. 52-179. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Advertising; 
(2)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; or 
(3)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.13) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068. 
Sec. 52-180. - Parking for more than 24 hours. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle, trailer, boat trailer or mobile home on any street for more than 24 hours consecutively. Any such motor vehicle, trailer, boat trailer or mobile home found parked in violation of this section may be towed away at the direction of any police officer. Any such towage cost or costs of resulting storage shall be paid by the owner. No person having a bill for such charges shall be required to deliver up the motor vehicle, trailer, boat trailer or mobile home in question without first receiving payment of the charges. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.16) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068. 
Sec. 52-181. - Parking in city-owned lots. 
(a)  All or portions of the following parking lots are designated as permit parking areas: 
(1)  Great Falls Plaza parking lot. 
(2)  Miller Street parking lot. 
(3)  Main Street parking lot. 
(4)  Phoenix Block parking lot. 
(5)  Mechanics Row parking lot. 
(6)  Court Street parking lot. 
(7)  Mechanics Row parking garage. 
(8)  Troy Street parking lot. 
(b)  The monthly fee for permit parking shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule payable in advance at the location designated by the city manager. All monthly permits must be paid by the tenth of each month. Permit holders will be restricted to park within their designated area. Any permit which has not been paid by the tenth of each month or permitted vehicles not parked within their designated area, the owner will be subject to enforcement provisions set forth in section 52-181(c). 
(c)  No car shall be parked in an area restricted to permit parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except pursuant to a valid permit which shall be affixed to the front window of the vehicle in question. Any car parked in violation of this section may be towed pursuant to section 52-204 and its owner shall be subject to the enforcement provisions set forth in section 52-203. The fact that a car is parked in a permit parking section without a valid permit displayed shall be prima facie evidence that the car in question has been illegally parked. The person in whose name the car is registered shall be responsible for any such illegally parked vehicle. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from restricting parking in permit parking areas during special events or from providing free temporary parking in permit areas. 
(e)  Any person parking his vehicle in a space limited to two- or four-hour parking in any city-owned parking lot shall not thereafter park the vehicle in any other parking space in that parking lot during the ensuing 12-hour period other than in a space as to which parking is limited to one hour or less. 
(f)  No person shall park a vehicle in any city-owned lot between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from November 15 to April 15, except in spaces designated as winter relief parking areas. 
(g)  No person shall park a vehicle which is not identified with a handicapped registration plate in a parking space in a city-owned lot which is limited to handicapped parking, nor shall any vehicle be parked in a handicapped parking space longer than the time limit applicable to that space. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.18; Ord. of 7-12-2004(1), § 4.18; Ord. No. 11-09162013, 10-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to layout and alter parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; parking on public ways, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2068; enforcement of disability parking restrictions, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 521(9-A). 
Sec. 52-182. - Parking trucks, railway engines or commercial vehicles in residential zones. 
(a)  No person shall park a tractor-trailer truck or railway engine in a residential zone within 500 feet of a residence with its motor running for a total of more than 20 minutes between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  No commercial vehicle which has a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of more than 9,200 pounds, or has an overall length of more than 22 feet, shall be parked overnight on any residential street, or for longer than two hours during the daylight hours, unless it is being used in the performance of work at the site. This subsection also applies to tractor-trailers as one unit or separate. Pickup trucks are exempt. 
(Code 1967, §§ 27-1.40, 27-1.42) 
Secs. 52-183-52-202. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 52-203. - Payment in lieu of fine. 
(a)  Any person violating any parking provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty imposed for violation of this chapter; however, any person may elect, in lieu of such penalty, to pay such sum for each violation as is set out in the schedule of fines available in the office of the chief of police. Such payment shall in no event be construed as an enforced imposition of a fine or penalty, but shall be construed to be an amount which an offender may voluntarily contribute toward the cost and expense of furnishing to the public a less expensive alternative method of regulating and administering traffic law violations. 
(b)  If, however, such payment has not been received at the city police department within 72 hours after notice of such violation is served by traffic ticket or otherwise, the payment in lieu of the fine shall be twice the amount of the original fine. This alternative method of payment will not be available or applicable for more than seven days after the date of the offense, and the general penalty provided in section 52-31 shall thereafter be imposed. 
(c)  The chief of police is nevertheless authorized to declare a temporary amnesty in the enforcement of this section whenever he determines that it would be in the best interest of the city to do so in order to increase the collection of fines for outstanding parking violations. During any such amnesty, the chief may suspend all or part of the amounts due from certain classes of parking violators above the amounts assessed for the initial parking violation. Any such amnesty shall be for a specified time, shall apply equally to all persons within the same classification of parking ordinance violators, and shall be widely publicized in order to inform those who are affected by it of the opportunity to take advantage of its terms. 
(Code 1967, §§ 26-8.2, 26-8.3; Ord. of 10-27-1997(2)) 
Sec. 52-204. - Towing of vehicles. 
(a)  Illegally parked vehicles. Any vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be towed to another location by or at the direction of the city police department at the risk of the owner. In addition to any other penalties provided by this chapter, the operator of the illegally parked vehicle shall be liable to the towtruck operator for the reasonable costs of towing and storing his car. The towtruck operator may refuse to deliver possession of any such towed vehicle to the owner or operator until such charges have been paid in full. If the operator offers to remove his illegally parked vehicle after a towtruck operator has been called, but before he has arrived, the operator of the vehicle shall pay to the towtruck operator the contracted price of responding to the call to move the vehicle. If the operator refuses to pay such costs the illegally parked vehicle may be towed to another location at the risk of the owner of the vehicle. The operator of the vehicle shall be responsible for the expense of towing and storing the vehicle as provided in this section. The owner of the vehicle may obtain possession of the vehicle from the towtruck operator at any time by paying any amounts due to the operator. 
(b)  Vehicles with unpaid parking fines. Any vehicle on which a minimum of $100.00 in unpaid parking fines has accumulated may be towed by or at the direction of the police department at the risk of the owner. The owner or operator of the vehicle may retrieve the vehicle upon payment of all unpaid parking fines and upon payment of towing costs as provided in this section. 
(Code 1967, § 26-8.4) 
State Law reference- Authority to remove improperly parked vehicle, 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2069. 
Sec. 52-205. - Failure to comply with citation. 
    If a violator of the restrictions on stopping or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to a motor vehicle within a period of seven days, the chief of police may send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that, if such letter is disregarded for a period of five days from the date of postmark, a court summons will be issued. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.11(a)) 
Sec. 52-206. - Registered owner of vehicle presumed responsible for violations. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the stopping or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4.11(b)) 
Sec. 52-207. - Removal of citation placed on vehicle. 
    No person shall remove from any vehicle parking violation ticket, notice or citation placed on or in such vehicle by a police officer of the city or a duly appointed constable, except for the purpose of answering such notice or citation as required therein. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.14) 
Secs. 52-208-52-237. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WEIGHT LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 52-238. - Limitation of 8,000 pounds. 
    No vehicle weighing more than 8,000 pounds, vehicle and load combined, nor any vehicle imparting to the road surface a pressure exceeding 400 pounds per inch of tire width (manufacturer's rating) shall be permitted on the streets, roads and highways of the city listed in a schedule on file and available in the city clerk's office between March 1 and May 31 of each year, except when the surface of the road is solidly frozen, in which case permission from the highway superintendent shall be obtained. 
(Code 1967, § 27-7.1) 
Sec. 52-239. - Limitation of 16,000 pounds. 
    No vehicle weighing more than 16,000 pounds, vehicle and load combined, nor any vehicle imparting to the road surface a pressure exceeding 400 pounds per inch of tire width (manufacturer's rating) shall be permitted on the streets, roads and highways of the city listed in a schedule on file and available in the city clerk's office, between March 1 and May 31, except when the surface of the road is solidly frozen, in which case permission from the highway superintendent shall be obtained. 
(Code 1967, § 27-7.2) 
Sec. 52-240. - Posting. 
    Prior to March 1 in each year, a notice shall be in place in a conspicuous location at each end of the roads mentioned in this article, stating the periods of closing and the restrictions imposed. 
(Code 1967, § 27-7.3) 
Secs. 52-241-52-258. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES 

Sec. 52-259. - Parent's responsibility. 
    The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any provision of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 26-5.1) 
Sec. 52-260. - Bicycle equipment. 
    No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public street in the city unless the bicycle is equipped in accordance with 29-A M.R.S.A. §§ 2062 and 2084. 
(Code 1967, § 26-5.2) 
Sec. 52-261. - Parking of bicycles. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 26-5.3) 
Sec. 52-262. - Riding bicycle on sidewalk. 
(a)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(b)  Law enforcement and fire rescue/emergency medical technician (EMT) personnel, while in the performance of their duties with respect to bicycle patrol and EMT/rescue patrol operations, are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 26-5.4; Ord. of 7-30-2001) 
Sec. 52-263. - Applicability of traffic regulations to persons riding bicycles. 
    Every person propelling or riding a bicycle upon a public street in the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of every vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1967, § 26-5.5) 
Sec. 52-264. - Speed limitation for persons riding bicycles. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1967, § 26-5.6) 
Sec. 52-265. - Motorcycles. 
    No person shall operate a motorcycle except in accordance with the provisions of 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2062. 
(Code 1967, § 26-6.5) 
Secs. 52-266-52-293. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 52-294-52-319. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NO PARKING AREAS 

Sec. 52-320. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
    Parking is prohibited at all times upon any of the streets or portions of streets described below: 
Second Street On the easterly side beginning at Mill Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 70 feet. Fifth Street On the northwesterly side between South Main Street and Dunn Street. Seventh Street On the westerly side beginning at the northwesterly curbline of Broad Street and extending northerly for a distance of 64 feet. Academy Street On the northerly side between High and Main Streets. On the southerly side between High and Main. On the southerly side beginning at the corner of Main Street and 
extending in a westerly direction for 140 feet. Aviation Drive On the east side from Flight Line Drive to Lewiston Junction Road. On the west side from Lewiston Junction Road to Wrights Landing. Bearce Street On the west side from Manley Street to the dead end. Blake Street On the southeasterly side from Winter Street to Turner Street. Boone Avenue On both sides from Seventh Street to Walton Field. Broad Street On the southerly side from South Bridge to Mill Street. On the north side beginning at Second Street and extending easterly for a distance of 162 feet. On the northwesterly side beginning at Ninth Street and extending in a southwesterly direction to CMP Pole #31 for a distance of 300 feet. Broadview Avenue On the easterly side beginning at Newall Avenue and extending in a southerly direction for 554 feet. Brookside Circle On the westerly side between Dennison Street and the point at which Brookside Circle turns at an angle to the right. On the northerly side from the angle in Brookside Circle to the westerly side of Winter Street. On the southerly side beginning 68 feet from the westerly curbline of Winter Street and extending 88 feet around the curve. Brown Street On the southerly side beginning at Center Street and extending westerly for 250 feet. Burns Street On the easterly side for its full length. Center Street On both sides, beginning at the downtown intersection of Turner Street and extending northerly to the northerly intersection of Turner and Center Streets. Charles Street On the east side south of Western Prom Church Street On both sides beginning at Turner Street and extending westerly for 300 feet. Cleveland Avenue On the easterly side from Minot Avenue to Marshall Avenue. Cook Street On the southeasterly side beginning at Ninth Street and extending in a southeasterly direction for 325 feet. Court Street On the north side beginning at the city line on the Longley Bridge and extending westerly to Goff Street. On the northerly side from Highland Avenue extending in a westerly direction to the corner of Haskell Street. On the northerly side beginning at James Street and extending 80 feet easterly. On the southerly side beginning at the point of intersection of the southerly side and an extension in a southerly direction of the easterly line of Highland Avenue, and extending in a westerly direction to a point 55 feet beyond the point of intersection of the southerly side and an of the extension southerly side of the northwesterly line of Haskell Street. On the southerly side beginning at the Lewiston City line and extending in a westerly direction across Main Street to a point 80 feet westerly of the westerly curbline of Main Street. On the southerly side beginning at Spring Street and extending in a westerly direction across intersecting streets to a point 46 feet westerly from the westerly line of South Goff Street. On the south side beginning at the easterly curbline of Harris Street and extending easterly for 46 feet. On the south side between Harris Street and Weaver Street. Cross Street On the northerly side for the entire length of the street. Dartmouth Street On the northerly side beginning at Center Street and extending westerly for 130 feet. Dartmouth Street West West-North side at 25 feet from Center Street. Davis Avenue On the turnaround at the dead-end portion of the street. Davis Avenue On the turnaround at the dead-end portion of the street. Dennison Street On the northerly side beginning 42 feet westerly of Winter Street and extending easterly to Whitney Street. On the southerly side beginning at Winter Street and extending westerly for a distance of 52 feet. On the southerly side beginning at Winter Street and extending easterly for a distance of 50 feet. Drummond Street On both sides, beginning at Main Street and extending westerly to the top of the hill. On both sides, beginning at Spring Street in a westerly direction to the dead end. East Bates Street On the northerly side beginning at Center Street and extending to Coolidge Street. ELHS Upper parking lot off Forest Avenue Elm Street On the south side beginning at Main Street and extending for 164 feet. On either side beginning at Minot Avenue and extending easterly to Spring Street. Fair Street On the northerly side from Oak Hill Road and extending in a westerly direction to Center Street. Fairmount Avenue On the westerly side from Hunton Place to Harris Street. On the easterly side beginning at Harris Street and extending northerly for 330 feet. Fern Street On the northwesterly side beginning at Lake Street and extending in a southwesterly direction for a distance of 300 feet between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when Lake Street School is in session. Forest Avenue On the west side for the entire length of the street. From 155 feet south of Court Street to Court Street Gamage Avenue On the north side beginning at a point 65 feet from Dennison Street and extending in a westerly direction for a distance of 75 feet. On the northerly side beginning at Park Avenue and extending in an easterly direction for a distance of 80 feet. On Gamage Avenue southerly from Oakland (no parking from there to corner) From 51 Gamage Avenue to drive. Gill Street On both sides between Second Street and Third Street. Goff Street On the east side beginning at Court Street and 
extending to Hampshire Street. On the westerly side beginning at the corner of Court Street and extending in a northerly direction for a distance of 110 feet. Gracelawn Road On the northerly side beginning at CMP #9 and extending westerly for 950 feet. Granite Street On the easterly side between Court Street and Fern Street. Hampshire Street On both sides between Turner and Pleasant Streets. On the north side beginning at the intersection of Pleasant Street and running in a westerly direction for 60 feet. On the southerly side beginning at the corner of Pleasant Street and extending in a westerly direction across Troy Street to a point 100 feet westerly from the westerly corner of Troy Street. Harris Street On the easterly side beginning at the southerly curbline of Court Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 90 feet. On the easterly side beginning at the end of the street and extending northerly for 132 feet. No parking on the westerly side. Haskell Street On the southeasterly side from Court Street to Lake Street. High Street On the west side beginning at the southwesterly corner of Court Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 130 feet. On either side beginning at Minot Avenue and extending to Academy Street. On the easterly side beginning at the southeasterly corner of Court Street and extending in a southerly direction for distance of 188 feet. Highland Avenue Between Hillcrest and Wedgwood (both sides of street) James Street No parking on the easterly side for its full length. Lake Auburn Avenue On the easterly side beginning at the 
northeasterly corner of Whitney Street and 
extending in a northerly direction for a distance of 141 feet. On the easterly side beginning at Stanley Street and extending southerly for a distance of 80 feet. On the southeasterly side beginning at a point 180 feet from the northeasterly corner of Lake Auburn Avenue and Whitney Street and extending in a northeasterly direction on Lake Auburn Avenue for a distance of 325 feet between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. when Washburn School is in session. Lake Shore Drive On the northerly side beginning at the intersection of Maple Hill Road and extending in an easterly direction for a distance of 2,640 feet. Lake Street On the northeasterly side from a point opposite the intersection of Fern Street to a point opposite the intersection to the southwesterly line of Lake Street and the northeasterly line of Court Street. On the southwesterly side beginning at Court Street and extending northerly 116 feet. Laurel Avenue On the northerly side beginning at the easterly curbline of Main Street and extending northeasterly for a distance of 114 feet. Main Street On the easterly side beginning at the southerly side of the northerly entrance of Newbury Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 84 feet. Beginning at the northerly side of Laurel Avenue and extending northerly for 157 feet. On the east side beginning at Laurel Avenue and extending southerly to Newbury Street. On the easterly side beginning at the southerly curbline of Court Street and extending southerly for a distance of 50 feet. On the westerly side beginning at the southerly curbline of Court Street and extending southerly for a distance of 78 feet. On the easterly side beginning 180 feet south of the southerly curbline of Court Street and extending southerly for 120 feet. On the easterly side beginning at the southerly curbline of the northerly alleyway to Miller Street and extending southerly for 42 feet. On the easterly side beginning 100 feet northerly of the northerly curbline of the southerly alleyway to Miller Street and extending northerly for a distance of 76 feet. Main Street On the westerly side beginning at the northerly curbline of Mechanics Row extended and running northerly for a distance of 106 feet. On the westerly side beginning 170 feet from the southerly curbline of Court Street and extending southerly for 76 feet. On the easterly side beginning 220 feet northerly of Newbury Street and extending northerly for a distance of 416 feet. On the easterly side beginning at the Miller Street entrance at the south end of the Roak Block and extending southerly for a distance of 54 feet. On the westerly side between Mechanics Row and Drummond Street. On the westerly side beginning at the southerly curbline of Academy Street and extending southerly for a distance of 100 feet. On the easterly side beginning at the southerly corner of 220 Main Street and extending southerly for 260 feet. On the westerly side beginning at the northerly curbline of Academy Street and extending northerly for 68 feet. Manley Court On the southeasterly side beginning at a point 171 feet northeasterly from Manley Street and extending in a northeasterly direction for a distance of 63 feet and then in a northwesterly direction along the northeasterly terminus of the street for a distance of 28 feet. Manley Street On the south side beginning at Willow Street and extending in an easterly direction for a distance of 300 feet. On the southwesterly side beginning at Union Street and extending in a northwesterly direction for a distance of 65 feet. On the northeasterly side beginning at the corner of Union Street and extending in a northwesterly direction for 53 feet. Maple Street On the north side beginning at High Street and extending to Pleasant Street. Mechanics Row On both sides beginning at Court Street and extending to the end of the street. Mill Street On the northerly side beginning at the easterly curbline of Second Street and extending westerly for a distance of 80 feet. On the northerly side beginning at Pole #11 and extending in a 
southwesterly direction for a distance of 170 feet. On the northerly side beginning at Broad Street and of Third Street and extending in an easterly direction for a distance of 54 feet. On the northerly side beginning at Broad Street and extending westerly for a distance of 88 feet. Miller Street No parking on both sides. On both sides of both alleyways leading to Miller Street from Main Street. Minot Avenue On the east side beginning at High Street and extending northerly to the intersection of Fletcher Road. On the westerly side beginning at the corner of Court Street and running southwesterly to the intersection of Hatch Road. On the westerly side beginning at a point directly opposite the 
southeasterly corner of the Lown Shoe Company Building and extending in a southerly direction to High Street. Newbury Street On the west side extending from Laurel Avenue to Pole #6, Central Maine Power Company. On the northeasterly side beginning at a point just opposite Pole #4 and extending easterly for a distance of 134 feet. Niskayuna Street On the northerly side beginning at Center Street and extending in a westerly direction for a distance of 200 feet. Northern Avenue On the westerly side beginning at Cross Street and extending in a northerly direction for a distance of 166 feet. Old Danville Road On the westerly side beginning at a point 346 feet from the sideline of Danville Corner Road; thence proceeding in a southerly direction for a distance of 190 feet and being essentially the distance between the two driveways at #711 Old Danville Road. Park Avenue On the easterly side beginning at Gamage Avenue and extending in a northerly direction to a point opposite CMP Pole #44, by Auburn 
Methodist Church. Parker Street From Summer Street on both sides northerly to Turner Street. On the westerly side between Summer and Winter Streets. Pettengill Road On the easterly side from Oak Hill Road in a northerly direction for a distance of 1,060 feet. On the westerly side beginning at CMP Pole #3 and extending northerly for a distance of 484 feet. Pleasant Street On the east side beginning at Hampshire Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 38 feet. On the east side beginning at Court Street and extending in a southerly direction to the intersection of Elm Street. On the east side beginning at Court Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 151 feet. On the easterly side beginning at Turner Street and extending southerly for a distance of 68 feet. On the westerly side beginning at Hampshire Street and extending northerly for a distance of 100 feet. On the westerly side beginning 132 feet from Hampshire Street and extending southerly for a distance of 56 feet. Poland Road On the southeasterly side between Minot Avenue and Atwood Street. Pride Road On the west side beginning at Minot Avenue and running in a southerly direction for 300 feet. Pulsifer Street On the westerly side beginning at a point 250 feet northerly of the northerly curbline of Mill Street and extending 140 feet around the corner onto Second Street. Reed Street On the southeasterly side between Turner Street and Whitney Street. Rowe Street On the southeasterly side from Winter Street to Turner Street. Sandy Beach Road On the southerly side for its full length. School Street On both sides, from Troy Street to Union Street Bypass. Sherwood Drive On the westerly side from Marian Drive to 19th Street. South Goff Street On the easterly side for its full length. South Main Street On the east side beginning at Memorial Bridge and extending southerly for 41 feet. On both sides between CMP Poles 87 and 91 as presently located. On the easterly side beginning at a point 83 feet southerly from the end of the Memorial Bridge across the Little Androscoggin River and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 47 feet. On the westerly side beginning at Mill Street and extending northerly to the Memorial Bridge. On the easterly side beginning at the southerly curbline of Broad Street and extending southerly for distance of 84 feet. Spring Road On both sides beginning at the Auburn Water District gate located nearest to West Auburn Road and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 173 feet, including the turnaround. Spring Street On the westerly side beginning at Elm Street and extending in a northerly direction for a distance of 172 feet. On the easterly side beginning at Court Street and extending in a northerly direction for a distance of 100 feet. On the west side beginning at a point 278 feet from Court Street and extending in a southerly direction for 330 feet. On the westerly side between Hampshire Street and Troy Street. On the westerly side beginning at Court Street and extending northerly for a distance of 60 feet. On the westerly side beginning at Court Street and extending southerly for a distance of 158 feet. On the easterly side beginning at Court Street and extending southerly for a distance of 174 feet. Stetson Road On the southerly side beginning opposite Central Maine Power Pole #14 and extending easterly for 790 feet. Stevens Mill Road On the southwesterly side beginning at the intersection of Court Street and running in a northwesterly direction for a distance of 450 feet. On both sides from Minot Avenue to Court Street. On the northerly side beginning at Garfield Road and extending westerly to the end of the street. Summer Street On the northerly side from Dennison Street to Rowe Street. Temple Street On the west side beginning at Manley Street and extending to the dead end. Troy Street On both sides, for its full length. Turner Road On both sides beginning at the northerly intersection of Turner Street and Center Street and extending northerly to the intersection of Fair Street and Turner Road. Turner Street On the easterly side from Court Street to the Turner Street entrance to the Great Falls Plaza. On the southerly side beginning at the easterly curbline of Dennison Street and extending easterly for a distance of 104 feet. On the easterly side beginning at a point opposite the southerly side of Pleasant Street and extending in a northerly direction to Center Street. On the northerly side from Lake Auburn Avenue to French's Lane. On the westerly side between Pleasant Street and Center Street. On the westerly side beginning at the southerly curbline of Hampshire Street and extending southerly for a distance of 80 feet. On the northerly side beginning at Center Street and extending westerly for a distance of 212 feet. On the southerly side between Burns Street and Union Street Bypass. Opposite Church Street at no parking signs. Union Street On both sides from Court Street to the intersection of Center and Turner Streets. Vine Street On the northerly side for its full length. On the southerly side beginning at the easterly curbline of High Street and extending in an easterly direction for a distance of 70 feet. Vining Street On the southerly side from Winter Street easterly to Summer Street. Washington Street On the southbound lane, beginning at Minot Avenue and extending in a southerly direction to Brick Yard Hill. On the northbound lane, beginning at Brick Yard Hill and extending in a northerly direction to the intersection of Minot Avenue. West Auburn Road On the westerly side beginning at a point opposite the northerly line of Summer Street and extending in a northerly direction for a distance of 1,425 feet. On the easterly side beginning at CMP Pole #146 and extending northerly 288 feet. Western Avenue On the westerly side beginning at the northerly curbline of Minot Avenue and extending in a northerly direction for a distance of 80 feet. Beginning on the easterly side at the northerly curbline of Minot Avenue and extending in a northerly direction for 115 feet. Western Prom South side. Whitney Street On the northerly side beginning at the northeasterly corner of Lake Auburn Avenue, extending in an easterly direction for a distance of 70 feet. Willow Street On the westerly side beginning at Hampshire Street and extending in a northerly direction to Manley Street, between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when Webster School is in session. Wilson Street On both sides from Field Avenue to the end. Wood Street On the easterly side for its full length. Youngs Corner Road On the southerly side beginning at a point located 490 feet easterly of Perkins Ridge Road and extending in an easterly direction for 270 feet. On the southerly side beginning at a point 1,230 feet easterly of Perkins Ridge Road and extending in an easterly direction for a distance of 310 feet.  
(Ord. of 02-01-2010) 
Secs. 52-321-52-343. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESTRICTED PARKING 

Sec. 52-344. - 15-minute parking, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
    Vehicular parking on the following streets is restricted to 15 minutes from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in the locations prescribed in the following schedule: 
Court Street On the southerly side beginning at a point located 46 feet westerly from the westerly curbline of South Goff Street and extending in a westerly direction for a distance of 64 feet. Drummond Street On the southerly side between Spring Street and Pleasant Street. Dunn Street On the northerly side beginning at Third Street and extending easterly for 148 feet. Hampshire Street On the northerly side beginning 20 feet from Willow Street and extending easterly for 40 feet. High Street On the westerly side beginning at a point located 130 feet southerly from the southerly side of Court Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 60 feet. Mill Street On the northeasterly side beginning at a point 130 feet from the Memorial Bridge over the Little Androscoggin River and extending in a 
southeasterly direction for a distance of 22 feet. On the northerly side beginning 80 feet easterly of the westerly curbline of Pulsifer Street and extending westerly for a distance of 20 feet. South Goff Street On the westerly side beginning at a point 28 feet southerly from the curbline of Court Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 40 feet. Spring Street On the easterly side along the curbline between the two accessways leading to premises presently occupied by the Dairy Joy Ice Cream Bar.  
Sec. 52-345. - 30-minute parking, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
    Vehicular parking on the following streets is restricted to 30 minutes from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in the locations described in the following schedule: 
Elm Street On the southerly side beginning at a point 32 feet westerly from the westerly line of High Street and extending in a westerly direction for a distance of 56 feet. Main Street On the easterly side beginning 48 feet from Newbury Street and 
extending northerly for a distance of 50 feet. Pleasant Street On the easterly side beginning 68 feet southerly of Turner Street and extending southerly for a distance of 52 feet. School Street On both sides between the MCRR tracks and Spring Street. Summer Street On the northeasterly side beginning 30 feet northwesterly of the intersection of Turner Street and extending in a northwesterly direction for a distance of 74 feet.  
Sec. 52-346. - One-hour parking, 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
    Vehicular parking shall be restricted to one hour from 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the streets and at the locations set forth in the following schedule: 
Court Street On the south side from Main Street to Spring Street. Court Street lot All stalls as indicated by paint on macadam surface. Spring Street On both sides from Court Street to Hampshire Street. Turner Street On the westerly side between Hampshire Street and Court Street. On the westerly side beginning 42 feet northerly of the northerly curbline of Hampshire Street and extending northerly 75 feet.  
Sec. 52-347. - One-hour parking, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
    Vehicular traffic is restricted to one hour from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the streets and at the locations indicated in the following schedule: 
Broad Street On both sides from Mill Street to Third Street. Hampshire Street On the northerly side beginning at a point 21 feet easterly from the easterly line of Spring Street and extending in an easterly direction for a distance of 98 feet. Mill Street On the southerly side from Pulsifer Street to a point 60 feet beyond Broad Street. Spring Street On the easterly side beginning 174 feet from Court Street and extending southerly for a distance of 52 feet. On the westerly side beginning 158 feet from Court Street and extending southerly for a distance of 46 feet. On the easterly side beginning 15 feet southerly from the southerly line of Drummond Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 60 feet. Summer Street On the northerly side beginning 20 feet from the westerly curbline of Turner Street extending westerly for 80 feet. Turner Street On the northerly side beginning at CMP Pole #30 and extending westerly for a distance of 50 feet.  
Sec. 52-348. - Two-hour parking, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
    Vehicular parking is restricted to two hours from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the streets and at the locations indicated in the following schedule: 
Third Street On both sides beginning at Mill Street and extending to Broad Street. On the easterly side beginning at Cook Street and extending northerly for 172 feet. Broad Street On both sides from Third Street to Fourth Street. Cook Street On the northwesterly side beginning at a point 15 feet northeasterly along Cook Street from the northeast side of Third Street and continuing in a northeasterly direction along Cook Street for a distance of 59 feet. Cross Street On the southerly side from Center Street to a point directly opposite the easterly side of Northern Avenue. Main Street On the easterly side beginning at a point 164 feet northerly from a point directly opposite the northerly curbline of Elm Street and extending in a northerly direction along the easterly line of Main Street for a distance of 66 feet. Mechanics Rowe Two-hour parking limit  
(Ord. of 2-1-2010) 
Sec. 52-349. - 15-minute parking, 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
    Vehicular parking is restricted to 15 minutes from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on the streets and at the locations indicated in the following schedule: 
Hampshire Street On the northerly side between Pleasant Street and Spring Street. On the northerly side beginning at a point 108 feet from Willow Street and extending northwesterly for distance of 42 feet. Pleasant Street On the westerly side beginning at a point 15 feet southerly from the intersection of Pleasant Street with the southerly line of Drummond Street and extending in a southerly direction for 22 feet.  
Sec. 52-350. - Parking prohibited November 15 to April 15. 
    Parking is prohibited upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows during the time between November 15 and April 15: 
First Avenue On both sides for its full length. Academy Street On the southerly side between High Street and Elm Street. Carrier Court On both sides beginning at Riverside Drive and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 300 feet. Charles Street On the southerly side for its full length. Grant Street On the northerly side for its full length. Hampshire Street On the southerly side between Willow Street and Oak Street. Harvard Street On the westerly side beginning at Coburn Street and running in a southerly direction for 500 feet. Hazel Street On the north side of the complete street. High Street On the westerly side between Academy Street and Elm Street. On the easterly side between Court Street and Drummond Street. Highland Avenue On the easterly side from Court Street to Western Promenade. Manley Street On the southerly side beginning at a point located 300 feet easterly of Willow Street extending in an easterly direction to Union Street. Myrtle Street On the westerly side for its full length. Newbury Street On the southerly side from Main Street in an easterly direction for 610 feet. Oak Street On the easterly side for its full length. Park Hill Avenue On the north side beginning at the intersection of Minot Avenue and extending in a westerly direction to Fourth Avenue. Pearl Street On the westerly side for its full length. Pine Street On the northerly side from Pearl Street to Willow Street. Prospect Street On the westerly side for its full length. Summer Street On the northerly side between Rowe Street and Vining Street. Vine Street On the southerly side between High Street and Main Street. Western Avenue On the easterly side for its full length. Western Promenade On the south side beginning at the intersection of Highland Avenue and extending in a northerly direction to Gamage Avenue. Whitney Street On the southwesterly side from Center Street to French's Lane. Willow Street On the easterly side between Pine Street and Hampshire Street. Wilson Street On the southerly side between Gamage Avenue and Field Avenue. Winter Street On the south side beginning at the intersection of Wood Street and extending in a westerly direction to Vining Street.  
Sec. 52-351. - Handicap parking. 
Main Street At 94 Main street (Rogers Haircutters)  
(Ord. of 2-1-2010) 
Sec. 52-352. - Miscellaneous parking restrictions. 
Court Street No parking on northerly side between Granite Street and Josslyn Street between 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on days when Edward Little High School is in session. Parking shall be restricted to handicapped persons on the southerly side beginning at a point 32 feet easterly from the easterly line of Spring Street and extending in an easterly direction for a distance of 26 feet. Main Street One-hour parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on the easterly side from Court Street to the Roak Block, and on the westerly side from Court Street to the Main Street parking lot. Parking shall be limited to two hours between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on the easterly side beginning at the north end of the Roak Block and extending to the south end, and on the westerly side between the entrance to the Main Street parking lot and Mechanics Row. Parking shall be restricted to handicapped persons on the westerly side beginning at a point 142 feet southerly from the southerly line of Court Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 28 feet. Pleasant Street Parking shall be restricted to handicapped persons on the westerly side beginning at a point 31 feet southerly from the southerly line of Hampshire Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 22 feet. Parking shall be limited to two hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on the easterly side beginning at Great Falls Plaza and extending to a point opposite the southerly side of Pleasant Street. Willow Street Parking shall be restricted to handicapped persons on the easterly side beginning 55 feet from Hampshire Street and extending northerly for 30 feet. Winter relief parking areas The parking areas hereinafter listed are designated as winter relief parking areas which may be utilized between November 15 and April 15 of the following year for parking by persons living in the vicinity of the parking lots. In order to become entitled to use a particular winter relief parking lot, a city resident shall apply to the traffic division of the police department for authorization to use a particular lot for winter parking. Such authorization is subject to reasonable conditions imposed by the traffic division of the police department, which may include the imposition of a fee or monthly charges as determined by the city treasurer to be used to defray the cost of maintaining the winter relief parking lots and the administration of the winter relief parking program. Persons authorized to use winter relief parking areas may also be required to display a sticker or other device on their cars indicating that they are permitted to park there. Any person who violates the conditions imposed upon his permit to use a winter relief parking lot may have his parking privileges terminated by the traffic division of the police department. Any person who parks in a winter relief parking area who is not authorized to do so may have his vehicle towed and stored under the direction of the police department at his own expense. The winter relief parking lots are as follows: Hampshire Street/Gamage Avenue. Webster School (Hampshire Street). Franklin School (Pine Street). Troy Street lot. Great Falls Plaza. Chamberlain School (High Street). Mechanics Row lot. Mechnics Row parking garage. 53 Broad Street.  
(Ord. of 2-1-2010) 
Secs. 52-353-52-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ONE-WAY STREETS 

Sec. 52-376. - Designated. 
    The following streets are designated as one-way streets: 
First Avenue (See Washington Street Rotary.) Brookside Circle From Dennison Street to Winter Street with traffic permitted only in a northerly direction becoming easterly and with entry permitted only from Dennison Street. Chasse Street (See Washington Street Highway.) Gill Street Between Second Street and Third Street with traffic permitted to proceed only in a northeasterly direction. Jefferson Street (See Washington Street Rotary.) Main Street On Main Street from Miller Street northerly to Court Street. Maple Street From High Street westerly to Pleasant Street. Mechanics Row One-way southerly between Court Street and Main Street. Miller Alley From Main Street easterly to Miller Street. Minot Avenue (See Washington Street Rotary.) Park Hill Avenue From Fourth Avenue northeasterly to Minot Avenue entering from Fourth Avenue. Pleasant Street From Court Street northerly to Hampshire Street. Pleasant Street From Court Street southerly to Elm Street with traffic permitted to proceed only in a southerly direction and entry permitted only from Court, 
Drummond and Maple Streets. Vine Street From High Street easterly to Main Street, entering from High Street only. Washington Street 
Highway Washington Street northbound for vehicular travel in a northerly direction only from a point 1,200 feet southerly from the Maine Turnpike exit to First Avenue. Washington Street southbound a one-way street for vehicular travel in a southerly direction only from First Avenue to a point 1,200 feet southerly from the Maine Turnpike exit. Old Washington Street as designated by the city council by resolution shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a southerly direction only. Ramp A as designated by the city council by resolution shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a westerly direction only. Ramp B as designated by the city council by resolution shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a southwesterly direction only. Ramp D as designated by the city council by resolution shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a northeasterly direction only. Ramp E as designated by the city council by resolution shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in an easterly direction only. The northerly lane of Chasse Street shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in an easterly direction only. The southerly lane of Chasse Street shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a westerly direction only. Connector #1 shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a 
southeasterly direction only. Washington Street 
Rotary Minot Avenue shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a westerly direction only from Washington Street to a point 150 feet from the westerly line of Minot Avenue. First Avenue shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a southerly direction only. The newly constructed (1958) road running approximately parallel to First Avenue and in part upon the same location shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a southerly direction only. The newly constructed (1958) connector road between First Avenue and Washington Street in the vicinity of and in part occupying the location of Jefferson Street shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in an easterly direction only. A connector road constructed between First Avenue and Washington Street through property purchased from the Winter Scientific Institute shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in an easterly direction only. Washington Street from Minot Avenue to the junction of First Avenue shall be a one-way street for vehicular travel in a northerly direction only. Western Promenade That section of Western Promenade beginning at Beacon Avenue and extending to Highland Avenue shall be restricted to one-way vehicular traffic traveling only in a northeast direction.  
(Ord. of 11-5-2007(01); Ord. of 9-15-2008; Ord. of 11-19-2009) 
Secs. 52-377-52-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PASSENGER AND FREIGHT LOADING ZONES 

Sec. 52-396. - Bus stops. 
Court Street North side beginning at the westerly line of Spring Street, westerly for a distance of 34 feet. South side beginning at a point 74 feet westerly from the westerly line of Spring Street, westerly for a distance of 67 feet. On the northerly side beginning at a point 60 feet westerly from the westerly line of the access road leading to the Urban Renewal Authority parking area and extending in a westerly direction for a distance of 50 feet. Lake Auburn Avenue On the westerly side beginning at a point 84 feet southerly of Harvard Street and extending in a southerly direction for a distance of 45 feet. South Main Street West side, from the northerly line of Mill Street northerly for a distance of 50 feet.  
Sec. 52-397. - Loading zones. 
Second Street On the westerly side beginning 100 feet south of the southerly curbline of Pulsifer Street and extending southerly for a distance of 42 feet. Court Street On the southerly side beginning 106 feet westerly of the westerly curbline of Main Street and extending westerly for a distance of 26 feet. Pleasant Street On the westerly side beginning 25 feet northerly of Elm Street and extending northerly for a distance of 65 feet. South Main Street On the easterly side beginning 106 feet southerly of the southerly curbline of Mill Street and extending southerly for a distance of 40 feet.  
Secs. 52-398-52-422. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPEED ZONES 

Secs. 52-423-52-442. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - STOP SIGNS 

Sec. 52-443. - Designated. 
    All vehicular traffic shall come to a full stop for stop signs erected as set forth in this schedule: 
First Avenue On First Avenue before entering Minot Avenue. On First Avenue before entering Jefferson Street. On First Avenue crossover before entering Minot Avenue from the north. First Street On First Street before entering Broad Street. Second Avenue On Second Avenue before entering Jefferson Street from both directions. On Second Avenue before entering Minot Avenue. Second Street On Second Street before entering Brook Street from both directions. On Second Street before entering Broad Street. On Second Street before entering Mill Street. Third Avenue On Third Avenue before entering Minot Avenue. On Third Avenue before entering Jefferson Street from both directions. Third Street On Third Street before entering Mill Street. On Third Street before entering Broad Street from both directions. Fourth Avenue On Fourth Avenue before entering Park Hill Avenue. Fourth Street On Fourth Street before entering Broad Street from both directions. On Fourth Street before entering Cook Street from both directions. On Fourth Street before entering Gill Street from both directions. Fifth Street On Fifth Street before entering Broad Street from both directions. On Fifth Street before entering South Main Street from the southeast. On Fifth Street before entering Mary Carroll Street. On Fifth Street before entering Dunn Street from both directions. On Fifth Street before entering Mill Street. Sixth Street On Sixth Street before entering Cook Street from both directions. On Sixth Street before entering Mary Carroll Street. On Sixth Street before entering South Main Street from both directions. On Sixth Street before entering Broad Street from both directions. Seventh Street On Seventh Street before entering South Main Street from both 
directions. On Seventh Street before entering Cook Street from both directions. On Seventh Street before entering Broad Street from both directions. Eighth Street On Eighth Street before entering Cook Street from both directions. On Eighth Street before entering Broad Street from both directions. On Eighth Street before entering South Main Street. Ninth Street On Ninth Street before entering South Main Street. On Ninth Street before entering Broad Street from both directions. On Ninth Street before entering Cook Street from both directions. On Ninth Street before entering Mill Street. Tenth Street On Tenth Street before entering South Main Street from both directions. 13th Street On 13th Street before entering Mill Street. On 13th Street before entering Broad Street. 19th Street On 19th Street before entering Cook Street. Academy Street On Academy Street before entering High Street from both directions. On Academy Street before entering Elm Street. Adams Street On Adams Street before entering Washington Street from both directions. Airport Terminal Road On Airport Terminal Road before entering Lewiston Junction Road. Alderwood Road On Alderwood Road before entering Cedarwood Road. Allain Park On Allain Park before entering Minot Avenue. On Allain Park before entering Poland Road. Allen Avenue On Allen Avenue before entering Court Street. Allied Road On Allied Road before entering Washington Street. Alpha Street On Alpha Street before entering Center Street. Amberly Way On Amberly Way before entering Fairview Avenue. Amherst Street On Amherst Street before entering Minot Avenue. Andrea Lane On Andrea Lane before entering University Street. Anita Avenue On Anita Avenue before entering Garfield Road. Arbania Street On Arbania Street before entering Rochelle Street. On Arbania Street before entering Poland Road. Atwood Street On Atwood Street before entering Poland Road. Auburn Heights On Auburn Heights before entering Western Avenue. Aviation Avenue On Aviation Avenue before entering Lewiston Junction Road. Avon Street On Avon Street before entering Roy Avenue. On Avon Street before entering South Main Street. Barkley Avenue On Barkley Avenue before entering Russell Avenue. On Barkley Avenue before entering Hampton Avenue. Barton Avenue On Barton Avenue before entering Sixth Street. On Barton Avenue before entering Fifth Street from both directions. Bates Street On Bates Street before entering Center Street from both directions. Baxter Avenue On Baxter Avenue before entering Zoar Street from both directions. On Baxter Avenue before entering Hazelhurst Street from both directions. On Baxter Avenue before entering Valley Street from both directions. On Baxter Avenue before entering Fairview Avenue. Beacon Avenue On Beacon Avenue before entering Western Promenade. On Beacon Avenue before entering Lake Street. Beaver Road On Beaver Road before entering the intersection of Dillingham Hill Road and Maple Hill Road. On Beaver Road before entering Johnson Road. Beck Avenue On Beck Avenue before entering Stevens Mills Road. Beckett Street On Beckett Street before entering South Main Street. Beech Hill Road On Beech Hill Road before entering Washington Street. On Beech Hill Road before entering Hotel Road. Belgrade Avenue On Belgrade Avenue before entering Stevens Mills Road from the west. On Belgrade Street before entering Hotel Road. Bennett Avenue On Bennett Avenue before entering Fairview Avenue. Birch Road On Birch Road before entering Lake Street. Blake Street On Blake Street before entering Summer Street from both directions. On Blake Street before entering Turner Street. On Blake Street before entering Winter Street. Blanchard Road On Blanchard Road before entering Turner Road. Bolster Street On Bolster Street before entering Cook Street from both directions. On Bolster Street before entering South Main Street. Boone Avenue On Boone Avenue before entering Seventh Street. Boothby Street On Boothby Street before entering Perkins Ridge Road. On Boothby Street before entering West Auburn Road. Boulder Drive On Boulder Drive before entering Stevens Mills Road. Bowdoin Street On Bowdoin Street before entering Center Street. Bradman Street On Bradman Street before entering Center Street. On Bradman Street before entering North River Road. Brann Street On Brann Street before entering Poland Road. Brentwood Drive On Brentwood Drive before entering East Hardscrabble Road. Bretton Avenue On Bretton Avenue before entering Poland Road. Briarcliff Knoll At Amberly Way Brickyard Circle On Brickyard Circle before entering Washington Street from the north on the left side of the traffic island. Broad Street On Broad Street before entering South Main Street from both directions. On Broad Street before entering Hackett Road. Broadview Avenue On Broadview Avenue before entering Coburn Street from both 
directions. On Broadview Avenue before entering Newall Avenue from both 
directions. Brook Street On Brook Street before entering Riverside Drive. Brookdale Lane On Brookdale Lane before entering Clover Lane. Brown Street On Brown Street before entering Center Street. On Brown Street before entering Turner Street. Browns Crossing Road On Browns Crossing Road before entering Trapp Road. On Browns Crossing Road before entering Old Danville Road. Burns Street On Burns Street before entering Summer Street. On Burns Street before entering Turner Street. Butler Hill Road On Butler Hill Road before entering Hatch Road. Cameron Lane On Cameron Lane before entering Turkey Lane Road. Candia Street On Candia Street before entering South Main Street. Carlton Street On Carlton Street before entering Pride Road. Carrier Court On Carrier Court before entering Riverside Drive. Carroll Avenue On Carroll Avenue before entering Shepley Street. Cedarwood Road On Cedarwood Road before entering Stevens Mills Road. Charles Street On Charles Street before entering Goff Street. Chasse Street On Chasse Street before entering Washington Street, northbound and southbound lanes. Chestnut Street On Chestnut Street before entering Manley Street. On Chestnut Street before entering Winter Street. Chic-A-Dee Drive On Chic-A-Dee Drive before entering Old Turner Road. Chicoine Avenue On Chicoine Avenue before entering Hotel Road. Church Street On Church Street before entering Turner Street. Clark Street On Clark Street before entering Western Avenue. On Clark Street before entering Hillside Avenue. Cleaves Street On Cleaves Street before entering Park Hill Avenue. Cleveland Avenue On Cleveland Avenue before entering Minot Avenue. On Cleveland Avenue before entering Marshall Avenue from both 
directions. Cliff Street On Cliff Street before entering Lake Street. Clover Lane On Clover Lane before entering Hotel Road. Coburn Street On Coburn Street before entering Center Street. On Coburn Street before entering Lake Auburn Avenue from both 
directions. On Coburn Street before entering Harvard Street from both directions. Colby Street On Colby Street before entering Center Street. On Colby Street before entering Turner Street. Colonial Way On Colonial Way before entering Lake Street. Conant Avenue On Conant Avenue before entering Granite Street. Cook Street On Cook Street before entering South Main Street from both directions. On Cook Street before entering Ninth Street from both directions. On Cook Street before entering South Main Street at the intersection of Roy Avenue, Cook Street and South Main Street. On Cook Street before entering Second Street. On Cook Street before entering Third Street from both directions. Coolidge Street On Coolidge Street before entering East Bates Street. Cornell Street On Cornell Street before entering Turner Street. Mechanics Row 
parking lot In the Court Street parking lot before entering Mechanics Row. Crest Avenue On Crest Avenue before entering Hotel Road. Cross Street On Cross Street before entering Center Street. On Cross Street before entering North River Road. Cushman Place On Cushman Place before entering Dana Avenue from both directions. Dana Avenue On Dana Avenue before entering Western Avenue. Danville Corner Road On Danville Corner Road before entering Washington Street. On Danville Corner Road before entering Pownal Road. Dartmouth Street On Dartmouth Street before entering Center Street from both directions. Davis Avenue On Davis Avenue before entering Granite Street from both directions. On Davis Avenue before entering Lake Street from both directions. On Davis Avenue at Gamage Street Dawes Avenue On Dawes Avenue before entering Court Street. Dee Street On Dee Street before entering South Main Street. Deer Rips Road On Deer Rips Road before entering North River Road. Dennison Street On Dennison Street before entering Turner Street from both directions. On Dennison Street before entering Whitney Street. On Dennison Street before entering Summer Street from both directions. On Dennison Street before entering Gamage Avenue. Dexter Avenue On Dexter Avenue before entering Fern Street. On Dexter Avenue before entering Court Street. Dillingham Hill Road On Dillingham Hill Road before entering Johnson Road. Dolores Street On Dolores Street before entering Vickery Road. Drummond Street On Drummond Street before entering Pleasant Street from both 
directions. On Drummond Street before entering Spring Street from both 
directions. On Drummond Street before entering Main Street. On Drummond Street before entering High Street from both directions. Dunn Street On Dunn Street before entering Third Street from both directions. On Dunn Street before entering Fourth Street from both directions. On Dunn Street before entering Second Street from both directions. On Dunn Street before entering South Main Street. On Dunn Street before entering Riverside Drive. East Auburn Lumber Road On East Auburn Lumber Road before entering Turner Road. East Hardscrabble Road On East Hardscrabble Road before entering Washington Street. On East Hardscrabble Road before entering Hotel Road from both directions. East Shore Road On East Shore Road before entering Hotel Road. Elm Street On Elm Street before entering Main Street. Enfield Street On Enfield Street before entering South Main Street. Fair Street On Fair Street before entering Turner Road. On Fair Street before entering Oak Hill Road from the west on the northerly side of the traffic island. Fairmount Avenue On Fairmount Avenue before entering Court Street. Fairview Avenue On Fairview Avenue before entering Minot Avenue from both directions. On Fairview Avenue before entering Court Street. Fairway Drive On Fairway Drive before entering Beech Hill Road. Fern Street On Fern Street before entering Granite Street from both directions. On Fern Street before entering Lake Street. Fickett Road On Fickett Road before entering Pownal Road. Field Avenue On Field Avenue before entering Grandview Avenue. On Field Avenue before entering Wilson Street. Fish Hatchery Road On Fish Hatchery Road before entering Turner Road. Flanders Street On Flanders Street before entering South Main Street. Fletcher Road On Fletcher Road before entering Minot Avenue. On Fletcher Road before entering Merrow Road. Flight Line Drive On Flight Line Drive before entering Aviation Avenue from both directions. On Flight Line Drive before entering Kittyhawk Avenue. On Flight Line Drive before entering the Airport Terminal Road. Forest Avenue On Forest Avenue before entering Court Street. Foster Avenue On Foster Avenue before entering Seventh Street. Foster Road On Foster Road before entering Hotel Road. French's Lane On French's Lane before entering Turner Street. Fulton Street On Fulton Street before entering Seventh Street. On Fulton Street before entering Tenth Street from both directions. Gammon Avenue On Gammon Avenue before entering Gamage Avenue. On Gammon Avenue before entering Lake Street. Garden Circle On Garden Circle Road before entering East Hardscrabble Road. Garfield Road On Garfield Road before entering Minot Avenue. Gary Street On Gary Street before entering Turner Road. Gill Street On Gill Street before entering Fifth Street. On Gill Street before entering Seventh Street from both directions. On Gill Street before entering Sixth Street from both directions. On Gill Street before entering Third Street. Gillander Avenue On Gillander Avenue before entering Gamage Avenue. Giroux Street On Giroux Street before entering Hotel Road. Glendale Avenue On Glendale Avenue before entering Minot Avenue. On Glendale Avenue before entering Pride Road from the southwest. Glenn Street On Glenn Street before entering Center Street. Goff Street On Goff Street before entering Court Street. Goldthwaite Road On Goldthwaite Road before entering Poland Road. Goodrich Avenue On Goodrich Avenue before entering Western Avenue. Gosnold Street On Gosnold Street before entering South Main Street. Goss Street On Goss Street before entering Goff Street. Gracelawn Road On Gracelawn Road before entering Turner Street. On Gracelawn Road before entering Mount Auburn Avenue. Grandview Avenue On Grandview Avenue before entering Gamage Avenue. Granite Street On Granite Street before entering Court Street. On Granite Street before entering Davis Avenue from both directions. On Granite Street before entering Fern Street from either direction. Grant Street On Grant Street before entering Goff Street. On Grant Street before entering James Street. Great Falls Plaza On the accessway to Great Falls Plaza immediately adjacent to the Auburn Esplanade housing project at two locations indicated by red circles on the master plan of the Great Falls Urban Renewal Area prepared by John M. Ackerman and dated April 1973 and revised August 3, 1973, and on August 29, 1973, copies of which are on file at the office of the city clerk and at the police station. Grove Street On Grove Street before entering Center Street. On Grove Street before entering Vernon Street. Hackett Road On Hackett Road before entering Washington Street. On Hackett Road before entering Old Danville Road. On Hackett Road Crossover before entering Washington Street 
northbound. Hamden Street On Hamden Street before entering Center Street. On Hamden Street before entering Turner Street. Hampton Avenue On Hampton Avenue before entering Goodrich Avenue. On Hampton Avenue before entering Russell Avenue. Harmons Corner Road On Pownal Road before entering Harmons Corner Road from both directions. On Harmons Corner Road before entering Pownal Road from both directions. On Harmons Corner Road before entering South Witham Road from both directions. On Harmons Corner Road before entering Old Danville Road. Harris Street On Harris Street before entering Court Street. Harvard Street On Harvard Street before entering Lake Auburn Avenue at either 
intersection. On Harvard Street before entering Coburn Street from both directions. Haskell Street On Haskell Street before entering Lake Street. On Haskell Street before entering Court Street. Hatch Road On Hatch Road before entering Garfield Road. On Hatch Road before entering Minot Avenue. Hatfield Road On Hatfield Road before entering Perkins Ridge Road. Hathaway Street On Hathaway Street before entering Turner Road. Hazel Street On Hazel Street before entering Western Avenue. Hazelhurst Street On Hazelhurst Street before entering Bennett Avenue. On Hazelhurst Street before entering Poland Road. Hector Street On Hector Street before entering Vickery Road. Heath Lane On Heath Lane before entering Minot Avenue. Helen Street On Helen Street before entering Hotel Road. Heritage Drive On Heritage Drive before entering Field Avenue. Hersey Hill Road On Hersey Hill Road before entering North Auburn Road. High Street On High Street before entering Court Street. On High Street before entering Elm Street from both directions. On High Street before entering Drummond Street from both directions. Highland Avenue On Highland Avenue before entering Shepley Street from both directions. On Highland Avenue before entering Court Street. On Highland Avenue before entering Western Promenade from both directions. Hillcrest Street On Hillcrest Street before entering Shepley Street. On Hillcrest Street before entering Highland Avenue from both directions. Hillsdale Street On Hillsdale Street before entering Lake Street. Hillside Avenue On Hillside Avenue before entering Goodrich Avenue. Hobart Road On Hobart Road before entering Jordan School Road. On Hobart Road before entering Fickett Road. Holbrook Road On Holbrook Road before entering North Auburn Road. Holly Street On Holly Street before entering Court Street. On Holly Street before entering Fern Street from both directions. Hotel Road On Hotel Road before entering the intersection of Hotel Road and Lake Street from the south. On Hotel Road before entering the intersection of Hotel Road and Manley Road from the north. Houghton Street On Houghton Street before entering Fairview Avenue. Howe Street On Howe Street before entering Stevens Mills Road. Huard Avenue On Huard Avenue before entering Manley Road. On Huard Avenue before entering Poland Road. Hutchins Street On Hutchins Street before entering High Street. Industry Avenue On Industry Avenue before entering Minot Avenue. Interurban Road On Interurban Road before entering Poland Road. Ipswich Street On Ipswich Street before entering South Main Street. Jackson Hill Road On Jackson Hill Road before entering Perkins Ridge Road. James Street On James Street before entering Court Street. On James Street before entering Charles Street. Jefferson Street On Jefferson Street before entering Washington Street. Joffre Street On Joffre Street before entering Hotel Road. Johnson Road On Johnson Road before entering the intersection of Skillings Corner Road and North Auburn Road. Jones Street On Jones Street before entering Pride Road. Jordan School Road On Jordan School Road before entering Sopers Mill Road from both directions. On Jordan School Road before entering Riverside Drive. On Jordan School Road before entering Pownal Road from both 
directions. Josslyn Street On Josslyn Street before entering Court Street. On Josslyn Street before entering Fern Street from both directions. Kittyhawk Avenue On Kittyhawk Avenue before entering Washington Street. On Kittyhawk Avenue before entering Hotel Road from both directions. On Kittyhawk Avenue before entering Lewiston Junction Road. Lafayette Street On Lafayette Street before entering Roy Avenue from both directions. Lake Auburn Avenue On Lake Auburn Avenue before entering Turner Street. Lake Shore Drive On Lake Shore Drive before entering Turner Road. On Lake Shore Drive before entering North Auburn Road. Lake Street On Lake Street before entering Davis Avenue from both directions. On Lake Street before entering Court Street. On Lake Street before entering the intersection of Gamage Avenue and Park Avenue from the southeast. On Lake Street before entering Park Avenue from both directions. Lane Road On Lane Road before entering South Main Street. Laurel Avenue On Laurel Avenue before entering Main Street. On Laurel Avenue before entering Newbury Street. Leavitt Street On Leavitt Street before entering Minot Avenue. Lewiston Junction Road On Lewiston Junction Road before entering Hotel Road. Linden Street On Linden Street before entering Lake Street. Longbow Court On Longbow Court before entering Fairview Avenue. Loring Avenue On Loring Avenue before entering South Main Street. Lost Valley Road On Lost Valley Road before entering Youngs Corner Road. Louise Street On Louise Street before entering South Main Street. On Louise Street before entering Jordan Avenue. Lucille Street On Lucille Street before entering South Main Street. Lufkin Street On Lufkin Street before entering Manley Road. Lunn Road On Lunn Road before entering Holbrook Road. Madison Street On Madison Street before entering Third Avenue from both directions. Main Street parking lot In the Main Street parking lot before entering Mechanics Row and before entering Main Street (two signs). Manley Street On Manley Street before entering Union Street Bypass. Maple Hill Road On Maple Hill Road before entering Lake Shore Drive. Maple Point Road On Maple Point Road before entering Hotel Road. On Maple Point Road before entering Manley Road from both directions. On Maple Point Road before entering Poland Road. Marian Drive On Marian Drive before entering Sherwood Drive. On Marian Drive before entering Broad Street. Markarlyn Street On Markarlyn Street before entering Washington Street. Marshall Avenue On Marshall Avenue before entering Fairview Avenue from both 
directions. Marston Hill Road On Marston Hill Road before entering the intersection of Perkins Ridge Road and North Auburn Road. On Marston Hill Road before entering the intersection of Marston Hill Road and Brighton Hill Road from a westerly direction. Marston Street On Marston Street before entering Fairview Avenue. On Marston Street before entering Richardson Street. Martin Street On Martin Street before entering the intersection of Turner Road and Center Street. On Martin Street before entering Fair Street. Martindale Road On Martindale Road before entering Hotel Road. On Martindale Road before entering Beech Hill Road. Mary Carroll Street On Mary Carroll Street before entering Seventh Street. On Mary Carroll Street before entering Third Street. Mayfield Road On Mayfield Road before entering Turner Street. On Mayfield Road before entering Summer Street. McKinnon Street On McKinnon Street before entering Pride Road. Meadow Lane On Meadow Lane before entering Hotel Road. Mechanics Row On Mechanics Row for traffic turning left (northerly) onto Main Street. Melvin Street On Melvin Street before entering Poland Road. Merrill Street On Merrill Street before entering Western Avenue. Merrow Road On Merrow Road before entering Hotel Road from both directions. On Merrow Road before entering Minot Avenue. Miami Avenue On Miami Avenue before entering Washington Street, both northbound and southbound lanes. Mill Street On Mill Street before entering Upper Broad Street. Millett Drive On Millett Drive before entering Court Street. On Millett Drive before entering Minot Avenue. Mine Road On Mine Road before entering Hatch Road. Morse Street On Morse Street before entering Field Avenue. On Morse Street before entering Gamage Avenue. On Morse Street at Coachman Avenue. Mower Lane On Mower Lane before entering North Auburn Road. Musket Drive On Musket Drive before entering Danville Corner Road. Myrtle Street On Myrtle Street before entering Academy Street. On Myrtle Street before entering Elm Street. Newbury Street On Newbury Street before entering Main Street. Newell Avenue On Newell Avenue before entering Center Street. Nickerson Street On Nickerson Street before entering Manley Road. Niskayuna Street On Niskayuna Street before entering Center Street. On Niskayuna Street before entering Turner Street. North River Road On North River Road before entering Pettengill Road. Northern Avenue On Northern Avenue before entering Cross Street. On Northern Avenue before entering North River Road. Nottingham Road On Nottingham Road before entering Lake Street. Oak Street On Oak Street before entering Hampshire Street. On Oak Street before entering Pearl Street. Oak Hill Road On Oak Hill Road before entering Center Street from both directions. On Oak Hill Road before entering Turner Street. On Oak Hill Road at Andrew Drive Oakes Road On Oakes Road before entering Old Portland Road from the south. Oakland Street On Oakland Street before entering Gamage Avenue. On Oakland Street before entering Highland Avenue. Old Carriage Road On Old Carriage Road before entering Hotel Road. Old Danville Road On Old Danville Road before entering Danville Corner Road from both directions. On Old Danville Road before entering Pownal Road. Old Portland Road On Old Portland Road before entering Washington Street. Old Turner Road On Old Turner Road before entering Turner Road. Olive Street On Olive Street before entering South Main Street. Oliver Street On Oliver Street before entering Dennison Street. Omni Circle On Omni Circle before entering Aviation Avenue. Orchard Street On Orchard Street before entering Granite Street from both directions. On Orchard Street before entering Lake Street. Par Four Drive On Par Four Drive before entering Beech Hill Road. Park Avenue On Park Avenue before entering Court Street. On Park Avenue before entering Lake Street from both directions. On Park Avenue before entering Mount Auburn Avenue. Park Hill Avenue On Park Hill Avenue before entering Minot Avenue from both directions. Parker Street On Parker Street before entering Summer Street from both directions. On Parker Street before entering Winter Street. On Parker Street before entering Turner Street. Partridge Lane On Partridge Lane before entering Pownal Road. Patton Street On Patton Street before entering Ninth Street. On Patton Street before entering Bolster Street. Paul Street On Paul Street before entering South Main Street. Pearl Street On Pearl Street before entering Hampshire Street. On Pearl Street before entering School Street. Penley Corner Road On Penley Corner Road before entering Riverside Drive. Perkins Ridge Road On Perkins Ridge Road before entering Garfield Road. On Perkins Ridge Road before entering West Auburn Road. Pettingill Park Road On Pettingill Park Road before entering Field Avenue. Phil-O-Mar Avenue On Phil-O-Mar Avenue before entering Washington Street from both northbound and southbound lanes. Pine Street On Pine Street before entering Goff Street. On Pine Street before entering Pearl Street. Pinewood Road On Pinewood Road before entering Cedarwood Road. Pinnacle Drive On Pinnacle Drive at Court Street Pleasant Street On Pleasant Street before entering Court Street. On Pleasant Street before entering Hampshire Street, from both 
directions. On Pleasant Street before entering Turner Street. On Pleasant Street before entering Elm Street. Poland Road On Poland Road before entering Hotel Road. On Poland Road before entering Minot Avenue. Poland Springs Road On Poland Springs Road before entering Hotel Road. On Poland Springs Road before entering Washington Street. Poliquin Avenue On Poliquin Avenue before entering Hotel Road. On Poliquin Avenue before entering Manley Road from both directions. On Poliquin Avenue before entering Poland Road. Pride Road On Pride Road before entering Minot Avenue. On Pride Road before entering Poland Road. Princeton Avenue On Princeton Avenue before entering Center Street. Prospect Street On Prospect Street before entering Court Street. Pulsifer Street On Pulsifer Street before entering Mill Street. On Pulsifer Street before entering Sixth Street. On Pulsifer Street before entering Fifth Street. Rafnell Street On Rafnell Street before entering Minot Avenue. Railroad Street On Railroad Street before entering Court Street. Reed Street On Reed Street before entering Whitney Street. On Reed Street before entering Turner Street. Reginald Street On Reginald Street before entering South Main Street. Richard Street On Richard Street before entering Vickery Road. Richardson Street On Richardson Street before entering Court Street. Ridgewood Avenue On Ridgewood Avenue before entering Poland Road. Riverside Drive On Riverside Drive before entering Broad Street. Roak Street On Roak Street before entering Fourth Street from both directions. On Roak Street before entering Sixth Street from both directions. On Roak Street before entering Seventh Street. On Roak Street before entering Fifth Street from both directions. On Roak Street before entering Third Street from both directions. On Roak Street before entering Second Street. Rochelle Street On Rochelle Street before entering Poland Road. Rockhill Avenue On Rockhill Avenue before entering Poland Road. Rodman Road On Rodman Road before entering Poland Road from both directions. On Rodman Road before entering Washington Street. On Rodman Road before entering Manley Road from both directions. On Rodman Road before entering Hotel Road. Roosevelt Avenue On Roosevelt Avenue before entering Lake Street. Rowe Street On Rowe Street before entering Summer Street from both directions. On Rowe Street before entering Turner Street. On Rowe Street before entering Winter Street. Roy Avenue On Roy Avenue before entering South Main Street. Royal Avenue On Royal Avenue before entering Manley Road. On Royal Avenue before entering Poland Road. Russell Avenue On Russell Avenue before entering Court Street. Sandy Beach Road On Sandy Beach Road before entering Hotel Road. School Street On School Street before entering Union Street from both directions. On School Street before entering Goff Street. On School Street before entering Spring Street. Shepley Street On Shepley Street before entering Lake Street. On Shepley Street before entering Gamage Avenue. Sheridan Avenue On Sheridan Avenue before entering Minot Avenue. Sherman Avenue On Sherman Avenue before entering Lake Street. On Sherman Avenue before entering Colonial Way. Sherwood Drive On Sherwood Drive before entering 19th Street. Short Street On Short Street before entering Cook Street. On Short Street before entering Broad Street from both directions. Simpsons Beach Road On Simpsons Beach Road before entering Hotel Road. Small Road On Small Road before entering Hatch Road. Smith Street On Smith Street before entering Jones Street. Snow Avenue On Snow Avenue before entering Hotel Road. On Snow Avenue before entering Manley Road. Sopers Mill Road On Sopers Mill Road before entering Penley Corner Road. South Goff Street On South Goff Street before entering Court Street. South Main Street On South Main Street before entering Broad Street from both directions. South Witham Road On South Witham Road before entering South Main Street. On South Witham Road before entering Sopers Mills Road. Spring Road On Spring Road before entering West Auburn Road. Spring Street On Spring Street before entering Elm Street. On Spring Street before entering Hampshire Street from both directions. Sprucewood Road On Sprucewood Road before entering Stevens Mills Road. Stanley Street On Stanley Street before entering Lake Auburn Avenue. On Stanley Street before entering Center Street. Steele Road On Steele Road before entering Pownal Road. Sterling Road On Sterling Road before entering Garfield Road. Stetson Road On Stetson Road before entering North River Road. On Stetson Road before entering Turner Street. Stevens Mills Road On Stevens Mills Road before entering Minot Avenue. On Stevens Mills Road before entering Court Street from both directions. On Stevens Mills Road before entering Hotel Road from both directions. On Stevens Mills Road before entering Garfield Road from both 
directions. Stone Road On Stone Road before entering Old Turner Road. Summer Street On Summer Street before entering Turner Street. On Summer Street before entering Dennison Street. On Summer Street before entering Park Avenue from both directions. On Summer Street before entering Union Street Bypass from both directions. Summit Street On Summit Street before entering Court Street. On Summit Street before entering Western Avenue. Sunderland Drive On Sunderland Drive before entering Stevens Mills Road. Sunset Avenue On Sunset Avenue before entering Lake Street. Taft Avenue On Taft Avenue before entering Valley Street from both directions. Towle Street On Towle Street before entering Minot Avenue. Trapp Road On Trapp Road before entering Pownal Road. Trask Avenue On Trask Avenue before entering Poland Road. Troy Street On Troy Street before entering Hampshire Street from both directions. On Troy Street before entering Turner Street. Turkey Lane On Turkey Lane before entering Washington Street. On Turkey Lane before entering Poland Spring Road at both ends. On Turkey Lane Road before entering Old Danville Road. Turner Street On Turner Street before entering the intersection of Turner Road and Center Street. Twin Road On Twin Road before entering Rodman Road. Undercliff Road On Undercliff Road before entering Lake Street. On Undercliff Road before entering Highland Avenue. Valley Street On Valley Street before entering Bennett Avenue. On Valley Street before entering Poland Road. Valview Drive On Valview Drive before entering Garfield Road. Vernon Street On Vernon Street before entering Whitney Street from both directions. On Vernon Street before entering Center Street. On Vernon Street before entering Turner Street. Vickery Road On Vickery Road before entering South Main Street. On Vickery Road before entering Riverside Drive. Vine Street On Vine Street before entering Main Street. Vining Street On Vining Street before entering Summer Street. Vivian Street On Vivian Street before entering South Main Street. Washington Street On Sharlaine's Crossover before entering northbound Washington Street. Waterman Road On Waterman Road before entering Turner Road. Weaver Street On Weaver Street before entering Court Street. Wedgewood Road On Wedgewood Road before entering Lake Street. On Wedgewood Road before entering Highland Avenue. Welcomes Corner Road On Welcomes Corner Road before entering Hatch Road. West Hardscrabble Road On West Hardscrabble Road before entering Lewiston Junction Road. Western Avenue On Western Avenue before entering Court Street. On Western Avenue before entering Minot Avenue. Western Promenade On Western Promenade before entering Lake Street. On Western Promenade before entering Gamage Avenue. Western View On Western View before entering Lake Street. Whitney Street On Whitney Street before entering Center Street. On Whitney Street before entering Lake Auburn Avenue from both 
directions. Willard Road On Willard Road before entering Hotel Road. Williams Street On Williams Street before entering Gamage Avenue. On Williams Street before entering Field Avenue. Willow Street On Willow Street before entering Manley Street. On Willow Street before entering Hampshire Street from both directions. On Willow Street before Pine Street. Wilson Street On Wilson Street before entering Gamage Avenue. Winter Street On Winter Street before entering Dennison Street from both directions. Witham Road On Witham Road before entering South Main Street. On Witham Road before entering Broad Street. Wood Street On Wood Street before entering Summer Street. Woodbury Road On Woodbury Road before entering Old Danville Road. On Woodbury Road before entering Danville Corner Road. Woodlawn Avenue On Woodlawn Avenue before entering Field Avenue from both directions. On Woodlawn Avenue before entering Gamage Avenue. Wrights Landing On Wrights Landing before entering Aviation Avenue. On Wrights Landing before entering Kittyhawk Avenue. Wyman Road On Wyman Road before entering Hotel Road. Xivray Street On Xivray Street before entering Center Street. On Xivray Street before entering Turner Street. Youngs Corner Road On Youngs Corner Road before entering Hotel Road from both directions. On Youngs Corner Road before entering Perkins Ridge Road on the left side of the traffic island. Zoar Street On Zoar Street before entering Bennett Avenue. On Zoar Street before entering Poland Road.  
(Ord. of 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 46-03212011-02, 3-21-2011) 
Secs. 52-444-52-469. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - YIELD SIGNS 

Sec. 52-470. - Yield intersections designated; yield required. 
    All vehicular traffic shall yield to other traffic when traveling on the streets and at the locations set forth in the following schedule: 
Fifth Street On Fifth Street before entering South Main Street from the northwest. Shaw's Plaza Center Street On the two locations not controlled by traffic lights before entering Center Street from the Shaw's Plaza Shopping Center, and the Auburn Mall. Boulder Drive On Boulder Drive before entering Cedarwood Road. Brickyard Circle On Brickyard Circle before entering Washington Street from the north on the right side of the traffic island. Charles Street On Charles Street before entering Western Promenade. Davis Avenue On Davis Avenue before entering Gamage Avenue. Fair Street On Fair Street before entering Martin Street. Glendale Avenue On Glendale Avenue before entering Pride Road from the northeast. Hampshire Street On Hampshire Street before entering the intersection of Goff Street and Gamage Avenue. Houghton Street On Houghton Street before entering Fairview Court. Lunn Road On Lunn Road before entering Hersey Hill Road. Mechanics Row On Mechanics Row before entering Main Street controlling traffic turning right (southerly) on Main Street from the right-hand side of the traffic island. Mill Street On Mill Street before entering Riverside Drive. Minot Avenue On Minot Avenue before entering southbound Washington Street from a westerly direction. Mount Auburn Avenue On Mount Avenue before entering Turner Street from the east on the right side of the traffic island. On Mount Auburn Avenue before entering Summer Street. Oak Hill Road On Oak Hill Road before entering the intersection of Oak Hill Road and Pettengill Road from the north. Pionite Road On Pionite Road before entering Rodman Road. Stetson Road Eastbound traffic on Stetson Road shall yield to traffic on Stetson Road proceeding in an easterly direction from Turner Street. Summer Street On Summer Street before entering West Auburn Road. On Summer Street before entering Youngs Corner Road from the 
northwest. Sunderland Drive On Sunderland Drive before entering Boulder Drive. Washington Street 
crossovers On two crossovers between northbound and southbound Washington Street just south of the railroad tracks. Yield before entering southbound lanes. On the crossover from Brickyard Circle before entering northbound Washington Street. On the First Avenue crossover before entering northbound Washington Street. Western Avenue 
crossover On the Western Avenue crossover before entering Washington Street southbound. Young's Corner Road On Youngs Corner Road before entering Perkins Ridge Road from the east on the right side of the traffic island. On Youngs Corner Road while travelling in a southeasterly direction along the northeasterly side of the traffic island located at the intersection of Youngs Corner Road and Perkins Ridge Road before entering Youngs Corner Road.  
Secs. 52-471-52-493. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - TRUCK TRAFFIC ROUTES 

Sec. 52-494. - Designated. 
(a)  The following provisions designate truck traffic routes in the city: 
(1)  All through trucks entering the city from the North Bridge shall use the following routes: 
a.  When travelling southerly via Route 202 or Maine Turnpike: Court Street to Union Street Bypass (Minot Avenue) and thence southerly. 
b.  When travelling northerly via Route 4: Court Street to Turner Street and thence northerly. 
(2)  All through trucks entering the city from the south or west on Routes 100, 200, 11 or 12 shall use the following routes: 
a.  When traveling to New Auburn: Minot Avenue to Elm Street, Elm Street to Main Street, Main Street southerly to New Auburn. 
b.  When travelling to Lewiston by the Longley Bridge: Minot Avenue northerly to Court Street, Court Street to Longley Bridge. 
(3)  All through trucks entering the city from the north on Route 4 or Turner Street shall use the following route when proceeding southerly to Route 202 or the Maine Turnpike: Turner Street to Union Street Bypass, Union Street Bypass to Minot Avenue. 
(4)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle over that section of Court Street between James Street and Fairmount Avenue (Goff Hill) except to turn into Highland Avenue or to turn into or exit from Forest Avenue or Prospect Street if the vehicle together with any trailer or other conveyance being hauled plus load exceeds nine tons gross vehicle weight, or if the trailer of other conveyance being hauled exceeds 20 feet in length. This subsection shall not apply to municipal vehicles, emergency vehicles or home delivery vehicles while actually servicing residences located in the prohibited area. 
(5)  Through truck traffic is prohibited on the section of Merrow Road between Minot Avenue and a point on Merrow Road located 0.7 mile southerly on Minot Avenue. 
(6)  Through truck traffic is prohibited for the entire length of Fletcher Road. 
(7)  Through truck traffic is prohibited for the entire length of East Hardscrabble Road. 
(8)  Through truck traffic is prohibited for the entire length of Royal Avenue. 
(9)  Through truck traffic is prohibited on Turner Street from Stetson Road northerly to the intersection of Turner Street and Center Street. 
(10)  Through truck traffic is prohibited on Pride Road for its entire length. 
(11)  Through truck traffic is prohibited for the entire length of Beech Hill Road. 
(12)  Through truck traffic is prohibited for the entire length of Old Hotel Road. 
(13)  Through truck traffic is prohibited for the entire length of Witham Road. 
(14)  Through truck traffic is prohibited for the entire length of Towle Street. 
(b)  Subsections (a)(6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12), (13) and (14) of this section shall not apply to municipal vehicles, emergency vehicles, home delivery or service vehicles, or to pickup trucks that are not used for commercial purposes. 
(Ortd. of 2-01-2010) 
Secs. 52-495-52-511. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - NO LEFT TURNS 

Sec. 52-512. - Designated. 
Center Street All vehicles traveling in a northerly direction on Center Street are prohibited from making a left turn onto Whitney Street. Court Street All vehicles traveling in a westerly direction on Court Street are prohibited from making a left turn onto Main Street. All vehicles traveling in a westerly direction on Court Street are prohibited from making a left turn onto High Street. All vehicles traveling in an easterly direction on Court Street are 
prohibited from making a left turn onto the road leading northerly into the Great Falls Plaza. High Street All vehicles traveling in a northerly direction on High Street are prohibited from making a left turn onto Court Street. Union Street All vehicles traveling in a northerly direction on Union Street are 
prohibited from making a left turn onto Turner Street. Whitney Street All vehicles traveling in an easterly direction on Whitney Street are prohibited from making a left turn onto Center Street.  
Secs. 52-513-52-532. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - RIGHT TURNS 

Sec. 52-533. - Designated. 
Elm Street All vehicles traveling in a westerly direction on Elm Street at the 
intersection of Minot Avenue must turn right onto Minot Avenue when in the righthand lane. All vehicles traveling in an easterly direction on Elm Street at the 
intersection of Main Street must turn right onto Main Street when in the righthand lane. Goff Street All vehicles traveling southerly on Goff Street in the righthand lane next to the curb must turn right onto Court Street. Pleasant Street All vehicles traveling southerly on Pleasant Street must turn right onto Court Street upon entering the intersection of Court and Pleasant Streets. All vehicles traveling in a northerly direction on Pleasant Street must turn right upon entering the intersection of Turner and Pleasant Streets.  
Chapter 54 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public utilities generally, 35-A M.R.S.A. § 2101 et seq.; sewers and drains generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3401 et seq.; sewer connections, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3405; service charges for sewage disposal, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3406; landlord access to tenant bill payment information, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3406-A; damage to public drains, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3407; private drains, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3421 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall be subject to a fine or penalty not exceeding $1000.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1967, § 28-3.4) 
Sec. 54-2. - Authority to shut off electric current in emergencies. 
    The fire chief, in case of fire, if in his opinion it is necessary, and the city electrician, whenever in his opinion the public safety so requires, shall have authority to direct any person using or operating any wires strung anywhere in the city for the purposes of carrying electric current to shut off the electric current from such wires as he knows or believes are dangerous to life or property, for such period of time as he may deem necessary. Any such person who shall refuse to shut off such current in accordance with such order shall be liable to a penalty of $50.00 for each and every hour during which such order shall be disregarded. 
(Code 1967, § 28-3.3) 
Secs. 54-3-54-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLES AND WIRES 

Sec. 54-23. - Indemnification of city. 
    Every person erecting, maintaining or using any utility poles or wires shall, in case of loss or damage, indemnify and save harmless the city, and its officers, agents and servants, from and against all claims and demands for injuries to persons or property occasioned or alleged to be occasioned by the existence or use of such poles or wires or the transmission of electric current by means thereof, and the city and its officers, agents and servants, exercising the rights and power given to them by any ordinance, shall not be held liable by such person on account thereof, by reason of any injury or damage caused thereby. 
(Code 1967, § 28-3.2) 
Sec. 54-24. - Permit requirements for poles and above-ground wires. 
    The terms of the permit for poles and above-ground wires, required by state law, which shall be included in the application and agreed to therein by the applicant over his signature, shall include: 
(1)  An agreement that one gain on each pole, below the electric power company's wires and above the telephone or cable television company's lines or cables, shall be reserved on all new and reconstructed poles planted, for municipal purposes, free of cost to the city. 
(2)  An agreement that, in case of emergency, if necessary, such poles and wires may be cut or removed by order of the fire chief or city electrician without claim upon the city therefor. 
(3)  An agreement to indemnify and save harmless the city against all liability, judgments, costs and expenses which may in any manner accrue against the city because of any negligence or alleged negligence in the performance of the work for which the permit is granted, or because of any negligence or alleged negligence in connection with the maintenance and use of such poles and wires, or in consequence of the granting of this permission. 
(4)  An agreement to consult with the airport management and the Federal Aviation Administration for locating poles and wires in areas adjacent to the airport. 
(Code 1967, § 28-2.1) 
Sec. 54-25. - Pole identification. 
    All poles placed or maintained by any public utility company shall be designated by stencil with the name of the company owning the pole. 
(Code 1967, § 28-2.2) 
Sec. 54-26. - Pole maintenance; obstruction of right-of-way. 
    Whenever from any cause any poles placed or maintained by any public utility company get out of an upright position, so that they become unsightly and disfigure any street, alley, lane or court, the owner thereof shall right the pole as soon as possible, and shall keep the pole at all times in good appearance. Such poles shall not obstruct the roadway or right-of-way. 
(Code 1967, § 28-2.3) 
Sec. 54-27. - Attachments interfering with city wires. 
    All persons are prohibited from affixing or attaching any wire or cable to any pole in the gain or space provided and maintained for the wire of the fire alarm system or the communication lines of the city which, in the judgment of the city electrician, may interfere in any manner with the city's wire operations. 
(Code 1967, § 28-2.4) 
Chapter 56 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to abate nuisances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3104; preservation of trees along public ways and water, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3252; public shade trees, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3281 et seq.; appointment and duties of tree wardens, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3282; removal of trees, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3283; destruction or injury to trees prohibited, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3284; cutting and removal of trees and brush, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3291. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 56-1-56-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 56-19. - Tree maintenance. 
    The public works director or persons acting under his direction and control may enter upon private property at reasonable times for the purpose of detecting the presence of tree disease and carrying out control measures. Whenever a tree is found upon private property infected with the disease, or whenever a tree is found upon private property that creates a hazard to the safety of persons or property, the public works director shall give notice in writing to the property owner advising him of the dangerous condition, demanding that the property owner have the tree removed within 30 days of receiving such notice, and notifying the property owner that if the requested action is not taken within the 30-day period the tree may be removed by the City at the expense of the property owner. If the requested action is not taken within the 30-day period, and if the public works director determines that immediate action is necessary to protect persons or property from the dangerous tree, he, or persons acting under his direction, may enter the premises and cause the dangerous tree or part thereof to be removed at the expense of the property owner. A property owner may appeal the public works director's notice to remove the tree within 30 days of receiving such notice to the board of appeals. An adverse decision of the Board of Appeals may be appealed to the superior court within 30 days of the decision. 
(Code 1967, § 13-1.3; Ord. No. 05-02022015, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 56-20. - Cutting, damaging or removing plants in public places. 
    No person shall willfully cut, dig up, break, injure, damage, destroy or interfere with any tree, shrub, flower bush or other plant in any public place in the city. No person except the public works director or any person he may designate or persons he may give permission to shall cut or trim trees or parts thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1.29) 
Secs. 56-21. - Shade trees. 
(a)  Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the home rule authority granted to the city in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Abutter. Person as defined above, who owns property, which includes the limits of any city road, public right-of-way, or any highway within the meaning of 30-A.M.R.S.A. § 3281. 
    Community cords. This program is established to provide available resources to the health and human services department to assist qualifying applicants with heating assistance. The program is funded through annual appropriations from the public tree revenue account, by the city council, during the annual budget process from at least two sources: selling wood from city tree maintenance and also the harvesting of city forests. 
    Person. Any individual, person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or organization. 
    Public shade trees. All trees within or upon the limits of any city road, public right of way, or any highway within the meaning of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3281. Street trees are owned by the abutter as defined above, but managed by the city under this section. 
    Public trees. All trees located upon any public property owned by the city, including public property currently used by any individual departments. 
    Municipal arborist. An official of the city appointed by the city manager who shall include the care and control of all public shade trees upon and along city roads and public rights of way and in the parks and public lands of the city, and that official shall enforce all laws relating to the preservation and maintenance of public shade trees and public trees. Any term or word of this section which is not defined in this subsection shall have a meaning consistent with Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., to the extent that such term is defined in that title; any terms that are not defined in that title shall have a meaning consistent with common usage. 
(c)  Appointment of municipal arborist. The city manager shall appoint the municipal arborist who shall administer this section in coordination with such other municipal agencies/departments as now or may in the future share in the responsibility of caring for and maintaining the community forest. The municipal arborist shall have appropriate training and skill in performing care and maintenance of all shade trees. The municipal arborist shall at all times during his or her employment hold a valid arborist's license issued by the State of Maine. 
(d)  Harvest revenues. If and when revenues generated from any timber harvests, salvage, or removal exceed the expense of conducting that harvest, salvage, or removal, the surplus revenues will be deposited in a dedicated public tree revenue account. Proposed expenditures of funds from this account shall be presented to the city council each fiscal year during the annual budgetary process. Expenditures related to the maintenance, replacement and improvement of public trees and the community cords program should be given priority while budgeting for expenditures from the public tree revenue account. 
(e)  Prohibition. No person shall prune, plant, cut down, remove, or alter a public shade tree or a public tree unless that person has first obtained the consent of the municipal arborist for those actions. 
(f)  Request for consent from municipal arborist. 
(1)  Written request. Any person who intends to prune, plant, cut down, remove, or alter a public shade tree or public tree shall make a written request to the municipal arborist and shall state specifically the action intended to be taken by that person concerning an identified public shade tree or public tree. 
(2)  Written decision. Within ten days of receipt of a written request pursuant to subsection (f)(1) of this section the municipal arborist shall approve the request, approve the request with conditions, or deny the request in a written decision mailed or hand delivered to the person making the request. 
The municipal arborist shall have the authority to deny or impose reasonable conditions upon approval of the request in order to preserve and maintain the health and beauty of public shade trees or public trees and the places where such trees are located; and in order to protect the public safety and the safety and convenience of the city roads, highways, public rights of way, and public lands. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration and may contain conditions attached thereto by the municipal arborist. 
(g)  Appeal. 
(1)  In the event that a person is aggrieved by the decision of the municipal arborist, then such a person shall have the right to appeal the notice of the municipal arborist to the city council within ten days of the date of the notice of the municipal arborist. The appeal shall be made in writing and shall set forth specifically the basis for the appeal. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the written appeal by the city council, the city council may delegate the responsibility for hearing appeals under this ordinance to another city administrative board or city staff member. 
(3)  The appeal hearing shall be scheduled within 60 days, and the appeal findings shall be communicated in writing to the person filing the appeal within ten days of the appeal hearing. 
(h)  Guidelines for planting, pruning, cutting removing, or altering of public shade trees. After a public hearing, the city council or its designated administrative board shall have the authority to adopt, amend, or modify guidelines for pruning, planting, cutting, removing or altering of trees, and thereafter, the municipal arborist shall use those guidelines in making decisions pursuant to this section. 
(i)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Any violator of any provision of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty payable to the city. Each act of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Should any public tree be destroyed, the person causing the destruction shall also make restitution to the city in an amount equal to the cost to the city of removing the destroyed tree plus its replacement value. 
(3)  Whenever the municipal arborist determines there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been a violation of any provisions of this article, he/she may initiate enforcement proceedings in accordance with the citation system established in article VIII of chapter 2. 
(4)  In addition to the remedies set forth above, the municipal arborist, on behalf of the city, may seek an abatement of the violation, or injunctive relief, including an award of penalties and reasonable attorney fees, from the district court or the superior court. 
(5)  The court also may order a violator of this section to reimburse the city for the cost of any action that was necessary to correct violations of the ordinance. If the city is the prevailing party in an enforcement action, it shall be awarded reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(j)  Severability. The provisions of this section shall be severable. If any portion of this section is held to be invalid, the remainder of this section and its application thereof shall not be affected. 
(k)  Other laws and ordinances. 
(1)  This section shall not prohibit or prevent the city from pruning, cutting, altering, or removing trees when the pruning, cutting, alteration, or removal is ordered by the city council or its designated administrative board for the following purposes: 
a.  To layout, alter or widen the location of city roads or highways; 
b.  To lessen the danger of travel on city roads or highways; 
c.  To suppress tree pests or insects; or 
d.  To replace street trees that have been removed and to add shade trees to the community forest. 
(2)  Should the city initiate work concerning street trees referenced above in subection 56-21(k)(1)a., b. c. or d. the abutter shall be notified a minimum of ten days prior to commencement of the work. 
(3)  The consent of the municipal arborist is not required for planting, pruning, cutting, altering or removal of trees by the city for the foregoing purposes set forth in subsection (h) of this section. The consent of the municipal arborist is also not required for pruning, cutting or removal of trees in connection with routine maintenance of public parks and other public facilities which are managed by the public services department of the city. The city shall, however, conform to any guidelines adopted pursuant to subsection (i) of this section in any actions taken for the foregoing purposes. 
(Ord. No. 06-02022015, §§ 2-12, 2-17-2015) 
Cross reference- Guidelines for cutting or altering of public shade trees, § 15-48. 
Secs. 56-22-56-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC WOODLOT MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 56-41. - Purpose. 
    The city hereby adopts the following public wood lot management ordinance in order to regulate the forest management on public lands within the city, including properties used by various individual departments. 
(Ord. No. 05-07112016, 8-1-2016) 
Sec. 56-42. - Authority. 
    This division is enacted pursuant to the Home Rule Authority granted to the city in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001. 
(Ord. No. 05-07112016, 8-1-2016) 
Sec. 56-43. - Definitions. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Voluntary outcome-based guidelines established by Maine Forest Service to maintain water quality and minimize sedimentation of water courses 
    Community forest. The sum of: 
(1)  Street trees within or upon the limits of any city road, public right of way or any highway within the meaning of 30-A.M.R.S.A. § 3281; 
(2)  Public trees included as part of landscaping at public buildings or parks; 
(3)  Public woodlots i.e. parcels which include forested acres which provide or have potential to provide wildlife habitat, forest products, recreation, educational opportunities and other amenities. 
    Designated representative. individual identified as responsible for overseeing forest management activities related to a timber harvesting operation. Principal contact with the forester supervising the harvest operation. 
    Forest management plan. A site specific document written by a professional forester with input from the landowner which establishes direction and goals for the management of a forest land area. The plan will specify all silvicultural practices and activities that support the landowner objectives and minimizes adverse environmental impact. Forest management plans normally include a description of the land and forest, inventory information, and management prescriptions. Forest management plans are typically updated every ten years. 
    Harvest plan. A document prepared by a professional forester describing activities involved in a timber harvest, including but not limited to: maps of access routes, cut locations, principle trails to be used to remove harvested material, water crossings, log landings; cutting prescriptions and controls; buffer zones; BMPs to be used; and special considerations sufficient to support the objectives of the forest management plan, and provide direction to the qualified logging professional conducting the operation under supervision of the forester. 
    Professional forester. An individual qualified and licensed to practice forestry in the State of Maine. (Forest management in Maine is limited to licensed professional foresters.) 
    Public trees. All trees located upon any public property owned by the city, including public property currently used by any individual departments. 
    Public woodlot. The portion of the community forest not including street trees within or upon the limits of any city road, public right of way, or any highway within the meaning of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3281 and public trees included as part of landscaping at public buildings or parks. Public woodlots are parcels which include forested acres which provide or have potential to provide wildlife habitat, forest products, recreation, educational opportunities and other amenities. 
    Qualified logging professional. A logger trained according to Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) Standard by an organization recognized by Maine's Sustainable Forestry Initiative Implementation Committee, including Maine Certified Logging Professional (CLP). 
    Stakeholder. Stakeholders include a range of persons, including city council, school committee, staff of individual city departments, adjacent landowners (abutters), and community members. 
    Any term or word of this division which is not defined in this section shall have a meaning consistent with Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., to the extent that such term is defined in that title; any terms that are not defined in that title shall have a meaning consistent with common usage. 
(Ord. No. 05-07112016, 8-1-2016) 
Sec. 56-44. - Development of a forest management plan. 
    The city council or its' designated administrative board or staff member shall ensure that a forest management plan is written for any public woodlot(s) that are intended to be managed. The forest management plan shall be written by a professional forester with documented input from the individual department responsible for the management of the public woodlot and other stakeholders, in order to define management objectives to be addressed in the plan. The management plan should address multiple uses, including but not limited to biodiversity, control of invasive species, education activities, forest inventory, recreation, special places, timber harvesting, water quality, wildlife habitat, and any other appropriate considerations. The management plan should be updated every ten years and conform to the current stewardship guidelines as defined by the Maine Forest Service. 
(Ord. No. 05-07112016, 8-1-2016) 
Sec. 56-45. - Conducting a harvest. 
(a)  The city council or its designated administrative board(s) shall approve any timber harvesting. 
(b)  The harvest will be supervised by a professional forester who shall provide regular written progress reports to the designated representative member of the individual department responsible for the public woodlot. The designated representative shall be empowered to suspend the operation if objectives are not being met. 
(c)  The harvest shall be conducted by qualified logging professionals. 
(d)  The harvest will be conducted according to a harvest plan, written by a professional forester and approved by the designated representative, that supports the objectives of the forest management plan and provides direction to the qualified logging professional conducting the operation. The harvest plan will include BMPs to safeguard water quality. 
(e)  Stakeholders, at minimum abutters, elected city officials, appropriate administrative board members and appropriate staff shall be notified 30 days prior to commencement of a harvest. 
(f)  Within 90 days of completion of a harvest, a review will be conducted including the forester, designated representative and appropriate stakeholders, in order to evaluate the operation's outcomes. A written review shall be prepared for the city council or its' designated administrative board. 
(Ord. No. 05-07112016, 8-1-2016) 
Sec. 56-46. - Harvest revenues. 
    Net revenues generated from any timber harvests shall be deposited in a timber harvest special revenue account. The proceeds in this account shall be distributed by the city council during the annual budget process. 
(Ord. No. 05-07112016, 8-1-2016) 
Sec. 56-47. - Prohibition. 
    No person shall prune, plant, cut down, remove, or alter a public tree. See section 56-48 below. 
(Ord. No. 05-07112016, 8-1-2016) 
Cross reference- Cutting, damaging or removing plants in public places, § 56-20; shade trees, § 56-21. 
Sec. 56-48. - Guidelines for cutting or altering of public shade trees. 
    After a public hearing, the city council or its designated administrative board shall have the authority to adopt, amend, or modify this division. Thereafter, the city council or it's designated administrative board shall use those guidelines in making decisions pursuant to this division. 
Cross reference- Shade trees, § 56-20. 
Sec. 56-49. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any violator of any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty payable to the city. Each act of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Should any public tree be destroyed, the person causing the destruction shall also make restitution to the city in an amount equal to the cost to the city of removing the destroyed tree plus its replacement value. 
(c)  Whenever the municipal arborist determines there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been a violation of any provisions of this article, he/she may initiate enforcement proceedings in accordance with the citation system established in article VIII of chapter 2. 
(d)  In addition to the remedies set forth above, the municipal arborist, on behalf of the city, may seek an abatement of the violation, or injunctive relief, including an award of penalties and reasonable attorney fees, from the district court or the superior court. 
(e)  The court also may order a violator of this division to reimburse the city for the cost of any action that was necessary to correct violations of this division. If the city is the prevailing party in an enforcement action, it shall be awarded reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(Ord. No. 05-07112016, 8-1-2016) 
Chapter 60 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal planning and land use regulation generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.; land use regulation, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4351 et seq.; zoning ordinances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4352; regulation of manufactured housing, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4358; enforcement of land use regulations generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4451 et seq.; subdivisions, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq.; fences and fence viewers generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2951 et seq.; local growth management programs, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4321 et seq.; Airport Zoning Act, 6 M.R.S.A. § 241 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 60-1. - Terms. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
    Lot. The term "lot "includes the words plot or parcel. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual. 
    Shall/may. The term "shall" is mandatory, the term "may" is permissive. 
    Tense. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
    Used or occupied. The term "used" or "occupied" includes the words intended, designed, or arranged, to be used or occupied. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 2.1) 
Sec. 60-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms as used herein shall have the meanings or limitations of meaning hereby defined, explained or assigned: 
    Accessory structure or building means an uninhabited building, at least five feet in distance from the principal building, used for a purpose which is customarily subordinate and incidental to that of the principal building or to the principal use of the land and which is located on the same lot as the principal building use. The term "accessory buildings," in residential districts, includes tool sheds, wood sheds, detached garages and swimming pools. No accessory building shall house a home occupation or professional office or be used as a sales outlet in a residential district. 
    Accessory use means a subordinate use of land or building which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or to the principal use of the land and which is located on the same lot with the principal building or use. 
    Adaptive reuse means a special exception permitting a structure of community significance to be used for one or more purposes, not otherwise permitted in the district in which the building is located, but which the planning board has determined will contribute to the preservation of a structure of community significance, including without limitation, the following uses: 
(1)  Bed and breakfast homes or inns; 
(2)  Restaurants, diners or cafes; 
(3)  Art studios and galleries; 
(4)  Performing arts centers; 
(5)  Medical and dental clinics; 
(6)  Office space; 
(7)  Municipal and government uses; and 
(8)  Retail sales as an accessory use. 
    Adult day center means a supervised facility providing a program of education, crafts or recreation for adults over the age of 55 years. 
    Animal unit means one living animal of any species. 
    Antique shop means a building, or portion of building, where artifacts from generally recognized previous eras are sold or traded as the primary commercial activity. 
    Apartment. See the term Dwelling unit. 
    Architectural features means exterior building elements intended to provide ornamentation to the building massing, including but not limited to, eaves, cornices, bay windows, window and door surrounds, light fixtures, canopies, and balconies. 
    Art galleries means a building or place where works of art or other objects of value are kept, displayed, produced and offered for sale to the general public. 
    Artist studio, residential means a dwelling where up to 50 percent of the total floor space can be used for the production of art and/or craft products. The term "residential artist studio" shall not include galleries or studios open to the public for display or sales. All artist studios shall be designed to meet all residential safety and occupancy requirements and shall be considered to be accessory to the residential use. 
    Automobile means a passenger vehicle propelled by a self-contained motor. The term "automobile" also includes motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, trucks and recreation vehicles (RVs). 
    Automobile and marine paint and body shops means a building in which the business of automobile and marine paint and bodywork is conducted. Such use may also include as an accessory use a facility for the orderly display and sale of vehicles which have undergone substantial body repair on the premises. No such facility shall display, outdoors or indoors, or offer for sale more than ten vehicles at any one time. 
    Automobile and marine repair and service station means a building, lot or both in or upon which the business of general motor repair and vehicle service is conducted, but excluding junk and/or wrecking businesses. 
    Automobile, commercial, means a vehicle the primary use of which is commercial in character. 
    Automobile filling station means a building or lot having pumps and storage tanks at which fuel, oil or accessories for the use of motor vehicles are dispensed, sold or offered for sale at retail, where repair service is incidental and no vehicle storage or parking space is offered for rent. 
    Automobile garage, private, means an accessory building or portion of a main building designed, arranged or used for housing of private motor vehicles, only one of which may be a commercial vehicle. Not more than 50 percent of the space in such a garage shall be used for housing vehicles other than those owned by occupants of the premises. 
    Automobile parking lot, private, means a parcel of land, lot or portion thereof required, in accordance with these regulations, for off-street automobile parking. 
    Automobile repair and service station means a building, lot or both in or upon which the business of general motor vehicle repair and service is conducted, but excluding junk and/or wrecking business. 
    Automobile sales lot means a lot arranged, designed or used for the storage and display of motor vehicles or any unoccupied trailer for sale. 
    Automobile scrap yard means any land or building used for the dismantling, storage and salvaging for reuse of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition. 
    Automotive towing and storage means a business engaged in/or offering the services of a towtruck or towing service whereby motor vehicles are towed or otherwise removed from one place to another by the use of a motor vehicle specifically designed for that purpose. Storage of towed vehicles is considered to be the keeping of vehicles in a secured yard for not more than 120 days until claimed or disposed of in accordance with the laws of the state. 
    Basement means that portion of a building below the first floor joists having at least one-half of its clear ceiling height above the main level of the adjacent ground. 
    Bed and breakfast home means an accessory use to a single-family dwelling involving the renting of four or fewer guestrooms to transient guests who are staying for a limited duration (seven consecutive days and/or 60 accumulated days in a calendar year) and the serving of breakfast only to house guests. Such establishment shall be owned and operated by the resident of the dwelling. The term "bed and breakfast home" also includes a tourist home. 
    Bed and breakfast inn means a dwelling involving the renting of more than four but fewer than ten guestrooms to transient guests who are staying for a limited duration (seven consecutive days and/or 60 accumulated days in a calendar year) and the serving of breakfast to house guests only. Such use may provide a restaurant, function rooms and places of public assembly. 
    Boardinghouse or lodginghouse means a dwelling which, for compensation, lodging, or lodging and meals are provided to more than four persons and where a proprietor or owner resides in the building. No provisions for cooking in individual rooms other than a main kitchen is allowed. 
    Building means a structure having one or more stories and a roof, designed primarily for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. (See the term Structure. ) 
    Building envelope means the ground area on a lot and the space above it on which a building may be constructed. 
    Building form means the overall shape and dimensions of a building. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the grade of the top of the highest roof beams of a flat roof, or to the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip roof. When a building faces on more than one street, the height shall be measured from the averages of the grades at the center of each street front. 
    Building inspector means the building inspector of the City of Auburn, Maine, or their duly authorized agent. 
    Building line means a line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any enclosed porch, vestibule of other enclosed portion of a building shall not project. 
    Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
    Care home means a rest, nursing, or convalescent home established to render domiciliary nursing care and board for chronically ill or convalescent patients, or persons who are infirm because of mental or physical conditions, but excluding a child care home or one for the care of mentally retarded patients, alcoholics, psychotics or drug addicts. 
    Cellar means that portion of a building below the first floor joists having at least one-half of its clear ceiling height below the mean level of the adjacent ground. A cellar shall not be used for habitation. 
    Cemetery means a place used for the permanent interment of dead bodies or cremated remains thereof. A cemetery may be a burial park of earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interments, or a combination of one or more thereof. 
    Child care home means a child boarding home, summer camp, foster family home or other place providing domiciliary arrangements for compensation, of three or more children, unrelated to the operator by blood, marriage or adoption, under 18 years of age. A facility providing child day care less than 24 hours per day, per child, to more than five children shall not be considered a child care home. The term "child care home" includes any family-type facility which provides child care to children placed by order of any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any public welfare department, or other governmental agency having responsibility for placing children for care, or placed by child-placing agency licensed under state law. 
    Child day care center means a facility conducted or maintained by anyone who provides, for consideration, care and protection for more than 12 children under 16 years of age, unrelated to the day care center operator, who are unattended by parents or guardians, for any part of the day. Any facility, the chief purpose of which is to provide education, shall not be considered to be a day care center, but is classified as a nursery school. 
    Child day care home means an accessory use of a residence by a person residing on a premises to provide on a regular basis, and for consideration, care and protection for up to 12 children under 16 years of age, unrelated to the day care home operator, who are unattended by parents or guardians, for any part of the day. Any facility, the chief purpose of which is to provide education, shall not be considered to be a day care home, but is classified as a nursery school. A child day care home shall not be located closer to another child day care home than 500 feet measured along the street frontage. Child day care homes shall be reviewed under the city's home occupation regulations (article IX of this chapter) and shall meet the following: 
(1)  All outdoor play areas, used in conjunction with the day care operation, shall be fully enclosed by a fence, a minimum of four feet in height. 
(2)  If the property utilizes a private sewerage disposal/septic system a written verification from a site evaluator, stating that the current system can handle the change of use to include the children in the proposed day care, shall be submitted. 
    Church means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which buildings, accessory buildings and uses are maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
    Clinic means an establishment where patients are accepted for treatment by a group of physicians practicing medicine together, but shall not offer domiciliary arrangements; medical and dental. 
    Club, private, means any building or rooms, which serve as a meeting place for an incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, literary, political, recreational or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
    Community based residential facilities (CRF) means dwelling units providing communal domiciliary arrangements for a group of unrelated persons under supervision of the state government human service agencies, for the transition of formerly institutionalized persons back into the mainstream community living and participation, a halfway house, or a group home. 
    Comprehensive plan means the master development plan of the City of Auburn, Maine, any amendments or additions thereto, part or portion thereof adopted by the city council upon recommendations of the planning board of Auburn, Maine, pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4323. 
    Convenience store means a business establishment having an interior selling space of less than 3,000 square feet where general food supplies for the table, other articles of household use and gasoline pump service is offered for sale. Such a use may include the sale of food vended in disposable containers for consumption on or off the premises. 
    Court means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings which is bounded on two or more sides by such building or buildings and every part of which is clear and unobstructed from its lowest point to the sky. 
    Dental clinic means an establishment where patients are accepted for treatment by a group of dentists practicing dentistry together. 
    Development standard(s) means building standards that establish basic parameters governing building form, including the envelope for building placement in three dimensions and certain permitted and required building elements such as storefronts, balconies, street walls, etc. The development standards establish both boundaries within which development may take place and what requirements apply. 
    Director means the director of planning and any successor or other official designated from time to time by the city council to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    District or zone means an area within which certain uses of land and buildings are permitted or denied pursuant to municipal review, and certain others are prohibited. 
    District, overlay, means a special district or zone which addresses special land use circumstances and environmental safeguards and is superimposed over the underlying existing zoning districts. Permitted uses in the underlying zoning district shall continue subject to compliance with the regulations of the overlay zone or district. 
    Dormitory means a building or portion thereof used for sleeping purposes in connection with a school, college or other educational institution. 
    Driveway means private ways intended for internal vehicular circulation on a lot or within an automobile parking lot. 
    Dump means any premises used primarily for disposal by abandonment, discarding, dumping, reduction, burial, incineration or any other means and for whatever purpose of garbage, trash, refuse, dead animals, waste materials of any kind, junk; but not untreated sewage, animal waste, discarded machinery, or vehicles or parts thereof. The establishment of any dump shall be approved by the city council of the City of Auburn. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof arranged or designed to provide living facilities for one or more families. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a residence designed for or occupied by three or more families with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
    Dwelling, one-family attached, means a residential structure designed to house a single-family unit from lowest level to roof, with private outside entrance, but not necessarily occupying a private lot, and sharing a common wall or walls with an adjoining dwelling unit or units. Each one-family attached dwelling shall contain not less than 700 square feet of net floor area of habitable space. 
    Dwelling, one-family detached, means a dwelling unit singly and apart from any other building and intended and designed to be occupied and used exclusively for residential purposes by one family only, excluding those forms of temporary housing permitted by section 60-666. Each one-family detached dwelling shall contain not less than 700 square feet of net floor area of habitable space. 
    Dwelling, seasonal, means a dwelling occupied for not more than six months of any year. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a freestanding building intended and designed to be occupied and used exclusively for residential purposes by two families only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
    Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit, physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, with facilities which are used for or intended to be used for independent living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes. Dwelling units available for rental or occupancy for periods of less than one week shall be considered boarding/lodging units. 
    Eave means the edge of a roof which projects beyond the exterior wall. 
    Encroachment means any architectural feature, structure or structural element, such as a gallery, fence, garden wall, porch, stoop, balcony, bay window, terrace, or deck that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit exceeding into a setback, the public frontage, or above a height limit. 
    Erected includes the terms "built," "constructed," "reconstructed," "enlarged" and/or "retained on." 
    Facade means the vertical surface of a building. 
    Family means one or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities, provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over four persons. 
    Farm means any parcel of land containing more than ten acres which is used in the raising of agricultural products, livestock or poultry, or for dairying. The term "farm," under the Agricultural and Resource Protection District, shall be further defined as meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  At least 50 percent of the total annual income of the farm occupant and his spouse living in the farm residence will be derived from such uses; and 
(2)  At least ten acres of the farm will be devoted to the production by the occupant of field crops or to the grazing of the occupant's livestock. For purposes of this definition, the term "poultry" means no fewer than 100 foul and the term "livestock" means no fewer than 20 cattle or other animals being raised for commercial purposes. 
    Farm, livestock, means any parcel of land that contains at least the following land area used for the keeping of horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, swine and similar sized animals for the agricultural use of the residents of the lot, provided that there is a minimum of 1 acre of land as required by Chapter 8 Animals and adequate land area is provided for each animal unit, excluding water bodies of one-quarter acre surface area or larger: 
(1)  Cattle: One bovine animal unit per acre of cleared hay-pasture land. 
(2)  Horse: 1.5 animal units per acre of cleared hay/pasture land. 
(3)  Sheep: Three animal units per acre of cleared hay/pasture land. 
(4)  Swine: Two animal units per acre of cleared land. 
(5)  Other livestock farms: The required lot size shall be determined by municipal officer charged with enforcement and shall conform to the lot size for similar sized animals. 
    Floodplain overlay means those areas of the city which are directly affected by flooding as shown on the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that shall comply with the pertinent regulations found in division 2 of article XII of this chapter pertaining to the Floodplain Overlay District. 
    Floor area of building means the total number of square feet of floor area of all stories in a building, excluding cellars, uncovered steps and uncovered porches. All horizontal measurements shall be made between exterior faces of walls. 
    Form based code means a land development regulation that fosters predictable built results and a high-quality public realm by using physical form (rather than separation of uses) as the organizing principle for the code. 
    Form based code zoning district means one of the five areas on the regulating plan, including Transect 4.1 (T-4.1), Transect 4.2 (T-4.2), Transect 5.1 (T-5.1), Transect 5.2 (T-5.2), and Transect 6 (T-6). 
    Frontage means the length of a lot extending between the side lot lines of a lot which borders an accepted portion of a street. Maine Turnpike frontage does not apply to this definition. 
    Frontage line means the lot line(s) of a lot fronting a street or other public way. 
    Greenhouse means an enclosed structure where trees, shrubs, vines and plants are propagated, grown or maintained. Activities associated with a greenhouse include: 
(1)  The sale of greenhouse products and related supplies; and 
(2)  The storage of material used in the maintenance of plants and growing items sold. 
    Grocery store means a small retail establishment having an interior selling space of less than 3,000 square feet where general food supplies for the table and other articles of household use are offered for sale. Such a use may include the sale of food vended in disposable containers for consumption on or off the premises; a corner market, a mom and pop store. 
    Ground area of building means the total number of square feet of horizontal surface covered by a building, including covered porches and accessory buildings. All measurements shall be made between exterior faces of walls, foundation, piers or other means of support. 
    Group home. See the term Community based residential facilities. 
    Guesthouse means a detached dwelling that is intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by transient, nonpaying visitors. 
    Habitable space means that area within a dwelling which has headroom of not less than seven feet when measured vertically upward from the finished floor, provided that any such area next below the roof of a dwelling shall be counted only if it is connected with the story next below by a permanent inside stairway. The floor area of any porch, cellar room, garage or shed attached to such dwelling shall not be counted in any measure of habitable space. 
    Half-story means a story directly under a sloping roof in which the points of intersection of the bottom of the rafters with the interior faces of the walls are less than three feet above the floor level. 
    Historic site means a parcel of land, a particular building, or a group of buildings that have played a significant role in the history of the community, and identified as such by the state historic preservation committee. 
    Historic or archaeological resources means areas identified by a governmental agency such as the state historic preservation commission as having significant value as historic or archaeological resources and any areas identified in the municipality's comprehensive plan. 
    Hog farm means any land or building used for the purpose of keeping, feeding or raising 20 or more swine per piggery. Establishment of this use requires approval from the city health department. 
    Home occupation means the accessory use of a dwelling unit for a business or commercial venture engaged in, by the person residing in the dwelling unit, and which allows up to one person who does not reside on the premises to be employed by that home occupation. 
    Hospital means any institution receiving inpatients and rendering medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" includes general hospitals and institutions in which service is limited to special fields such as cardiac, eye, nose and throat, pediatric, orthopedic, skin, cancer, mental health, tuberculosis, chronic disease and obstetrics. The term "hospital" also includes sanitariums, including those wherein mentally retarded and mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, senile psychotics or drug addicts are cared for or treated. 
    Hotel means a building in which the primary use is transient lodging accommodations offered to the public on a daily rate of compensation and where ingress and egress to the sleeping rooms is primarily through an inside lobby or office, supervised by a person in charge at all hours. Such facilities may include accessory uses such as restaurants, bars, nightclubs, function rooms, places of public assembly and/or recreational facilities. 
    Household pet means any animal kept as a pet and normally housed at night within the owner's dwelling or an accessory building on the same lot, including laying hens, but not including any animal normally raised as livestock or poultry or any animal raised for commercial gain. No household pet shall be kept that creates a public nuisance by reason of: 
(1)  Objectionable effects perceptible outside the owner's property, such as excessive or untimely noise or offensive odors; or 
(2)  Being a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of neighbors, invited guests or public servants visiting the property in the pursuit of their normal duties. 
    Illustrative plan means a plan or map that depicts (i.e. Illustrates but does not regulate) the streets, lots, buildings and general landscaping of the proposed Downtown Auburn/New Auburn Form-Based Code District. 
    Industrial use, heavy, means the use of real estate, building or structure, or any portion thereof, for assembling, fabricating, manufacturing, packaging or processing operations. 
    Industrial use, light, means the use of real estate, building or structure, or any portion thereof, for manufacturing or fabrication which will not create a nuisance by noise, smoke, vibration, odor or appearance. 
    Institution means any building or open area used only by an educational, religious, medical, charitable, philanthropic, or nonprofit organization, either public or private. 
    Institution, philanthropic, means a private, nonprofit organization that is not organized or operated for the purpose of carrying on a trade or business, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any member of said organization and which either: 
(1)  Provides volunteer aid to the sick and wounded of the armed forces in time of war and relief services to victims of natural or manmade calamities; or 
(2)  Provides all or any of the following: religious, social, physical, recreational and benevolent service. 
    Institution, private educational, means any private school or educational institution, however designated, which offers an academic curriculum of college, professional, preparatory, high school, middle school, elementary, kindergarten or nursery school instruction, or any combination thereof; but not a training program of trade, craft, technical or artistic instruction operated by a governmental entity. No private educational institution shall be deemed a home occupation. (See the terms Training school and School. ) 
    Institution, research, means an agency for scientific research of technical development including offices, libraries, laboratories, testing facilities and equipment incidental to such research and development. 
    Junkyard or automobile graveyard means any land or building used for the abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metal, other scrap or discarded material, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, machinery or parts thereof. Establishment and operation of this use requires annual approval from the City Council of Auburn, Maine. 
    Kennel means any building and/or land used, designed or arranged for the boarding, breeding or care of dogs, cats, pets, fowl or domestic animals, kept for purposes of show, hunting or as pets, except horses. 
    Land use permit means a permit required for the use of property that is legally permitted under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Landscape services means the actual planting, bed preparation, installation of landscape materials and maintenance of the landscape, planting and materials. Activities associated with landscaping include: the storage of materials and equipment related to the performance of landscaping, the temporary storage of trees, shrubs and plants pending installation in an existing landscape plan and the application and storage of pesticides and fertilizers by a licensed person. 
    Lawn maintenance service means the care and upkeep of the landscape after its installation and consists of such activities as mowing of the lawn, pruning of trees and shrubs, application by hand of fertilizer and weed control, insect and disease control, planting and care of flower beds, replacement of dead plants, incidental repairing of walls and paved surfaces, cleaning of fountains and pool basins, irrigation of lawns, cultivation of soil around trees and shrubs, rolling and reseeding of lawns, raking of leaves, winterization of trees and shrubs and snow removal. 
    Library means a place containing books and other material for reading, study or reference, provided that no such material is offered for sale. 
    Livestock means, but may not be limited to, any horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, or swine. 
    Lodge, private. See the term Club, private. 
    Lot means for zoning purposes, as covered by this chapter, a lot is a parcel of land under one ownership or joint ownership of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an accepted public street and may consist of: 
(1)  A single lot of record; 
(2)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(3)  A combination of complete lots of record; 
(4)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residential lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter; 
(5)  Lots shown on a plan approved by the planning board of the City of Auburn. 
    Lot frontage/width means the front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements or corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under the definition of yards in this section. 
    Lot line, rear, means the lot line generally opposite or parallel to the front lot line, except in a through lot. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet long or the lot comes to a point at the rear, said rear lot line is assumed to be a line not less than 20 feet long, lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line, or in the case of a curved front lot line, parallel to the chord of the arc of said front lot line. 
    Lot measurements means the following measurements: 
(1)  The depth of a lot shall be considered to be the uninterrupted distance between the midpoints of lot frontage and the midpoint of the rear lot line unless the lot meets the exception provided for by section 60-39. 
(2)  The width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided, however, that the width between the side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect the street line) shall not be less than 80 percent of the required lot width except in the case of a lot on the turning circle of a cul-de-sac, where the 80 percent requirement shall not apply. 
    Lot of record means a lawfully laid out lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the proper office of the registry of deeds, or a lawfully laid out lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
    Lot types means the diagram which follows illustrates terminology used in this chapter with reference to corner lots, interior lots, reversed frontage lots and through lots. In the diagram above, the lots designated by letters are defined as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot, defined as a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. (See lots marked A(1) in diagram) 
(2)  Interior lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street other than an alley. 
(3)  Through lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an alley. Through lots with frontage on two streets may be referred to as double frontage lots. 
(4)  Reversed frontage lot, defined as a lot in which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles to the general pattern in the area involved. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot or an interior lot. (See A-D and B-D in diagram.) 
    Lot, undersized, means for zoning purposes, as covered by this chapter, an undersized lot is a parcel of land of insufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area or width or depth. 
    Major or principal arterial highway means the highway that: 
(1)  Serves the major traffic movements within urbanized areas such as between central business districts and outlying residential areas, between major intercity communities, or between major suburban centers; 
(2)  Serves a major portion of the trips entering and leaving the urban area, as well as the majority of the through traffic desiring to bypass the central city; 
(3)  Provides continuity for all rural arterials which intercept the urban area. The term "major or principal arterial highways" includes Washington Street (State Routes 4 and 100, U.S. 202), Minot Avenue (State Routes 11 and 121), Union Street/Center Street/Turner Road (State Route 4), Veterans Memorial Bridge and approaches (State Routes 11 and 100, U.S. Route 202), North Bridge/Court Street to in town Minot Avenue Intersection (Turner Street), Court to Center Street (State Route 4). 
    Major recreational use of land means permanent use of at least 100 acres of outdoor space limited to ski areas with at least two lifts and public and private golf courses with a minimum of 18 holes. 
    Major retail development means a single building in excess of 100,000 square feet of new ground floor retail space. 
    Manufactured housing means a structural unit designed for occupancy, and constructed in a manufacturing facility and then transported by the use of its own chassis, or placed on an independent chassis, to a building site. The term "manufactured housing" includes any type of building which is constructed at a manufacturing facility and then transported to a building site where it is utilized for housing and may be purchased or sold by a dealer in the interim. The term "manufactured housing" includes newer mobile homes and modular homes. 
    Mining, quarrying, or earth removing means the excavation of any earth materials. 
    Minor arterial highway means the highway that: 
(1)  Serves trips of moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than principal arterials; 
(2)  Provides access to geographic areas smaller than those served by the major arterial highway system; and 
(3)  Provides intra-community continuity but does not penetrate identifiable neighborhoods. Examples are Riverside Drive, Mill Street, South Bridge (Broad Street to Mill Street), Main Street, Mechanics Row, High Street (Minot Avenue to Academy Street), Academy Street (High Street to Main Street), Elm Street, Spring Street (Minot Avenue to Court Street), Turner Street (Union Street to Turner Road), Mount Auburn Avenue (Center Street to Turner Street), Lake Street, Court Street (Union Street to in town Minot Avenue Intersection), Hotel Road (Manley Road to Poland Spring Road). 
    Mobile home development , intended to be generic, includes mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions, and mobile home condominiums. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel of land under single ownership in rural residence and suburban residence districts which has been planned and improved for the placement of not less than three mobile homes for nontransient use. 
    Mobile homes, newer, means those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called "newer mobile homes," which the manufacture certifies are constructed in compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development standards, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, are 14 body feet or more in width and are 700 or more square feet, and which are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical system contained therein; except that the term "newer mobile homes" includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition, except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban development and complies with the standard established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
    Mobile homes, older, means any factory-built home which fails to meet the definition of manufactured housing and more specifically, the term "older mobile homes" means any mobile home constructed prior to June 15, 1976. These units shall be restricted to approved mobile home parks. 
    Modular homes means those units which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the state's Manufactured Housing Act and regulations, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, which are not constructed on a permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning or electrical systems contained therein. 
    Motel means a building or group of detached buildings intended primarily to provide sleeping accommodations to the public on a daily rate of compensation and having a parking space generally located adjacent to a sleeping room. Such facilities may include a main kitchen or snack bar for the use of motel guests only. 
    Municipal sanitary landfill means a disposal site for household, commercial and industrial wastes, sludge or incinerator ash operated or controlled for operation by the city in a controlled manner involving the covering of deposited wastes with layers of earth so as to reduce health hazards and public nuisances from vermin, insects, odors and wind-borne debris. The location and design of sanitary landfills also require precautions against ground and surface water contamination through clay lining, water impoundment, aquifer avoidance and similar techniques. 
    Municipal uses means any lawful use of a building or of land carried on by the city sanitary landfill shall not be deemed a municipal use. 
    Museum means a building or place where works of art or other objects of permanent value are kept and displayed, provided such objects are not offered for sale. 
    Nonconforming building means a building lawfully existing at the time this or any previous zoning ordinance became effective and which does not conform to the dimensional regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming lot means a lot lawfully existing at the time this or any previous zoning ordinance became effective and which does not conform to the dimensional regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use of a building or of land lawfully existing at the time this or any previous zoning ordinance became effective and which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nursery means an outdoor place where live trees, shrubs, vines and plants are propagated, grown or maintained before permanent planting. Activities associated with nursery a business include: the sale of nursery products and related gardening supplies, the storage of material used in the maintenance of plants and growing items sold and the use of power-motorized equipment required by the nursery. 
    Nursery, child, means a facility providing a program less than 24 hours per day per child for the care of infants up to the age of 21/2 years. 
    Nursery, wholesale, means a nursery where plants, trees, shrubs and vines are propagated and/or grown and sold only at wholesale to industry related buyers such as retail nurseries, greenhouses and landscape contractors. A wholesale nursery may also provide landscape services accessory to the nursery use provided. 
(1)  At least one-half of the area of the lot (up to a maximum of three acres) is in active nursery production in a husband type manner; and 
(2)  The plants and trees propagated, grown and nurtured in the nursery are used as the primary products by the owner/operator of the landscape service. 
    Office means a building, or portion of a building wherein services are preformed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations. 
    Office trailer means a movable vehicle or structure designed for yearround or temporary occupancy for purposed of supervising construction; for business actually engaged in the business of selling manufactured housing, mobile homes and trailers; and as temporary office space for a business during the period in which permanent office space is being constructed. 
    Open space, common means land within or related to a development which is not individually owned and is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of a development and may include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate. 
    Outpatient addiction treatment clinic means a program or facility operated for the purpose of and specializing in the care, treatment and/or rehabilitation of persons suffering with addictions, including but not limited to gambling addition, alcohol or controlled substance addictions. The term "outpatient addiction treatment clinic" includes, but is not limited to, substance abuse treatment programs licensed by the State of Maine Department of Behavioral and Developmental Services Office of Substance Abuse. An outpatient addiction treatment clinic shall not be located within 2,000 feet of any property that is occupied by a church, school, family day care home, small day care facility, day care center, or public park or playground on the date of application for a license for such a facility. The term "outpatient addiction treatment clinic" does not include an inpatient or residential addiction treatment program, or a program consisting solely of support group activities without treatment by licensed health practitioners, such as Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous, and similar programs. 
    Parapet means a low wall along the edge of a roof or the other portion of a wall that extends above the roof line. 
    Parking space, off-street, means a rectangular area, not less than nine feet by 18 feet, forming a parking stall within or without a structure, not located in any public right-of-way. 
    Performing arts center means a public or private space used to create and present various performing and visual arts. For the purposes of this definition, the term "performing arts center" also includes educational and training uses associated with the various performing and visual arts. 
    Personal services means the furnishing of labor, time and effort by a person as an independent contractor not involving the delivery of a specific end product. 
    Place of worship see definition of church. 
    Planning board means the planning board of the City of Auburn, Maine. 
    Primary entrance means a section of building elevation which contains the street level principal entrance of the business, including the businesses on upper floors or in a basement. 
    Principal use means the principal use for which a lot or main building thereon is designed, arranged or intended and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
    Professional office means rooms and/or buildings used for office purposes as the principal use by members of any recognized profession, including doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, veterinarians, etc. 
    Realm, private means the physical and social domain that is considered private by their physical location and visual association being away from public view. This is considered areas behind the front building facade along with side and rear yard areas. 
    Realm, public means the physical and social domain of the public that is held in common either by their physical presence or visual association. This includes but is not limited to sidewalks, plazas, squares, parks, streets, front yards, civic buildings and civic spaces. 
    Recreational uses of land means permanent uses of outdoor space which are intended or designed for public use and include but are not limited to ski areas, golf courses (both public and private), driving ranges, horse boarding and riding facilities, miniature golf, paintball, horse and dog racing, snowmobile races, motorhome or recreational vehicle parks or commercial campgrounds and facilities for mass gatherings when used for two or more events during a calendar year. 
    Regulating plan means the adopted map that shows the Form Based Code zoning districts, which correspond to the special requirements of the form based code. 
    Restaurant means an eating place in which food is prepared and vended for immediate consumption on the premises without further preparation by the customer. The takeout of food on an infrequent basis is not prohibited. 
    Restaurant, carry-out, means an eating place in which all food is vended in disposable containers for consumption on or off premises at the customer's choice; a fast-food restaurant. 
    Restaurant, drive-in, means an eating place in which the business transacted is conducted by a customer from within his automobile or in which consumption of goods sold normally takes place within the customer's automobile on the establishment's premises. 
    Retail means a principal use encompassing the sale of commodities or goods in small quantities directly to the consumer. The term "retail" sales does not include sales of professional, financial and governmental services and personal services, including but not limited to a hotel and its accessory uses (restaurants, salons, gift shops, recreational facilities, convention space, etc.). 
    Retail space means the areas of a building, within a climate controlled environment, devoted to the display of commodities or goods for sale directly to the consumer and including customer sales transaction areas and areas associated with customer access. 
    Rifle, pistol, skeet or trap shooting range means a rifle, pistol, skeet or trap shooting range operated by an individual or club. Such a range may be opened to the general public or developed for the exclusive use of the individual, or club and invited guests. 
    Road means any public or private traveled way or any portion thereof. 
    Roof means the covering for a building which is an integral part of the structure for the purpose primarily of protecting the interior of the building or covering a porch or other similar permanent portion thereof, excluding awnings, stoop coverings, or similar additions which are removable without substantially impairing the original structure. 
    Sawmill means a unit designed to saw logs into lumber, firewood or other processed wood products. 
    School means an educational institution offering an academic curriculum; not the teaching of the crafts or a training school offering a program of trade, technical instruction or physical education. (See the term Training school. ) 
    Shared housing means housing consisting of two or more families occupying a single dwelling and using common cooking facilities. Shared housing shall permit the same number of families at the same density as allowed in the zoning district where the property is located subject to all applicable codes relating to building, housing, life safety, health and zoning as would be applied to independent living units located in the same structure. Approval for shared housing shall be secured from the department of community development and planning subject to the codes and ordinances indicated in this definition, prior to establishing a shared housing arrangement in any building. 
    Shelter for abused persons means dwelling facilities complying with the laws administered by the state government human services agencies, providing temporary domiciliary arrangements for children and adults unable to protect their own interest and welfare because of critical family circumstances. 
    Shopping center or office mall means a planned integrated complex of three or more retail stores and/or offices sharing a common structure and developed according to a unified plan. Such uses may include a common pedestrian circulation system and off-street automobile parking facilities. 
    Sign means any device, display surface, structure or object in public intended for visual communications. 
    Sign, mobile mounted, means a temporary sign which is mounted or for mounting on wheels or a mobile platform or which is portable. 
    Sign, official business directional, means any off-premise sign permitted to be erected pursuant to article II of chapter 42. 
    Sign, on-premises, means any sign that advertises, calls attention to, or indicates the person occupying the premises on which the sign is erected or maintained or the business transacted thereon, or advertises the property itself or any part thereof as for sale or rent, and which contains no other matter. 
    Sign, standing, means any sign that is not attached to a building. 
    Sign, temporary, means any movable sign, including its supporting structure, intended to be maintained for not more than 90 days in any calendar year. 
    Site-built home means a building constructed on-site which is designed to be used as a dwelling on foundations, when connected to the required utilities. 
    Slaughterhouse (abattoir, dressing plant) means any building, place or establishment in which is conducted the slaughtering of livestock and/or poultry for commercial purposes. 
    Special exception means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such a use may be permitted in such district as a special exception, if specific provision for such special exception is made in this zoning chapter and reasonable restrictions imposed by the planning board are complied with. 
    Specialty shop means a retail business offering products of a similar kind and nature designed for a particular use, purpose or occasion and distinguished from a store offering the same type of product together with other products of a nonhomogeneous quality. 
    Stable, riding, means any building or structure used or designed for boarding, breeding or care of horses, other than horses used for farming or agricultural purposes. 
    Standing means a person who holds title, right or interest in a property which may include a written option, contract to purchase the property or a leasehold interest or may be a person who can show how his actual use or enjoyment of property will be adversely affected by the proposed decision as an abutter as defined in section 60-1473. 
    Story means that portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the other floor or roof next above it, but not including the lowest portion so contained if more than one-half of such portion vertically is below the mean finished grade of the ground adjoining such building unless such space is used for business or as habitable space, in which case it shall count as a story. 
    Story, half, means a story under the gable, hip or gambrel roof, the plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are more than two feet above the floor of such story. 
    Street means the following: 
(1)  A public way laid out and established by the state, county commissioners of the County of Androscoggin; 
(2)  A way accepted by the municipal officers of the city; 
(3)  A way as to which a petition for improvements has been allowed under the provisions of this chapter for which the cost of the improvements has been provided for by the developer in either a cash amount or as provided for in this chapter; or 
(4)  A way on a plan of a subdivision duly approved by the planning board. 
    Street frontage. See the term Frontage. 
    Street line means a line defining the edge of a street right-of-way separating the street from abutting property or lots. 
    Street, primary means the street that is considered to be more intensely used than the other on a corner or double sided lot. 
    Street, secondary means the street that is considered to be less intense to the other on a corner or double sided lot. 
    Structure of community significance means a building that by virtue of its historic, social, cultural or economic contribution to the community, as determined by the planning board, is entitled to a special exception allowing its adaptive reuse. The planning board may consider a building's age, as well as any evidence of its role in the historic, social cultural, or economic history of the community, in determining whether a building qualifies for this designation. 
    Structure or building means a combination of materials to form a construction that is safe and stable including, among other things: stadia, reviewing stands, platforms, automobile parking garages, stagings, windmills, observation towers, trestles, sheds, coal bins, shelters and display signs, but not fences of any kind. 
    Subdivision means a division of land as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401. 
    Summer camps means seasonal dwelling units intended for and actually used for single-family dwellings only during the months of May, June, July, August, September and October or weekends or other periods of vacations not exceeding 30 days. 
    Supermarket means a retail establishment having an interior selling space of 3,000 square feet or more where general food supplies for the table and other articles of household use are offered for sale. 
    Swimming pool means any manmade receptacle or excavation housing a surface area of 250 square feet, or more, designed to hold water to a depth of at least 24 inches, primarily for swimming or bathing whether in the ground or above the ground. 
    Theater, indoor, means a building designed and/or used primarily for the commercial exhibition of motion pictures or plays to the general public. 
    Theater, outdoor, includes only those areas, buildings or structures designed and used for the commercial outdoor exhibition of motion pictures to passengers in parked motor vehicles. 
    Tourist home. See the term Bed and breakfast home. 
    Townhouse means a single-family dwelling unit that is one of two or more residential buildings having a common or party wall separating the units. 
    Trailer or RV means any vehicle or structure, except a device exclusively used upon stationary rails or tracks, mounted on wheels for use on highways and streets; propelled or drawn by its own or other motor power; and designed and constructed to provide living and/or sleeping quarters for one or more persons or for the conduct of a business, profession, trade or occupation for use as a selling or advertising device. If the wheels of a trailer are removed, except for repairs, it is deemed a building subject to all the regulations thereof. A trailer shall not be considered an accessory building. 
    Trailer home means a travel trailer, camping trailer or other similar vehicle capable of being hauled by a passenger automobile or light truck and designed primarily for temporary occupancy for recreational purposes or other seasonal use. A trailer home shall not be considered an accessory building. 
    Training school means a public or private school or training institution which offers a training program of trade, technical instruction, or physical education. A training school shall not be deemed a home occupation. 
    Transect (rural-to-urban) means a cross-section of the environment showing a range of different building development zones. The rural-to-urban transect of the human environment is divided into multiple transect zones that describe the physical form and character of a place according to the intensity of its land use and building development pattern. 
    Transmission towers means a structure that has the sole purpose of transmitting radio, television, cellular telephone or telephone waves from one location to another. 
    Useable open space means open or green space that is accessible for the use and enjoyment of residents, shall not be steep sloped (over ten percent slope), shall not include wetlands, parking or required buffer areas, and may include any required yard area or open areas for play. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. The term "variance" is authorized for only dimensional and supplemental regulations. Establishment of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the district or adjoining districts. 
    Wayside stand means a structure designed, arranged or used for the display and sale of agricultural products primarily grown or produced on the premises upon which such stand is located. A wayside stand may be located on premises that the products are not grown upon provided such premises is owned by the grower. 
    Wholesale means sales chiefly to retailers, other merchants, industrial and/or commercial users mainly for resale or business use. 
    Yard means a required open space on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed by any principal structure or portion of a principal structure. 
    Yard, front, means the open space extending across the full width of lot between the front lot line and nearest line of the principal building or any enclosed portion thereof. The depth of such yard shall be the shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the building or any enclosed portion thereof. 
    Yard, rear, means the open space extending across the full width of lot between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building or any enclosed portion thereof. The depth of such yard is the shortest horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the building. When the rear lot line is less than ten feet long or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the depth of the rear yard is measured to an assumed rear lot line as follows, the lot line generally opposite or parallel to the front lot line, except in a through lot. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet long or the lot comes to a point at the rear, said rear lot line is assumed to be a line not less than 20 feet long, lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line, or in the case of a curved front lot line, parallel to the chord of the arc of said lot line. 
    Yard, side , means the open space between the side lot line, the side street line, or the proposed side street line and the principal buildings, or any portion thereof, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or, in the absence of either of such yards, to the front lot line and/or rear lot line. The width of a side yard shall be the shortest distance between the side lot line and the nearest point of the principal building or any portion thereof. 
    Zone. See the term District. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 2.2; Ord. No. 13-09062011-05, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 12-09062011-04, 9-19-2011; Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 11-11072016, 11-21-2016; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 1, 4-24-2017; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017; Ord. No. 13-11062017, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 60-3. - Purpose. 
(a)  The zoning districts and regulations as set forth in this chapter are for the following purposes: 
(1)  To promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(2)  To improve and beautify the city; protect property values; avoid environmental blight and pollution; conserve natural resources; and protect access to direct sunlight for solar energy use. 
(3)  To lessen congestion in the streets; secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers; provide adequate light and air; prevent overcrowding of the land; avoid undue concentration of population; and economize public expenditure in the provision of public services, utilities and facilities. 
(b)  This zoning ordinance has been adopted pursuant to authority granted to the city by state law and is consistent with a comprehensive master plan adopted by the city council. Zoning districts have been designated with reasonable consideration given to the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 1.1) 
Sec. 60-4. - Zoning districts. 
(a)  For the purposes in section 60-3, the use, construction and alteration of buildings and structures and the use and alteration of land in the city are hereby restricted and regulated according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city is hereby divided into zoning districts designated as follows and more fully described on the official zoning map: 
District title Classicfication Short title Agriculture and Resource Protection Resource AG Low Density Country Residential Resource/Residential LDCR Rural Residence Residential RR Suburban Residence Residential SR Urban Residence Residential UR Multifamily Suburban Residential MFS Multifamily Urban Residential MFU Planned Unit Development Residential/Commercial PUD Downtown Enterprise Zone Residential/Commercial DEZ General Business Commercial GB Neighborhood Business Commercial NB Form Based Code Regulating Plan:  Traditional Main Street Neighborhood (Transect 4.1) Residential/Commercial T-4.1  Traditional Downtown Neighborhood (Transect 4.2) Residential/Commercial T-4.2  Downtown Traditional Center (Transect 5.1) Residential/Commercial T-5.1  Downtown City Center (Transect 5.2) Residential/Commercial T-5.2  Great Falls Metropolitan (Transect 6) Residential/Commercial T-6 Industrial Industrial ID Floodplain Overlay District Environmental FPO Taylor Pond Overlay District Environmental TPO Lake Auburn Watershed Overlay District Environmental LAO Shoreland Overlay District Environmental SLO Manufacturing Housing Overlay District Residential MHO  
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 1.2; Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-5. - Zoning map. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of the zoning districts and form based code regulating plan in section 60-4 are as shown on the map entitled City of Auburn, Maine, Zoning Map, dated, May 16, 2016, revised through its current date and revisions, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  As zoning district and form based code boundaries are amended from time to time in accordance with article XVII of this chapter, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after final approval of the amendment and the date following "revised through" appearing on the map shall be changed to match the effective date of the latest amendment. All previous editions of the zoning map shall thereupon become obsolete, null and void. 
(c)  The official zoning map, revised according to the most recent amendment, shall be located in the office of the department of community development and planning and shall be the final authority on current zoning district and form based code locations and boundaries. It shall be the responsibility of the city planning director to see that the official map is kept current and accurate. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 2.2; Ord. No. 13-09062011-05, 9-6-11; Ord. 12-09062011-04, 9-19-2011; Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-6. - Zone boundaries. 
    In the interpretation of the exact boundaries of zoning districts and form based code as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines; 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city or county limits shall be construed as following city or county limits; 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks; 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the measurements using the scale of the map; 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) of this section, the planning board shall interpret the zone boundaries. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 1.4; Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-7. - Establishment of fees. 
(a)  The city council, upon recommendation of the planning board, shall from time to time establish and amend a schedule of fees to be paid upon the filing of certain applications and petitions described in this chapter. 
(b)  No certificate, permit, special exception, variance or zoning ordinance amendment shall be issued unless or until such fees have been paid in full by the applicants or petitioners; nor shall any action to schedule public hearings on applications or petitions be taken until the fees related to the application or petition have been paid in full. 
(c)  If an approved application or petition is required to be recorded at the registry of deeds, the applicant or petitioner shall pay such fee. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 9.1) 
Secs. 60-8-60-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 60-33. - Permitted uses. 
    In the zoning districts specified in this article and in article XII of this chapter, the designated buildings and alterations and extensions thereof and buildings accessory thereto and the designated uses of land, of buildings and of parts of land or buildings and the uses accessory thereto are permitted. Except as provided in this article, all other buildings and uses of land or of buildings are hereby expressly prohibited, except those already lawfully existing which by the operation of this provision would hereby become lawfully nonconforming. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1A) 
Sec. 60-34. - Buildings per lot. 
    No more than one principal building shall be erected on any lot in residential zoning districts except in the case of multifamily buildings and/or developments approved under divisions 10 and 11 of article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1B) 
Sec. 60-35. - Conversion of one-family dwellings. 
    In all residential, general business and form based code districts, one-family dwellings erected prior to January 1, 1958, may be converted to two-family dwellings provided that: 
(1)  Any floor space created by additions to the existing structure after January 1, 1958, shall not be converted to a second dwelling. 
(2)  There will not be less than one accessible off-street parking place of 200 square feet in area, exclusive of driveways, per dwelling unit resulting from such conversion. 
(3)  Stairways leading to any floor above the first floor will be enclosed within the exterior walls of the dwelling and any fire escapes required will be on the rear or one side of the dwelling and not on any wall facing a street. 
(4)  After such conversion, the building converted will retain substantially the appearance and character of a one-family dwelling. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1C; Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-36. - Lots in more than one jurisdiction. 
    When a lot in one ownership lies in more than one jurisdiction, the whole lot shall be considered for density and lot dimension purposes in the same manner as if the entire lot were situated in the city. Any site plan or special exception review of the use or development of the lot in the city, however, shall be limited to that portion that lies within the city's jurisdiction only. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1D) 
Sec. 60-37. - Minimum lot area determined. 
    In determining the minimum area of lot required in any zoning district, any land within the lines of the street upon which such lot abuts shall not be included, even if the fee to such street is in the owner of the lot with the following exception: If a lot at a street corner is bounded in part by a curved exterior street line not more than 80 feet in length connecting other exterior street lines bounding such lot which, if extended, would intersect, the area required in such lot shall be computed as if said line were extended. If such curved line is more than 80 feet in length, the minimum area required in such lot shall be measured and computed entirely within the lines bounding such lot. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1E) 
Sec. 60-38. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  Abutting undeveloped nonconforming lots under one ownership shall be considered as one lot and shall not again be divided. 
(b)  Abutting nonconforming lots under one ownership or joint ownership shall be considered as one lot. Such a lot may be divided provided that: 
(1)  One or more of the lots has been developed. 
(2)  The lots were purchased by separate deed. 
(3)  The lots are divided along the historical lot dimensions. 
(4)  All dimensional regulations are maintained. 
(c)  An abutting conforming and nonconforming lot under one ownership, or joint ownership shall be considered as one lot. Such a lot may be divided provided that: 
(1)  The lots are divided along the historical lot dimensions. 
(2)  The conforming lot is not reduced in any manner that violates any provision of this chapter. 
(3)  All dimensional regulations are maintained. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1F) 
Sec. 60-39. - Lot area, width and depth exception. 
    The lot area (except as otherwise may be required), lot width and lot depth requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any lot which was lawfully laid out in conformance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of lot creation and duly recorded by plan or deed. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1G) 
Sec. 60-40. - Reduction in dimensional regulations. 
    No lot (except as allowed by the planning board at the time of final approval of a subdivision or development plan) shall be reduced, subdivided, conveyed, divided or otherwise transferred that violates, or creates a lot that violates, any minimum or maximum dimensional regulation of this chapter. No building permit or other municipal permit or license shall be issued to any of the land so transferred or to the land retained until all of such land or lots are in conformance with all dimensional regulations. If a serious health or safety issue with the property should arise, the director of planning and permitting services shall determine if a permit should be issued to correct the problem. This provision shall not allow further nonconformity to occur in order to achieve the corrective action necessary. Any land taken by eminent domain or conveyed for a public purpose shall not be deemed in violation of this provision. Any setback or lot that is reduced below the minimum or extended beyond the dimensional requirements as a result of land taken by eminent domain or conveyed for a public purpose shall not be deemed nonconforming. Setbacks for the enlargement of any existing building located on such a lot shall be referenced to the property line as it was located prior to the eminent domain action or the conveyance for a public purpose. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1H; Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-41. - Lot of record. 
    Where used in this article, the term "lot" means "lot of record" as defined in sections 60-1 and 60-2. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1I) 
Sec. 60-42. - Unsewered lots. 
    The minimum lot sizes specified in this chapter for residential districts are for lots having sanitary sewer service. No unsewered lots having an area less than 20,000 square feet shall be developed for residential dwelling purposes. This regulation does not reduce lot size requirements in residential districts having larger minimum lot sizes. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1J) 
Sec. 60-43. - Residential accessory buildings and structures. 
(a)  Accessory buildings of 120 square feet and ten feet or less in height will have a zero rear and side setback. The front yard setback shall be maintained. 
(b)  Accessory buildings greater than 120 square feet shall have rear and side yard setbacks that are 50 percent of the requirement for principal buildings, except that in no case shall the setbacks be reduced to less than five feet. The front yard setback shall be maintained. 
(c)  A deck that is no greater than 30 inches high shall be allowed a zero rear and side setback provided that the deck is no closer than 15 feet to a neighboring principal building. All decks that are higher than 30 inches shall meet the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  A deck that attaches a principal building to an accessory building shall be allowed and shall not be deemed to cause the accessory building to be nonconforming. Such decks shall meet all other requirements as found in this section. 
(e)  The maximum first floor space of accessory buildings on lots under two acres is 1,000 square feet. On lots of over two acres, there is no maximum size. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1K; Ord. No. 30-01182011-02, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 60-44. - Conflicts. 
    In any case where there is a conflict with another ordinance the more stringent standard shall apply. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1L) 
Sec. 60-45. - Site plan/special exception review. 
(a)  Projects requiring site plan review shall be reviewed by the planning board in accordance with divisions 2 and 3 of article XVI of this chapter and according to the standards and criteria contained therein. No project requiring site plan review shall be expanded, extended or enlarged so as to occupy additional land area greater than ten percent of the original area or one-half acre, whichever is less; or by the construction of a structure or an addition to an existing structure by more than ten percent of additional floor space unless approval has been secured from the planning board in the manner provided in this section. A reduction in the scope of the project, except for land area, does not have to be reviewed by the planning board provided that an amended plan is submitted to the planning department to determine that all other land use provisions are satisfied. 
(b)  The expansion, extension or enlargement of uses or buildings which are less than described subsection (a) of this section, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning department using the criteria of divisions 2 and 3 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(c)  If an applicant disagrees with the review of the planning department, the planning board upon the written request of the applicant, shall conduct an administrative review of the planning staff's decision. 
(d)  Permitted uses subject to special exception review pursuant to sections 60-499(b)(17), 60-525(b)(13), 60-547(b)(4) and 60-578(b)(33). which are to be located in a commercial or industrial subdivision which has been duly approved by the city planning board shall not be required to be reviewed and approved by the planning board in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter unless, in the determination of the municipal officer charged with enforcement, the project contains elements that deserve a full review by the planning board. In making such a determination, the municipal officer shall take into account the planning board's initial review of the subdivision, including but not limited to such issues as traffic, drainage, infrastructure improvements, availability of water and sewer, fire protection and the impact on the environment. 
(e)  The permitted uses which have been exempted from special exception review and located in duly approved commercial or industrial subdivisions shall be processed by administrative review by the planning department in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter. Such uses shall also be subject to all city ordinances as would be required for review of special exceptions. 
(f)  The planning board shall be notified of all action taken, or approvals granted, by the municipal officer pursuant to this section. 
(g)  The city finds that a major retail development can have a significant impact on the immediate and surrounding areas and accordingly requires a determination by the city planning board of consistency with the adopted comprehensive plan in addition to the review and approval process of site plan/special exception review and other state and/or municipal permitting. A request for a determination of consistency shall be submitted to the department of planning and code enforcement a minimum of 15 days prior to this item being placed on the planning board agenda for action. Action on the request for a determination of consistency shall be made a minimum of one regularly scheduled meeting prior to the planning board meeting at which the project is to be reviewed. Notice for the consideration of a request for a determination of consistency shall conform to the requirements found in section 60-1474. and must state that the determination of consistency is being sought for a major retail development. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1M) 
Sec. 60-46. - Home occupation. 
    The establishment of a home occupation shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts provided the use is consistent with the definition of home occupation and approval is secured form the department of community development and planning in accordance with article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1N) 
Sec. 60-47. - Corner lots. 
    There shall be a front yard along the street line as provided for under yard requirements, front in the district where located. all other yards shall be considered as side yards and measured as provided for under yard requirements, side in the district where located. On corner lots within the form based code districts, there shall be a primary street front yard and a secondary street front yard with minimum and maximum building setback requirements. The yard opposite from the primary street shall be considered the rear yard while the yard opposite the secondary street shall be considered the side yard. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1O; Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-48. - Public utilities. 
    The use of property by a public utility for the transmission of water, electricity, telephone or gas by pipes, poles, wires, lines, conduits, cables or other devices is permitted in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1P) 
Sec. 60-49. - Railroads. 
    Railroad tracks, spurs, yards, crossings and structures existing as of the date of the enactment of this provision are permitted. The expansion, extension or enlargement of these facilities and the introduction of new facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the planning board in accordance with division 2 of article XVI of the chapter and according to the standards and criteria contained therein. Railroads shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1Q) 
Sec. 60-50. - Accessways to land zoned commercial or industrial. 
    Accessways over land zoned residential to parcels of land situated in commercial or industrial districts shall be allowed upon approval of a site plan reviewed by the planning department in accordance with division 2 of article XVI of the chapter and further provided that: 
(1)  Access to a public street that does not require using land zoned as residential is reasonably available. Such access shall be used. 
(2)  The accessway and the building shall be screened from adjacent residential lots or uses as provided for by section 60-579(3)g. 
(3)  The street onto which access will be gained is adequate to carry the projected volumes of traffic. This shall be determined by a traffic study as provided for by chapter 52, pertaining to traffic and vehicles. 
(4)  Accessways shall be designed in accordance with the standards for industrial/commercial streets as provided for by chapter 52, pertaining to traffic and vehicles. 
(5)  Title to the land used for access will be retained by the owner of the land zoned for commercial or industrial use to which access is provided. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1R) 
Sec. 60-51. - Mass gatherings. 
    The use of property for a mass gathering as defined and regulated by article II of chapter 6 is permitted in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1S) 
Sec. 60-52. - Adult day centers and child day care centers. 
    Adult day care centers and child day care centers proposed to be operated in a church, school or municipally owned building or recreation facility shall not be required to be reviewed and approved by the city planning board as a special exception. Such uses shall be processed by administrative review by the planning department in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter. The planning board shall be notified of any project approved by the planning department. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.1T) 
Secs. 60-53-60-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR USES 

Sec. 60-78. - Continuance. 
    Any lawfully nonconforming use of building or land which was established prior to September 14, 1960, or in conformance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of establishment or granted by variance may be continued in the same kind and manner and to the same extent as at the time it became lawfully nonconforming. No lot shall be deemed to be a nonconforming lot, nor shall any building or use of a lot or a building be deemed a nonconforming use solely by reason of the lot being one shown upon an approved planned unit development pursuant to division 10 of article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.2A) 
Sec. 60-79. - Change, extension or enlargement. 
    The following provisions shall govern changes, extensions or enlargements of nonconforming buildings or uses. 
(1)  A lawfully nonconforming use shall not be changed to a dissimilar use, extended or enlarged; unless it can meet the criteria listed in this section. 
(2)  A lawfully nonconforming residential building may not be enlarged beyond the size permitted by dimensional regulations for buildings in said district except that an existing nonconforming building line may be extended, but in no case shall the yard requirement for said addition be reduced to less than five feet. 
(3)  An existing lawfully nonconforming, nonresidential building or structure may be extended or enlarged, provided that it satisfies the following criteria: 
a.  No building or structure shall be altered, enlarged, added to or reconstructed (except as may be allowed by subsection (3)h of this section to extend further in a nonconforming manner or in any way which does not satisfy all dimensional regulations required in the district where located; 
b.  A building or structure occupied or otherwise used for a nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged; 
c.  Any enlargement shall only be used to accommodate the needs of the existing use or different conforming use proposed to occupy the entire structure. An enlargement which purpose is to provide for additional floor space as a result of the addition of a new business under separate ownerships shall not be allowed; 
d.  Only a commercially used building or structure located in a commercially zoned district and industrially used buildings in an industrial district may be enlarged or extended; 
e.  Except as provided in this subsection (3)e, any building or structure enlarged under this section shall conform to all regulations applicable to: access management, parking, landscaping and buffering, signage and environmental regulations. 
1.  Upon written request of the property owner, the planning director may authorize a waiver of, or less than, full compliance with access management, parking, landscaping and buffering, signage, and environmental regulations, if is it is determined to be impractical, infeasible or would cause an unnecessary hardship on the property owner; 
2.  All owners of abutting properties and property directly across the street from the site shall be notified by mail and given a ten day comment period regarding the requested waiver. The applicant shall be responsible for the postage cost of providing the notice to abutters plus an administrative fee as provided in the city fee schedule; 
3.  The planning director shall provide a written decision to the property owner, and to any abutter who responded, within 14 days from the date of the request; 
4.  If the property owner or one or more abutters disagrees with the decision of the planning director, regarding the requested waiver, a written request may be submitted to the planning board within 30 days of the decision and the planning board shall determine whether to grant the waiver. Both the applicant and abutters shall be notified of any such meeting by mailed notice not less than 14 days prior to the meeting. The party making such a request shall be responsible for the cost of the notification; 
f.  Any building or structure enlarged under this section shall require the removal of nonconforming or obnoxious characteristics such as: excess signage, improper lighting, and/or outside storage; 
g.  A commercially used building or structure located in a commercially zoned district may be enlarged up to 2,500 square feet or 25 percent of the occupied floor area that now exists, whichever is greater, to a maximum expansion of 5,000 square feet; an industrially used building in an industrial district may be enlarged by 5,000 square feet or 25 percent of the occupied floor area that now exists, whichever is greater, to a maximum expansion of 10,000 square feet. The expansion limitations in this subsection (3)g may be allowed under this process no more than once during the lifetime of the structure. Expansions proposed to exceed the thresholds as outlined in this subsection (3)g may be allowed by the planning board, pursuant to divisions 2 of article XVI of this chapter and further provided that all applicable criteria herein articulated are satisfied; and 
h.  No building or structure which possesses two or more nonconforming violations (lot dimensions, density, yard requirements or height) shall be extended or enlarged if the new construction will increase or extend the nonconforming violations, unless approved by the planning board, pursuant to division 2 of article XVI of this chapter. 
None of the limitations of this subsection (3) shall apply to a building or structure, which requires it to be altered, extended or enlarged to satisfy life safety codes and/or handicapped accessibility. 
(4)  An existing nonconforming use may be authorized by the planning director to be changed to a similar nonconforming use upon application to and a finding that the following criteria are met: 
a.  It would not be economically feasible to convert the property to a conforming use; 
b.  The use proposed would have the same or less adverse impact on the neighborhood in terms of noise, odor, smoke, traffic, physical appearance and other similar conditions than the existing or lapsed nonconforming use; and 
c.  Expenditures for any structural modifications to the property required to accommodate the new nonconforming use shall not exceed 50 percent of the assessed tax value of the property at the time of the change in use. 
(5)  The use of any property or building that formerly was used in a lawfully nonconforming manner and which was abandoned (as defined in section 60-81) may be permitted after approval by the planning board in accordance with division 2 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.2B) 
Sec. 60-80. - Change to conformity. 
    Any nonconforming building or portion thereof or nonconforming use of building or land or portions whether or not granted by action of the board of appeals, may be changed to one conforming with all the zoning provisions of the district in which located, provided it shall thereafter continue to conform. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.2C) 
Sec. 60-81. - Abandonment. 
    If any nonconforming use of a building or portion thereof or of land or portion thereof be discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months' duration or more or is voluntarily discontinued, it shall be presumed abandoned, such use shall not be resumed, and only a use conforming with zoning provisions in the zoning district in which located shall thereafter be made of such building or land, except as may be permitted otherwise under section 60-79(4) and (5). A use shall be deemed to be discontinued when the principle activity ceases. A use that is voluntarily discontinued shall be deemed to have ceased when a written statement containing the name of the owner of the property, the name of the business or use, the nature of the use being discontinued and the date of the discontinuance is reviewed by the municipal officer charged with enforcement. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.2D) 
Sec. 60-82. - Damage. 
    Any nonconforming use of a building or structure, which has the structural members (frame, flooring, roof and exterior walls) above the foundation and the mechanical equipment (plumbing, electrical and heating) destroyed or damaged by fire, lightning, wind or other natural disaster to the extent of 65 percent or more shall not be rebuilt, repaired, reconstructed or altered except in conformance with all provisions of the underlying district's regulations. For the purpose of this section, a residence building on a full foundation in an agriculture and resource protection district which has been destroyed or damaged by natural disaster shall not be deemed nonconforming for a period of one year following the damage and may be rebuilt, repaired and reconstructed in the same nonconforming location. Alterations and expansions of such buildings shall only be in conformance with all the underlying district's regulations. For the purpose of this section, a full foundation is considered to be a permanent concrete or masonry structure used to support a building. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.2E) 
Sec. 60-83. - Relocation and replacement mobile homes. 
    No nonconforming mobile home may be moved to another lot or parcel in the city and no nonconforming structure may be replaced by another nonconforming structure but shall be replaced with a site-built home or manufactured home that meets the definition of newer mobile home as found in section 60-2. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.2F) 
Sec. 60-84. - Forfeited. 
    Any nonconforming use housed in a building or structure which has the structural members (frame, flooring, roof and exterior walls) and the mechanical equipment (plumbing, electrical and heating) destroyed or damaged by fire, lightning, wind or other natural disaster to the extent of 65 percent or more shall be presumed to be forfeited at the time of such damage. Such use shall not be resumed, and only a use conforming with zoning provisions in the zoning district in which located shall thereafter be made of such building or land. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.2G) 
Sec. 60-85. - Reconstruction, alteration or modification. 
    A nonconforming building or structure which is being rebuilt, remodeled, reconstructed or otherwise modified shall not have its structural members (frame, flooring, roof and exterior walls) above the existing foundation or frame supports removed by more than 50 percent. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.2H) 
Sec. 60-86. - Residential use. 
    An existing residential building that is nonconforming in terms of density of units and where the units, either some or all, have been abandoned as defined under section 60-81, shall be allowed to exceed its permitted density by two units or to reestablish the same number of units at the time they were abandoned, whichever is less. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.2I) 
Secs. 60-87-60-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 60-116-60-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-144. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this district are to allow for conservation of natural resources and open space land, and to encourage agricultural, forestry, and certain types of recreational uses. It is declared to be in the public interest that these areas should be protected and conserved because of their natural, aesthetic and scenic value, the need to retain and preserve open space lands, their economic contribution to the city, and primarily because these areas are so remote from existing centers of development that any added uncontrolled growth could result in an economic burden on the city and its inhabitants. This section shall be construed so as to effectuate the purposes outline here and to prevent any attempt to establish uses which are inconsistent with these purposes or any attempt to evade the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.31A) 
Sec. 60-145. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings, including manufactured housing subject to all the design standards, except the siting requirements of section 60-173, as set forth in article XII of this chapter, accessory to farming operations subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any such farm residence until the barns, livestock pens, silos, or other such buildings or structures which are to be erected in connection with the proposed agricultural use as shown on the plans and specifications presented to the municipal officer charged with enforcement are substantially completed. 
b.  In no case shall any farm residence constructed under the provisions of this section after the effective date of the amended ordinance from which this section is derived continue to be occupied as a residence if the principal agricultural use has been abandoned or reduced in scope below the minimum requirements as shown on the plans and specifications presented to the municipal officer charged with enforcement. 
c.  Any residence constructed under this article shall not be converted to nonfarm residential use except by permission of the planning board based upon a finding that the abandonment or reduction in such use resulted from causes beyond the control of the applicant and not from any intention to circumvent the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Buildings, equipment and machinery accessory to the principal use including, but not limited to: barns silos, storage buildings and farm automobile garages. 
(3)  Forest products raised for harvest. 
(4)  Field crop farms. 
(5)  Row crop farms. 
(6)  Orchard farms. 
(7)  Truck gardens. 
(8)  Plant and tree nurseries. 
(9)  Greenhouses. 
(10)  Handling, storage and sale of agriculture produce and processed agricultural products derived from produce grown on the premises. 
(11)  Livestock operations including poultry farms, cattle farms, dairy farms, stud farms, hog farms, sheep ranches, other animal farms, including farms for raising fur-bearing animals. 
(12)  Wayside stands. 
(13)  Two-family dwellings which are created from the conversion of a one-family dwelling structure which was constructed prior to 1900. 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted by special exception after approval by the planning board in accordance with the provisions of division 3 of article XVII of this chapter: 
(1)  Sawmills and their customary accessory land uses and buildings incidental to the harvesting of forest products, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Sawmill and accessory activity shall not be detrimental to the neighborhood or the city by reason of special danger of fire or explosion, pollution of rivers or perennial streams or accumulation of refuse. 
b.  Wood processing operation shall be located no closer than 75 feet from any river or perennial stream, 250 feet from any zoning district boundary or residential dwelling and shall be limited to four persons employed. 
c.  Where natural vegetation is removed, it shall be replaced within six months with other vegetation which will be equally effective in retarding erosion and will preserve natural beauty. 
(2)  Veterinary hospitals, where operated by licensed veterinarians, including offices and facilities for temporarily boarding animals. 
(3)  Handling, storage and sale of agricultural services, equipment, and supplies accessory to the farming use. 
(4)  Bona fide residences required for farm labor. Any residence constructed for farm labor shall not be converted to nonfarm residential use except by permission of the planning board based upon a finding that the abandonment or reduction in such use resulted from causes beyond the control of the applicant and not from any intention to circumvent the requirements of this division. The findings and the conditions upon which such altered use may be continued shall be made a part of the permanent records. 
(5)  Recreational uses of land intended or designed for public use subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No such recreational use shall be expanded or extended so as to occupy additional land area greater than 20 percent of the original area or one acre, whichever is less; or by the construction of a structure or an addition to an existing structure by more than 900 square feet of additional floor space unless the owner or occupant first obtains approval of the planning board in the manner and upon the same terms as approvals of initial recreational uses. 
b.  Any proposed new or expanded recreational use shall be completed on or before the estimated completion date except that the planning board may grant reasonable extension of time where good cause for the failure to complete is shown. 
(6)  Any legally nonconforming summer camp or cottage may be rebuilt if destroyed by fire or other casualty, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such reconstruction shall comply with all ordinances applicable to new construction. Such reconstruction need not, however, comply with zoning provisions which would otherwise be applicable except for the provisions of article XII of this chapter. 
b.  In cases where no minimum setback is established by division 5 of article XII of this chapter an open yard space of at least ten feet between the building as reconstructed and each of the property lines shall be maintained. 
(7)  Rifle, pistol, skeet or trap shooting ranges, public or private. 
(8)  Cemeteries, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  At least 20 acres in area. 
b.  Not located in any environmental overlay district or over any known aquifer. 
(9)  Municipal sanitary landfills, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Not located in any environmental overlay district or over any known aquifer. 
b.  Provisions shall be made to avoid surface water and groundwater pollution. 
c.  Provisions shall be made for frequent covering of deposited wastes with earth to counteract vermin, insects, odors, and windblown debris. 
(10)  Radio, radar, television and radio telephone transmitting or broadcasting towers, but not studios or offices for such transmitting or broadcasting, provided that: 
a.  Every such tower shall be installed in a location and manner that ensures its safe operation and the safety of the surrounding residents, building occupants, land uses and properties. 
b.  In no case shall such tower be located less than one and one-half times its height from the nearest property line. 
(11)  Wholesale nurseries, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  At least one-half of the area of the lot (up to a maximum of three acres) is in active nursery production in a husband type manner. 
b.  The plants and trees propagated, grown and nurtured in the nursery are used as the primary products by the owner/operator of the landscape service. 
(12)  Processing and storage of compost and bulking agents from the municipal wastewater sewerage sludge facilities provided that: 
a.  All compost and amendments are to be stored undercover or screened from the public way and abutting property as determined by the planning board. 
b.  All federal, state and local ordinances and laws relating to the processing and storage of waste are complied with. 
c.  An end-use plan must be filed as part of the planning board process. 
(13)  Licensed hospice care facility provided that it shall be licensed by the state as a Medicare certificate hospice. 
(14)  Slaughterhouse, stockyard, abattoir, dressing plant in compliance with state and federal regulations subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The facility shall not be located within the Lake Auburn Watershed Overlay District, the Watershed of Taylor Pond, the Shoreland Overlay District or the Floodplain Overlay District. 
b.  The proposed use shall not occupy more than 10,000 square feet of building area. 
c.  The number of employees shall be limited to not more than 15. 
d.  Accessory retail sales shall be limited to 10 percent of building area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is smaller. 
e.  Hours of operation shall limited to between 6 a.m. and 8 p.m. 
(15)  Compost operations, excluding municipal and industrial waste, to process products such as manure, bedding, animal mortalities, waste feed, produce, forestry by-products, leaves and yard trimmings in compliance with state and federal regulations, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  All compost sites shall be evaluated for suitability by a properly qualified professional, including benchmark water testing prior to approval. 
b.  Provisions shall be made to avoid surface and groundwater pollution. 
c.  Provisions shall be made to counteract vermin, insects and odors. 
d.  Must comply with all applicable state department of environmental protection and state department of agriculture rules and regulations and best management practices. 
e.  Shall not be located within the Lake Auburn Watershed Overlay District. 
(16)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(17)  Assembly, sale, research and development, distribution, instruction, training, demonstration or maintenance of recreational or agricultural equipment, including buildings as accessory structures used in the assembly, sale, distribution, instruction, training, demonstration, or maintenance of recreational or agricultural equipment, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed use is accessory, complementary, or otherwise related to a recreational or agricultural use; 
b.  The recreational or agricultural use has been in existence for at least five years prior to the date of the application for the special exception; and 
c.  The recreational or agricultural use is located on the parcel for which the special exception is requested or is adjacent to the property for which the special exception is requested. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.31B; Ord. No. 32-02072011-07, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 06-08012011-07, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017; Ord. No. 06-06052017, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 60-146. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. No lot shall be created and/or no building shall be erected on a lot containing less than ten acres, exclusive of any bodies of water having a surface area of one-fourth of an acre or more, and measuring not less than 250 feet in width at the street frontage, and 200 feet in depth. 
a.  A building may be erected on a lot containing not less than 50,000 square feet and possessing the required minimum frontage width provided it is contiguous with other lots or parcels of land in the same ownership containing an aggregate of not less than ten acres; notwithstanding the separation of the said other lots or parcels of land by a road, stream, private right-of-way or other natural boundary from the lot on which the building is to be constructed. This section shall not be construed to prevent the construction of nonresidential accessory farm buildings on any such lot. 
b.  On legally nonconforming undersized lots, the keeping of horses, mules, cows, goats, sheep, hogs, and similar sized animals for domestic use of the residents of the lot is permitted provided that the land area required per animal unit conforms to the definition of animal farm contained in section 60-2. 
(2)  Density. The density of yearround dwelling units shall not exceed an average of one dwelling per ten acres. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet. 
b.  Side. There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between any building and the side property line. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot whichever is less. 
(4)  Height. The height of all dwelling structures shall be limited to two and one-half stories of 35 feet in height. Accessory buildings and structures may have a maximum height of 65 feet from grade, provided that the front yard, rear yard and each of the side yards shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height in excess of 35 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.31C) 
Secs. 60-147-60-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOW DENSITY COUNTRY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-200. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this zone is to maintain and promote the rural/agricultural character of the land within this zone. This zone is composed of those areas in the city whose predominant land use is rural, wooded and agricultural. The regulations for this zone are designed to protect and stabilize these predominant land uses which are the essential characteristics of these areas and to minimize conflicting land uses detrimental to agricultural enterprises. Since residences are only incidental to this zone's development, the densities which require improved roads and expanded municipal services, in excess of those required by the present agricultural-oriented uses, shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.32A) 
Sec. 60-201. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the Agriculture and Resource Protection District, except uses allowed by section 60-172(a)(8) and (9). 
(2)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(3)  Lawn maintenance services. 
(b)  Special exception uses . The following uses are permitted by special exception after approval by the planning board in accordance with the provisions of division 3 of article XVI of this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted by special exception in the Agriculture And Resource Protection (AR) District, (divisions 2 and 3 of article IV of this chapter), except uses allowed by section 60-172(b)(7), (14), and (15). 
(2)  Bed and breakfast. 
(3)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.32B; Ord. 33-02072011-08, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 08-08012011-07b, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-202. - Dimensional requirements. 
    All structures in this district except as noted shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. No lot shall be created and/or no building shall be erected on a lot containing less than three acres and measuring less than 325 feet in width. No lot shall be less than 200 feet in depth. The keeping of horses, mules, cows, goats, sheep, hogs and similar size animals for domestic use of the residents of the lot is permitted provided that the land area required per animal unit forms to the definition of animal farm contained in section 60-2. 
(2)  Density. The density of dwelling units shall not exceed an average of one dwelling per three acres. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 50 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between any building and the side property line plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every five feet or part thereof increase in street frontage over 50 feet to a maximum of 25 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 50 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot whichever is less. 
(4)  Height. The height of all dwelling structures shall be limited to 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height. Accessory buildings and structures may have a maximum height of 65 feet from grade, provided that the front yard, rear yard, and each of the side yards shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height in excess of 35 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.32C) 
Secs. 60-203-60-227. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LOW DENSITY RURAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-228. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to provide for low density rural residential areas while protecting adjacent agriculture and resource protection districts, allowing a degree of residential development compatible with maintenance of environmental quality and preservation of the open character of the area. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.41A) 
Sec. 60-229. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the Agriculture and Resource Protection District pursuant to (section 60-172(A)). 
(2)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(3)  Two-family dwellings. 
(4)  Attached single-family dwellings, provided that they are approved by the planning board as part of a planned residential unit development and subdivision, under the provisions of division 10 of article IV and division 4 of article XVII of this chapter. 
(5)  Mobile home parks, subject to the requirements and conditions of section 60-669, mobile home park standards. 
(6)  Licensed veterinarians provided that the lot is of at least three acres. 
(7)  Wayside stands. 
(8)  Accessory uses, buildings or structures. 
(9)  Lawn maintenance services. 
(10)  Municipal uses and buildings. 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted by special exception after approval by the planning board in accordance with the provisions of division 3 of article XVI of this chapter: 
(1)  Radio, radar, television and radio-telephone transmitting or broadcasting towers, but not studios or offices for such transmitting or broadcasting, provided that: 
a.  Every such tower shall be installed in a location and manner that ensures its safe operation and the safety of the surrounding residents, buildings occupants, land uses and properties. 
b.  In no case shall such tower be located less than 11/2 times its height from the nearest property line. 
(2)  Care homes, lodginghouses and boardinghouses. 
(3)  Recreational uses of land intended or designed for public use, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No such recreational use shall be expanded or extended so as to occupy additional land area greater than 20 percent of the original area or one acre, whichever is less; or by the construction of a structure or an addition to an existing structure by more than 900 square feet of additional floor space unless the owner or occupant first obtains approval of the planning board. 
b.  Any proposed new or expanded recreational use shall be completed on or before the estimated completion date except that the planning board may grant reasonable extension of time where good cause for the failure to complete is shown. 
(4)  Child day care centers, provided that: 
a.  They are located on arterial and collector streets as defined in the Auburn Tomorrow Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  They shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from other established day care centers. 
c.  These standards shall not apply to section 60-52. 
(5)  Cemeteries, provided that: 
a.  At least 20 acres in area. 
b.  Not located in any environmental overlay district or over any known aquifer. 
(6)  Community-based residential facilities, provided that: 
a.  The minimum distance between any two such facilities shall be 1,500 feet. 
b.  Any such facility shall house no more than eight persons. 
(7)  Licensed kennels provided that there shall be available land area of at least three acres. 
(8)  Training schools. 
(9)  Handling, storage and sale of agricultural services, equipment, and supplies accessory to the farming use. 
(10)  Adult day centers. 
(11)  Landscape services. 
(12)  Wholesale nurseries, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  At least one-half of the area of the lot (up to a maximum of three acres) is in active nursery production in a husband type manner. 
b.  The plants and trees propagated, grown and nurtured in the nursery are used as the primary products by the owner/operator of the landscape service. 
(13)  Schools. 
(14)  Churches or temples. 
(15)  Libraries. 
(16)  Museums. 
(17)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.41B; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-230. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted, shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. No lot shall be created and/or no building shall be erected on a lot containing less than 43,560 square feet and measuring less than 250 feet in width. No lot shall be less than 150 feet in depth. The keeping of horses, mules, cows, goats, sheep, hogs, and similar sized animals for domestic use of the residents of the lot is permitted, provided that the land area required per animal unit conforms to the definition of animal farm contained in section 60-2. 
(2)  Density. The density of dwelling units shall not exceed an average of one dwelling per acre. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a minimum distance of five feet between any building and the side property line plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every five feet or part thereof increase in street frontage over 50 feet to a maximum of 15 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot whichever is less. 
(4)  Height. The height of all dwelling structures shall be limited to two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height. A public building, church or temple, and accessory buildings and structures may have a maximum height of 65 feet from grade, provided that the front yard, rear yard, and each of the side yards shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height in excess of 35 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.41C) 
Secs. 60-231-60-253. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SUBURBAN RESIDENCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-254. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to provide for, protect and stabilize low density suburban residential areas and their adjunct public and institutional uses. It is designed to ensure an open character of development through its lot size requirements and through permitting of certain uses, rural in nature, that are compatible with residential uses. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.42A) 
Sec. 60-255. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Attached single-family dwellings, provided that they are approved by the planning board as part of a planned residential unit development and subdivision, under the provisions of division 10 of article IV and division 4 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(4)  Mobile home parks, subject to the requirements and conditions of section 60-669, mobile home park standards. 
(5)  Farming of field crops, row crops, orchards or truck gardens. 
(6)  Greenhouses. 
(7)  Licensed veterinarians, provided that the lot containing same is of at least three acres. 
(8)  Animal farms provided that the land area required per animal unit conforms to the definition of animal farm contained in section 60-2 and: 
a.  A site plan be submitted to the municipal officer charged with enforcement that contains the information required by section 60-1301. 
b.  Upon request, the municipal officer charged with enforcement may waive the necessity of providing any of the foregoing information which is not relevant to the proposed development. 
c.  In judging whether or not a permit to operate an animal farm will be issued, the municipal officer charged with enforcement shall review and make a decision consistent with the finding requirements of section 60-1304. 
(9)  Wayside stands. 
(10)  Accessory uses, buildings or structures. 
(11)  Lawn maintenance services. 
(12)  Municipal uses and buildings. 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted by special exception after approval by the planning board in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted by special exception in the Rural Residence (RR) District, except those uses allowed by section 60-229(b)(3), (9), (11) and (12). 
(2)  Professional offices may be created within existing single-family residences in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Such residences shall have frontage on a major arterial as defined in the city's comprehensive plan. 
b.  Access to parking shall be located on the arterial frontage except for corner lots, in which case access may be located on the secondary roadway frontage. 
c.  In addition to meeting the requirements of articles V through XI of this chapter, required parking shall be separated from all lot lines by a buffer of 30 feet in width. Such buffer shall be vegetated in a manner to fully screen parked vehicles from view at the lot lines. A driveway serving such a parking area must be separated from the side lot line by a sight impervious fence of six feet in height or a buffer of ten feet in width meeting the vegetation requirements of this subsection (b)(2)c. 
d.  Signage shall be limited to a single nonilluminated sign with a maximum of 16 square feet of display per side. 
(3)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.42B; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-256. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted, shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. No lot shall be created and/or no building shall be erected on a lot containing less than 21,780 square feet, and measuring less than 150 feet in width; and measuring less than 125 feet in depth. 
(2)  Density. The density of dwelling units shall not exceed an average of two dwellings per acre. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a minimum distance of five feet between any building and the side property line plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every five feet or part thereof increase in street frontage over 50 feet to a maximum of 15 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot whichever is less. 
(4)  Height. The height of all structures shall be limited to 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height with the following exceptions: A farm accessory building or structure, church or temple, or windmill may have a maximum height of 65 feet from grade, provided that the front yard, rear yard and each of the side yards shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height in excess of 35 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.42C) 
Secs. 60-257-60-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - URBAN RESIDENCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-276. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to provide for, protect and stabilize medium density urban residential areas of single- and two-family detached dwellings and their adjunct public and institutional uses. It is designed to ensure a family living environment in an urban setting through lot size requirements that provide adequate yard space for family outdoor activity and play space for children. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.43A) 
Sec. 60-277. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Attached single-family dwellings, provided that they are approved by the planning board as part of a planned residential unit development and subdivision, under the provisions of division 10 of article IV and division 4 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(4)  Accessory uses building or structures. 
(5)  Farming of field crops, row crops, orchards or truck gardens. 
(6)  Municipal uses and buildings. 
(b)  Special exception uses. All uses permitted by special exception in the Suburban Residence (SR) District (division 6 of article IV of this chapter), except radio, radar, television and radio-telephone transmitting towers are permitted in the Urban Residence (UR) District. 
(1)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.43B; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-278. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted, shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. No lot shall be created and/or no building shall be erected on a lot containing less than 10,000 square feet; and measuring less than 100 feet in width. No lot shall be less than 100 feet in depth. No two-family dwelling shall be erected on a lot containing less than 12,000 square feet. 
(2)  Density. The density of single-family dwelling units shall not exceed four units per acre. The density of two-family dwelling units shall not exceed six units per acre. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a minimum distance of five feet between any building and the side property line plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every five feet or part thereof increase in street frontage over 50 feet to a maximum of 15 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. 
(4)  Height. The height of all structures shall be limited to 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height with the following exceptions: A farm accessory building or structure, church or temple, or windmill may have a maximum height of 65 feet from grade, provided that the front yard, rear yard and each of the side yards shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height in excess of 35 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.43C) 
Secs. 60-279-60-304. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MULTIFAMILY SUBURBAN DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-305. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to stabilize and protect medium to high density residential areas by providing for a varied denser urban pattern made suitable to the needs of the population by encouraging a range of dwelling types. This multifamily zone has a maximum density of 17 dwelling units per acre, yet retains the open character of residential areas by requiring 50 percent green space. It is intended that this district will provide the maximum possible freedom in the design of structures and their grouping and will encourage flexible and imaginative layouts and designs. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.44A) 
Sec. 60-306. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings in existence on September 23, 1988. 
(4)  Attached single-family dwellings, provided that they are approved by the planning board as part of a planned residential unit development and subdivision, under the provisions of division 10 of article IV and division 4 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(5)  Farming of field crops, row crops, orchards or truck gardens. 
(6)  Shelter for abused persons. 
(7)  Accessory uses, buildings or structures. 
(8)  Newly constructed multifamily dwellings and existing structures expanded to contain three or more additional dwelling units within a five-year period, provided that they are approved by the planning board as a subdivision under division 4 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(9)  Municipal uses and buildings. 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted as special exceptions after approval by the planning board in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter: 
(1)  All uses are permitted by special exception in the Urban Residence (UR) District (division 7 of article IV of this chapter). 
(2)  Off-street parking lot, provided that: 
a.  Such parking is limited to occupants of buildings located within 500 feet of such parking area whether or not within the same zone. 
b.  Reasonable conditions imposed by the planning board regarding location, fencing, screening, drainage, ingress and egress, signs and lighting and total capacity of the parking area designed to protect the residential character of the neighborhood are met. 
(3)  Professional offices. 
a.  Shall be in buildings which are listed on the state resource list and/or federal historic register. 
b.  All renovations to the building either internally and externally or both to accommodate the office use shall be accomplished in conformance with accepted historic preservation and rehabilitation guidelines. 
c.  A single sign to identify the building and its uses, conforming to the requirements contained in article VI of this chapter. Signs shall not be lighted. 
(4)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.44B; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-307. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted, shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations. 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. For each building erected, there shall be provided lot areas as follows: 
a.  Building housing one family: 10,000 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 100 feet width, and 100 feet in depth. 
b.  Buildings housing two families: 12,000 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 100 feet width, and 100 feet in depth. 
c.  Buildings housing three families: 14,000 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 100 feet width, and 100 feet in depth. 
d.  Buildings housing four families: 16,000 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 100 feet width, and 100 feet in depth. 
e.  Multifamily buildings: 10,000 square feet minimum lot area for the first dwelling unit and 2,000 square feet minimum lot area for each additional dwelling unit. No lot shall be less than 100 feet width and 200 feet in depth. More than one principal building per lot is allowed. 
(2)  Density. The following maximum densities per acre shall apply, according to housing type: 
One-family 4 units per acre Two-family 6 units per acre Three-family 9 units per acre Four-family 10 units per acre Multifamily 17 units per acre  
Not less than 50 percent of the net acreage shall be devoted to green area. Green space shall be deemed to include patios, whether paved or not, pedestrian walks, and landscaping within parking lots, but no off-street parking spaces, driveways, or common roads. For townhouse projects, the green area of individual lots may be counted toward the 50 percent green space requirement of the project. Net acreage shall include all land contained within the project except dedicated streets or street rights-of-way shown on the city's adopted master development plan or proposed to be so included within a reasonable period of time. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a minimum distance of five feet between any building and the side property line plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every five feet or part thereof increase in street frontage over 50 feet to a maximum of 15 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot whichever is less. 
d.  Principal buildings. More than one principal building may be erected on a lot, provided that the building meet all yard setback requirements and are separated by a distance equivalent to the height of the higher building or 30 feet, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Height. The height of all structures shall be limited to 21/2 stories of 35 feet, except as follows: 
a.  Multifamily buildings shall have a maximum height of 45 feet from grade. 
b.  A church or temple or windmill may have a maximum height of 65 feet from grade, provided that the front yard, rear yard and each of the side yards shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height in excess of 35 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.44C) 
Secs. 60-308-60-332. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MULTIFAMILY URBAN DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-333. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to stabilize and protect high density residential areas by providing for a varied, denser, urban pattern made suitable to the built-up portions of the city. This multifamily zone has a maximum density of 26 dwelling units per net acre, yet retains the open character of residential areas by requiring 50 percent green space. It is intended that this district will provide the maximum possible freedom in the design of structures and their grouping and will encourage flexible and imaginative layouts and designs. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.44A) 
Sec. 60-334. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the Multifamily Suburban (MFS) District except section 60-306(a)(5). 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted special exceptions after approval by the planning board in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted by special exception in the Multifamily Suburban (MFS) District (division 8 of article IV of this chapter). 
(2)  Medical and dental clinics, provided that: 
a.  Shall be in buildings which are listed on the state resource list and/or federal historic register. 
b.  All renovations to the building either internally or externally or both to accommodate the office use shall be accomplished in conformance with the accepted historic preservation and rehabilitation guidelines. 
c.  A single sign to identify the building and its uses, conforming to the requirements contained in article VI of this chapter. Signs shall not be lighted. 
(3)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.45B; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-335. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted, shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. For each building erected there shall be provided lot areas as follows: 
a.  Building housing one family: 5,000 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 50 feet width, and 100 feet in depth. 
b.  Buildings housing two families: 6,500 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 50 feet width, and 100 feet in depth. 
c.  Buildings housing three families: 8,000 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 50 feet width, and 100 feet in depth. 
d.  Buildings housing four families: 9,500 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 100 feet width, and 100 feet in depth. 
e.  Multifamily buildings: 5,000 square feet minimum lot area for the first dwelling unit and 1,500 square feet minimum lot area for each additional dwelling unit. No lot shall be less than 50 feet width and 100 feet in depth. more than one principal building per lot is allowed. Buildings located inside the fire zone (as defined in the city building code) are subject to the requirements of chapter 12, pertaining to buildings and building regulations. 
(2)  Density. The following maximum densities per acre shall apply, according to housing type: 
One-family 8 units per acre Two-family 13 units per acre Three-family 15 units per acre Four-family 17 units per acre Multifamily 26 units per acre  
Not less than 50 percent of the net acreage shall be devoted to green area. Green space shall be deemed to include patios, whether paved or not, pedestrian walks, and landscaping within parking lots, but no off-street parking spaces, driveways, or common roads. For townhouse projects, the green area of individual lots may be counted toward the 50 percent green space requirement of the project. Net acreage shall include all land contained within the project except dedicated streets or street rights-of-way shown on the city's adopted master development plan or proposed to be so included within a reasonable period of time. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a minimum distance of five feet between any building and the side property line plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every five feet or part thereof increase in street frontage over 50 feet to a maximum of 15 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot whichever is less. 
d.  Principal buildings. More than one principal building may be erected on a lot, provided that the building meet all yard setback requirements and are separated by a distance equivalent to the height of the higher building or 30 feet, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Height. The height of all structures shall be limited to two and one-half stories or 35 feet, except as follows: A church or temple or windmill may have a maximum height of 65 feet from grade, provided that the front yard, rear yard and each of the side yards shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height in excess of 45 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.45C) 
Secs. 60-336-60-358. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 60-359. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide for a greater variety and choice of design for urban and suburban living, to gain efficiencies, to coordinate design development efforts, to conserve and make available open space, to utilize new technologies for land development and to offer a flexible alternative to conventional land control regulations. This section should not be used as a device for circumventing the city's development regulations and may be employed in instances where there is truly some benefit to be derived from its use for the community and for the developer. The type and amount of development permitted shall be based on the planning board's evaluation of the development proposal and the purposes standards and provisions set forth in this division. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(A); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51A; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 60-360. - Scope. 
(a)  Application for a PUD-C Planned Unit Development, PUD-I Planned Unit Development or PUD-R Planned Unit Development may be made for land located where public sewer is presently available or will be made available by the developer prior to certificates of occupancy being issued. Application for a PUD-RR Planned Unit Development: Recreation/Residential may be made for land located where public sewer is presently available, will be made available by the developer prior to certificates of occupancy being issued or may utilize private wastewater disposal systems in compliance with state plumbing codes. 
(b)  The dimensional requirements stated in individual zoning districts and signs as stated in article V of this chapter may be increased or decreased by the planning board as they apply to planned unit developments, except the front yard setback from all public streets shall not be reduced. The dimensional requirements and provision of signs shall be controlled by the standards sets forth in section 60-359, purpose, and section 60-361, general standards. 
(c)  Coordination with subdivision regulations. 
(1)  If a plan review is required under division 4 of article XVI subdivision of this chapter, it shall be accomplished simultaneously with the review of the planned unit development plan under this division of this zoning chapter. 
(2)  The final development plan shall be submitted in a form that is in accordance with the requirements of division 4 of article XVI subdivision of this chapter relative to final plans where applicable. 
(3)  Requirements of this division of this zoning chapter and those of division 4 of article XVI of this chapter shall apply to all planned unit developments. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(B); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51B; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 60-361. - General standards. 
    The following provisions apply to all planned unit development districts: 
(1)  The dimensional requirements as stated in individual zoning districts shall apply within the PUD but may be increased or decreased due to individual site characteristics as determined by the planning board to promote the purposes set forth in section 60-359 of this chapter. 
(2)  The planning board may increase or decrease the required number of off-street parking spaces as stated in article V of this chapter in consideration of the following factors: 
a.  The probable number of cars owned by occupants of dwellings in the planned unit development; 
b.  The parking needs of any nonresidential uses; 
c.  Varying time periods of use, and whatever joint use of common parking areas is proposed. 
(3)  Whenever the number of off-street parking spaces is reduced because of the nature of the occupancy, the city shall obtain assurance that the nature of the occupancy will not change. 
(4)  A PUD involving residential uses shall reserve an amount of land equal to that required by section 60-1367 to be held as open space for the mutual use of the residents of the PUD or open to the public. Land reserved to satisfy the open space requirement shall be: 
a.  Administered through a homeowner's association; or 
b.  Dedicated to and accepted by the city for public use; or 
c.  Land occupied by a major recreational use adjacent to a PUD-RR; or 
d.  Managed by a non-profit organization or land trust deemed capable of management by the planning board; or 
e.  A combination of a, b, c and/or d above. 
(5)  All of the requirements of the City Code of Ordinances applicable to the zoning district not addressed in this division, shall apply. 
(6)  Before granting approval of the final development plans, the planning board must find that said plan addresses each of the following criteria or that one or more of the criteria are not applicable to the proposed development and/or that a practical substitute to one or more of the criteria has been achieved:: 
a.  The proposed development has an appropriate relationship to the surrounding area; 
b.  Circulation, in terms of internal street circulation system, is designed for the type of traffic generated, safety, separation from living areas, convenience, access and control of noise and exhaust. Proper circulation in parking areas is designed for safety, convenience, separation and screening; 
c.  Adequate open space has been provided with consideration given to preservation of natural features including trees and drainage areas, topographic features, recreation and views. 
d.  Privacy in terms of needs of individuals, families and neighbors; 
e.  Pedestrian and bicycle traffic in terms of safety, separation, convenience and access points; 
f.  Building types in terms of appropriateness to density, site relationship and bulk; 
g.  Building design in terms of orientation, spacing, character, storage, signs and lighting; 
h.  Landscaping of total site in terms of purpose such as screening, ornamental types used, and materials uses, if any; 
i.  Preservation of historically or architecturally significant buildings or places, if any; 
j.  There is public sewer available to the lot or will be made available by the developer prior to certificates of occupancy being issued, except as allowed by section 60-360(a) in the case of a PUD-RR. 
k.  That the proposal meets the requirements of section 60-1335, special exception of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(D); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51D; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Secs. 60-362-60-380. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Types 

Sec. 60-381. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Planned includes plans, plats or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(C)(1); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51C) 
Sec. 60-382. - PUDs established. 
    The following types of planned unit development may be established by special use approval in any existing zoning district as noted in this section. The options for use are as follows: 
(1)  PUD-R Planned Unit Development: Residential in LDCR, RR, SR, UR, MFS, MFU, GB and CB. 
(2)  PUD-RR Planned Unit Development: Recreation/Residential in AG/RP, LDCR, RR, SR, UR, and GB. 
(3)  PUD-C Planned Unit Development: Commercial in GB and CB. 
(4)  PUD-I Planned Unit Development: Industrial in ID. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(C)(1); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51C; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 60-383. - Zoning map indication. 
    The area included in each approved planned unit development shall be indicated on the zoning map as PUD-R or, PUD-RR or PUD-C or PUD-I. (Ord. of 3-16-2009, § (3.51)(C); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51C; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 60-384. - Permitting. 
    Phased planned unit developments shall be permitted where any type of PUD is otherwise allowed by this chapter with an additional review by the director of planning and permitting prior to recording at the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds. It is the intent of this phasing to allow coordinated long term planning of a large scale development without the disincentives of taxation and financing for phases that will not be constructed in the short term. The final development plan shall be kept on file in the planning and permitting office and the developer shall meet the requirements of section 60-420(c) prior to declaration and recording of a phase. The developer shall declare and record the approved phase plan within 30 days after a written approval is issued by the director. The recorded plan shall contain a note referencing this chapter. This division may be applied to existing PUDs if said plan was approved by the planning board as a phased development. (Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(C)(1); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51C; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 60-385. - Planned Unit Development-Residential (PUD-R). 
    It is the intent of this section that any residential property which is under single ownership and contains three acres or more area may be developed as PUD-R Planned Unit Development: Residential. Within the PUD-R the following uses and densities may be permitted subject to the approval of the planning board. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right or permitted by special exception in the residential districts noted in this section and the underlying zoning district. 
(2)  Commercial uses may be permitted in the PUD-R district if the planned unit development contains 20 or more dwelling units. Such commercial uses shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Such uses including parking shall be included as an integral part of the PUD and shall not occupy more than five percent of the total area of the PUD. Commercial uses in any development shall not be open to use prior to issuance of the certificates of occupancy for 50 percent of the dwelling units. 
b.  Except as stated in division 10 of article IV of this chapter all restrictions applicable to the NB district are applicable to the commercial center in the PUD-R district. 
c.  Such establishments shall be located, designed and operated primarily to serve the needs of the persons within the planned development. These buildings shall be architecturally compatible with the dwellings they serve using similar materials, geometry, topographic relationships, color and lighting to minimize its effect on the environment of existing or future residential uses adjacent to them. 
d.  Sign. 
1.  Any part of the sign for a commercial use shall not project above the eaves or protrude from the face of the building more than 12 inches. A commercial use shall have not more than one sign for every street frontage. Any free standing signs may not exceed 20 feet in height and must have a minimum setback of 25 feet. Portable flashing and moving signs are not permitted. All emblems, shields or logos are considered part of the total allowable sign area. 
2.  A residential subdivision may have one sign for each newly created entry to the subdivision, not to exceed 40 square feet in size. 
(3)  The total number of dwelling units permitted in the PUD-R district shall be determined by dividing the total project acreage (not including public rights-of-way) by the area required per unit in the underlying zoning district or as approved by the planning board pursuant to the standards in the underlying zoning district. 
(4)  If common open space remaining is offered to the city and is acceptable to the city, such dedication may be considered as partial or total fulfillment of park and open space dedication. 
(5)  Upon review of a PUD-R proposal, the planning board may authorize up to a 20 percent increase in density over that otherwise allowed in the underlying district if the following criteria are met: 
a.  Architecture. Utilization of existing topography, recognition of the character of the area reflected in materials and layout. 
b.  Siting. Preservation of unique natural features, separation of pedestrian and vehicular circulation and integration of open space. 
c.  Design. A unified cohesive development, focal points for orientation and interaction, variety of scale. 
d.  Landscaping. The compatibility with natural landscape, the separation of individual units for privacy. 
e.  Convenient. A convenient well-defined access. 
f.  Compatibility. Compatibility with the adopted comprehensive plan and/or plans approved by city boards and departments for school service area and size of buildings, park system, police and fire protection standards and other facilities public or private. 
(6)  All planned unit developments containing residential units shall comply with all city zoning and subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(C)(2); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51C; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 60-386. - Planned Unit Development-Recreation/Residential (PUD-RR). 
    The PUD-RR district is created to provide for the development of residential and commercial uses that are customary, complementary, and appropriate to major recreational uses on land located adjacent to them. Major recreation uses of land are designed for outdoor use of large land areas and have indoor facilities to accommodate groups of people. Major recreation uses may be open year round or may operate seasonally and their economic viability and continued operation are recognized as assets to Auburn. Flexibility for the siting of homes, condominiums, hotels or motels and accessory uses that are of a scale that is compatible with the surrounding area will help support the economics of a major recreation use. 
    Any major recreation use containing 100 acres or more area may be developed as a planned unit development: Recreation/Residential-PUD-RR. Within a PUD-RR the following uses and densities may be permitted subject to the approval of the planning board. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right or permitted by special exception in the underlying zoning district. 
(2)  Attached single-family dwellings with direct access to the outside at ground level may be permitted, provided that they are approved as part of a planned unit development and as a subdivision under section 60-359 and section 60-1359 of this chapter. 
(3)  Hotels or motels adjacent to an existing major recreation use or a major recreation use if construction of the major recreational use is complete and open for use, provided that they are approved by the planning board as a site plan and as a special exception under section 60-1276 and section 60-1335 of this chapter. The size and scale of a hotel, motel, or accessory commercial uses shall be determined by the planning board at the time of PUD and/or special exception review. In making their determination, the planning board shall consider the appropriate relationship of the hotel, motel or accessory buildings and structures to the major recreation use and the surrounding neighborhood in terms of bulk, location or operation of proposed buildings and structures, traffic impact, access management, parking requirements, internal circulation, vehicular and pedestrian connections to adjacent property, external lighting, landscaping, signage using the standards of section 60-385(2)d. as a guide, provisions for water and public sewer, and the preservation of scenic and natural beauty to the extent possible. 
(4)  Accessory commercial uses provided that they are approved as a site plan and as a special exception under section 60-1276 and section 60-1335. Building and structures shall be architecturally compatible using similar materials, topographic relationships, color and lighting, landscaping, and signage to minimize its effect on the environment of existing or future recreation and residential uses adjacent to it. 
(5)  The total number of dwelling units permitted in the PUD-RR district shall be determined by dividing the total project acreage including the major recreational use (not including public rights-of-way) by the area required per unit in that zoning district or as approved by the planning board pursuant to section 60-361(4). For the purpose of determining the number of dwelling units permitted on parcels located within more than one zoning district, the higher density district standard may be applied to the entire parcel and adjacent major recreational use in the case of a PUD-RR Planned Unit Development. 
(6)  The requirements of a planned unit development, section 60-361(4) and as a subdivision, section 60-1367 to provide recreation and/or open space may be satisfied by the principal recreation, entertainment, and social uses of the adjacent major recreation use. 
(7)  Access to the property shall be located on an arterial or collector street to minimize congestion or unsafe conditions and unreasonable deterioration of the local road system. Access to individual house lots shall be from an internal street system to retain the character of the area. 
(8)  The requirements of this chapter applicable to the underlying distrct or districts, not addressed in this section, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 60-387. - Planned Unit Development-Commercial (PUD-C). 
    The PUD-C district is created to provide for the development of planned business and shopping centers and mixtures thereof. It is intended to promote the grouping of professional offices and retail commercial uses and to provide areas of sufficient size to establish harmonious relationships between structures, people and vehicles through the use of well planned parking access, pedestrian walkways, courtyards, walls and other open spaces. This district should offer a wide variety of goods and services. Any commercially zoned area three acres or more in size may be developed as a PUD-C district. Uses permitted in the underlying zoning districts are permitted in the PUD-C district. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(C)(3); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51C; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 60-388. - Planned Unit Development-Industrial (PUD-I). 
    The PUD-I district is created to provide for the development of planned industrial areas. It is intended to promote the grouping of industrial uses and to group these uses in such a manner that they provide well planned parking and access, landscaped open areas and harmonious relationships between structures. Any industrial area over five acres may be developed as a PUD-I district. Uses permitted in the underlying zoning district are permitted in the PUD-I district. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(C)(4); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51C; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Secs. 60-389-60-417. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Application Procedure 

Sec. 60-418. - Compliance. 
    All applicants for planned unit development shall comply with procedures set forth in this subdivision and in accordance with division 2 of article XVI of this chapter site plan review. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(E)(intro. ¶); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51E) 
Sec. 60-419. - Submission and review. 
(a)  An applicant shall make application for the approval of the planned unit development to the planning department. The applicant shall present his completed application and fee, in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, along with the development plan outline as specified in this division. 
(b)  The development plan outline shall include both the site plan map and a written statement of procedures. The plan shall indicate sufficient areas surrounding the proposed planned unit development to demonstrate the relationship of the planned unit development to adjoining existing and proposed uses. 
(c)  The site plan must contain the following information: 
(1)  All site plans shall conform to the provisions as contained in division 2 of article XVI of this chapter; 
(2)  The type and character of proposed development to include general architectural design, types of building materials to be used and, when appropriate, the proposed number of dwelling units per acre; 
(3)  The proposed location and size of public uses including schools, parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and other common open spaces. 
(d)  The written statement to accompany the development plan outline map must contain the following information: 
(1)  A brief description of unique project design needs that make the planned unit approach advantageous to the city and developer; 
(2)  An anticipated schedule of development and a conceptual phase plan where the developer intends to phase the declaration of portions of the development; 
(3)  Proposed agreements, provisions or covenants which govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the PUD and any of its common areas. 
(e)  The number of copies of the written statement must be consistent with the provisions of section 60-1300. 
(f)  The applicant may be requested to submit any other information or exhibits deemed pertinent in evaluating the proposed planned unit development. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(E)(1); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51E) 
Sec. 60-420. - Final development plan. 
(a)  The final development plan shall be submitted in accordance with section 60-419 of the municipal code relative to final plans. 
(b)  The planning board shall approve the final development plan if it is in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary development plan. The final development plan shall be recorded as if it were a final subdivision plan except in the case of a phased development which shall follow the standards of subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  For phased developments the final development plan shall be kept on file in the planning and permitting office. The developer shall provide a phase plan and letter of intent to declare a phase for review and approval by the director of planning and permitting prior to recording at the registry of deeds. The director shall consider the following standards before approving a phased plan for recording: 
(1)  The remaining undeveloped land/phases shall be considered as one lot for frontage purposes. The phase plan shall provide the required frontage for the remaining land/phases. 
(2)  Common open space, roadway improvements and/or access to utilities may be completed without opening a phase provided that the director determines that the work is necessary or beneficial to an open phase of the development or to the city. 
(3)  The phased plan must be determined by the director of planning and permitting to be consistent with and progress towards completion of the long term final development plan. 
(d)  From time to time the planning board shall compare the actual development accomplished in the planned unit development with the approved development schedule. If the owner of property in the PUD has failed to meet the approved development schedule without cause, the planning board may initiate proceedings. The planning board, for good cause shown by the property owner, may extend the limits of the development schedule. 
(e)  The planning board may require adequate assurance in a form consistent in a form acceptable to the planning board, that the common open space shown in the final development plan shall be provided and developed. 
(f)  Final development plan contents: 
(1)  The final development plan shall contain the information provided on the preliminary development plan and any additional information requested by the planning board and must be submitted within one year following the approval of the preliminary development plan unless written request is made for an extension of up to one year and approved by the planning board. 
(2)  The final development plan, with supplemental information in report form, shall be prepared in conformity with the provisions of section 60-419. 
(3)  Copies of any special agreements, conveyances, deed restrictions, or covenants, which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit development and any of its common area must accompany the final development plan. 
(4)  The applicant may submit any other information or exhibits he deems pertinent in evaluating his proposed planned unit development. 
(g)  Control of planned unit development following completion. 
(1)  The planning board shall review and take action on the competed final plan. 
(2)  After final approval has been granted the use of the land and the construction, modification or alteration of any building or structure within the planned development shall be governed by the approved final development plan rather than by any other provisions of this zoning chapter. 
(3)  After final approval, no changes may be made in the approved final development plan except upon application to the appropriate agency under the following procedures: 
a.  Any minor extension, alteration, or modification of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the planning board if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final plan. No change authorized by this division may decrease or increase the dimension of any building or structure by more than ten percent. 
b.  Any uses not authorized by the approved final plan, but allowable in the PUD as a permitted principal, accessory, or special use under the provisions of the underlying zoning district in which the planned development is located may be authorized by the planning director and added to the final development plan provided that such an addition does not adversely impact the approved development plan. 
c.  A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development plan or amendments thereof approved under subsection (g)(3)a and b of this section. 
d.  Changes in use of common open spaces may be authorized by an amendment to the final development plan under subsection (g)(3)a. and b. of this section. 
e.  All other changes in the final development plan must be made by the planning board under the procedures authorized by this chapter. No changes may be made in the final development plan unless found to be required for: 
1.  Continued successful functioning of the planned unit development; 
2.  By changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was approved; or 
3.  By changes in the development of the community. 
No changes in the final development plan which are approved under this division are to be considered as a waiver of the provisions limiting the land use, buildings, structures, and improvements within the area of the planned unit development, and all rights to enforce these provisions against any changes permitted in this division are expressly reserved. (Ord. of 3-16-2009, § 3.51(E)(2); Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.51E; Ord. No. 08-08072017, 9-11-2017) 
Secs. 60-421-60-438. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - DOWNTOWN ENTERPRISE ZONE 

Sec. 60-439. - Purpose. 
    To promote the historic, economic, operational, and visual character of the established residential areas within downtown Auburn, by introducing incentives for reinvestment while maintaining the essential physical integrity of the area consistent with Auburn's Downtown Action Plan for Tomorrow. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.52A) 
Sec. 60-440. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  One-, two- and three-family homes. 
(2)  Townhouses. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast homes with four or fewer rooms for rent. 
(4)  Restaurants, diners or cafes with up to 50 seats, but not to include drive-in facilities. An additional 25 outdoor seats may also be permitted subject to all municipal health and safety codes. 
(5)  Artist studios, up to two such studios per building. 
(6)  Art galleries. 
(7)  Performing arts centers owned and operated by a public agency. 
(8)  Antique shops. 
(9)  Clothing stores. 
(10)  Furniture stores. 
(11)  Bookstores. 
(12)  Elderly day care centers. 
(13)  Child day care centers. 
(14)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(15)  Grocery stores, up to 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(16)  Office space, up to 5,000 square feet. 
(17)  Retail bakeries. 
(18)  Specialty shops. 
(19)  Accessory uses and structures commonly associated with the uses in this subsection (a). 
(20)  Municipal uses and government buildings. 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted as special exceptions after approval by the planning board in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter: 
(1)  Apartment buildings of four or more dwelling units. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast inn with five, but not more than ten rooms for rent. 
(3)  Restaurants, dining rooms or lunchrooms with more than 50 seats, but not to include drive-in facilities. Up to 25 outdoor seats may also be permitted subject to all municipal health and safety codes. 
(4)  Artist studios, more than two such studios per building but not more than four. 
(5)  Research or philanthropic institutions. 
(6)  Performing arts centers owned and operated by nonprofit and for-profit entities. 
(7)  Places of worship such as temples, churches or mosques. 
(8)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.52B; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-441. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All new structures in this district shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. For each building erected, there shall be provided lot areas as follows: 
a.  Buildings housing one family: 5,000 square feet of lot area, not less than 50 feet in width and 100 feet in depth. 
b.  Buildings housing two families: 7,500 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 50 feet in width and 100 feet in depth. 
c.  Buildings housing three families: 10,000 square feet minimum lot area, not less than 50 feet in width and 100 feet in depth. 
d.  Townhouses: 5,000 square feet minimum lot area, 5,000 square feet of lot area plus 1,500 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling and not less than 50 feet in width and 100 feet in depth. 
e.  Multifamily buildings: 10,000 square feet of lot area for the first dwelling unit, and 2,000 square feet of lot area for each additional dwelling unit; no lot shall be less than 100 feet in width and 100 feet in depth. 
f.  Commercial building: 10,000 square feet of lot area, not less than 100 feet in width and 100 feet in depth. 
g.  Mixed-use building: 5,000 square feet of lot area, not less than 50 feet in width and 100 feet in depth if at least 50 percent of the total building area is used for residential living space. 
(2)  Maximum lot coverage. For each new building erected, the maximum combined lot area for the building and all parking areas shall not exceed 75 percent of the total lot area for commercial and 65 percent for residential. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be a rear yard of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less for all structures. 
b.  Side. There shall be a minimum distance of five feet between any portion of a building and the side property line for all structures. 
c.  Front. There shall be a minimum front yard of ten feet. 
d.  Principal building. More than one principal building may be erected on a lot provided all yard requirements listed in this subsection (3) are met. 
(4)  Height. The height of all structures shall be limited to 41/2 stories or 45 feet. Religious and municipal buildings may have a steeple or tower to a maximum height of 90 feet, if said structure is limited to 15 percent of the footprint of the principal building. 
(5)  Parking and loading. All uses shall be subject to the off-street parking and loading regulations as listed in this subsection (5). Sections 60-607(7), (8), (12) and (15) shall also be followed. 
a.  For all uses, no portion of the front yard, other than driveways, shall be used for off-street parking. 
b.  One-unit dwellings: two spaces; two- and three-unit dwellings: one space per unit. 
c.  Residential artist studio: one space for one- and two-bedroom units; two spaces for residential artist studio with three or more bedrooms. 
d.  Townhouses: one space per unit. 
e.  Multifamily buildings: same as townhouses. 
f.  Retail businesses: one space per 400 feet of net floor area. 
g.  Office uses: one space per 400 feet of net floor area. 
h.  Medical or dental clinics: one space per 200 feet of net floor area. 
i.  Restaurants, cafes and diners: one space per four seats or bench equivalent capacity. 
j.  Off-street parking provided as a private or municipal facility, within 500 feet of any use allowed in the DEZ may be included in the calculation of off-street parking requirements, if written documentation is provided indicating the permanent availability of off-street parking for the use in question. Parking areas may or may not be within the same zoning district. 
k.  One parking space may be eliminated from the total off-street parking requirement if two trees and flowering shrubs (or similar planting scheme) are provided and maintained along the lot frontage or within the lot so as to minimize views of the parking area and/or improve the streetscape. 
l.  One parking space may be eliminated from the total off-street parking requirement if a publicly accessible walkway is provide connecting two streets in the instance where a lot has the minimum required frontage on two parallel streets or where the lots are back to back and have the minimum required frontage on two parallel streets. 
m.  One parking space may be eliminated from the total off-street parking requirement if a significant and permanent public art contribution is provided. 
n.  Subsections (5)j, k, and l of this section may be combined resulting in a reduction of up to two parking spaces. A developer shall be eligible for parking reductions in subsections (5)k, l, and m of this section if all requirements in the subsections are met and the proposal has been reviewed by the city planning department. 
o.  For projects subject to special exception review, the planning board may reduce the total required off-street parking by up to 30 percent. Off-street parking is required to be met on site to the extent practicable based on the characteristics and use of the property. On-street parking may be allowed within 500 feet if no other off-street parking is available, subject to the approval of the community development department. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.52C) 
Sec. 60-442. - Development review. 
(a)  Expansions of existing buildings or new construction in excess of 1,000 square feet shall be subject to the site plan review, division 2 of article XVI of this chapter. Projects of less than 1,000 square feet shall be reviewed by the community development department for a determination of consistency with the intent and standards of this chapter. 
(b)  The following requirements and those of division 2 of article XVI of this chapter are intended to foster safe and effective site plans that will result in projects that are consistent with the size and scale of the surrounding neighborhoods, and the use of materials or design treatments that protect and highlight the architectural and historic qualities of the area: 
(1)  All off-street parking areas shall be screened by plantings, wood fencing or a combination of both. 
(2)  All lighting shall fall within the lot from which it emanates, and all lighting fixtures shall be in compliance with lighting and fixture standards approved by the planning board or the community development department. 
(3)  All dumpsters or trash receptacles of any kind shall not be permitted in any portion of the front yard setback, and all said facilities shall be screened from public view. 
(4)  Renovation of structures listed on federal, state or local historic registers shall be consistent, at a minimum, with standards adopted by the state office of historic preservation, common preservation practices, and additional standards which, from time to time, may be adopted or amended by the city. 
(5)  If not previously existing, at least one tree per 50 feet of frontage shall be required for all development. Said tree shall have a trunk diameter of at least three inches, measured six inches above planting grade. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.52D) 
Sec. 60-443. - Signs. 
    All signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in article VI of this chapter except for the following: 
(1)  All uses shall be limited to externally illuminated signs. 
(2)  Standing signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. The maximum height shall not exceed six feet above grade. If employed, a standing sign shall be the only sign permitted except for window signs. See subsection (4) of this section. 
(3)  Signs for all commercial activities, attached to the premises which they advertise, shall not exceed 16 square feet. 
(4)  Signs attached perpendicular to a building shall be permitted and shall have a maximum area of 12 square feet. Signs shall not extend more than four feet from the building to which they are attached. Further, the lowest portion of the sign shall be seven feet above grade and the highest portion not more than 15 feet above grade. Height minimums and maximums can be altered by the planning board if it is determined an alternate sign location is required by the building configuration, building material, design consistency in the immediate neighborhood, or to protect historic buildings or facades. 
(5)  Roof signs, internally lighted signs, automatically changing signs and signs or advertising on canopies are prohibited. 
(6)  Fees. All fees found in appendix A of this Code, shall not apply to developments found in this division. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.52E; Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.52F) 
Secs. 60-444-60-469. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-470. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to provide for the daily convenience shopping and business needs of nearby residents and contains those retail, service and office uses which serve primarily a neighborhood population. It is intended that this district be located on lots in areas zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.61A) 
Sec. 60-471. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted, provided that the business use be limited to the ground floor and/or basement and that the gross building area devoted to business use, excluding storage, does not exceed 3,000 square feet: 
(1)  Residential dwellings at the same density as permitted in any abutting residential district. 
(2)  Beauty parlors, barbershops and self-service laundries. 
(3)  Public transportation passenger stations. 
(4)  Grocery stores. 
(5)  General commercial uses (retail, service and office uses), not necessarily associated with the surrounding neighborhood, may be authorized by the planning director upon written application adhering to the following procedure and criteria: 
a.  The external activity levels and impacts are limited as to be compatible with and not adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
b.  The proposed use will not create excessive noise, excessive traffic, nuisances (vibration, smoke, odor, appearance, etc.), fire hazard and other negative impacts of business activities being conducted in the residential neighborhood. 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted as special exceptions after approval by the planning board in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(1)  Automobile parking lots and garages, commercial and public, provided that they shall be at least ten feet from any lot in a residential district and that the setback area be landscaped. 
(2)  Public utility uses, such as electric substations and office, excluding repair facilities and the storage of material and trucks. 
(3)  Convenience stores, drug stores, variety stores and retail bakeries shops provided that goods baked on the premises shall be sold only on the premises. 
(4)  Automobile filling stations. 
(5)  Halls, private clubs and lodges. 
(6)  Shoe repair shops, pickup laundries and dry cleaners. 
(7)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.61B; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-472. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted, shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. No minimum shall be applied to buildings in this district. 
(2)  Density. The maximum lot coverage by all building shall be 40 percent. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every principal building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 35 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a distance of five feet between any principal building and the side property line, plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every four feet or part thereof increase in street frontage over 49 feet to a maximum of 25 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every principal building a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. 
d.  Open and unbuilt spaces. Any yard space or area required to be kept open and unbuilt on may be used, if otherwise lawful, for off-street automobile parking, except that a green strip not less than ten feet wide shall be maintained open and green, not built on, paved, or parked on, all or parked on, all along each property line that abuts land residentially. 
(4)  Height. No permitted structure shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height. A public building, church or temple, or accessory building or structure may have a maximum height of 65 feet from grade, provided that the front yard, rear yard and each of the side yards shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height in excess of 35 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking and loading. Provisions for off-street parking shall not be required in the NB district, except for dwellings and for any parking and loading area required as a condition of special exception approval. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.61C) 
Secs. 60-473-60-497. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-498. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to include commercial uses serving both the city and the region, together with normal accessory uses compatible with a cohesive and attractive shopping and office area. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.62A) 
Sec. 60-499. - Use regulation. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Residential dwelling uses permitted in the Multifamily Suburban District (MFS) (division 9 of article IV of this chapter). 
(2)  Grocery stores and supermarkets. 
(3)  Clothing stores. 
(4)  Furniture stores. 
(5)  Department stores. 
(6)  Specialty shops. 
(7)  Hotels and motels. 
(8)  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(9)  Child day care centers. 
(10)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(11)  Wholesale bakeries. 
(12)  Retail laundries and dry cleaners, but not plants. 
(13)  Banks, business and professional offices. 
(14)  Public transportation passenger offices. 
(15)  Governmental offices. 
(16)  Municipal, civic or public service buildings and other utility facilities. 
(17)  Warehouses, wholesale offices, salesrooms and showrooms. 
(18)  Restaurants, bars, dining rooms or lunchrooms, but not to include drive-in and carry-out restaurants. 
(19)  Halls, private clubs and lodges, bowling alleys, ice and roller skating rinks, indoor theaters and similar places of indoor amusement or recreation. 
(20)  Animal hospitals and pet shops, but no kennels. 
(21)  Business equipment repair and business services. 
(22)  Radio and television studios. 
(23)  Printing shops, but not publishing plants. 
(24)  Retail, service, office and commercial uses similar to the foregoing. 
(25)  Carwashes. 
(26)  Accessory uses, building and structures. 
(27)  Shelters for abused persons. 
(28)  Greenhouses and lawn maintenance services. 
(29)  Temporary outdoor places of amusement. 
(30)  Churches and temples. 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted as special exceptions after approval by the planning board in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter: 
(1)  Automobile filling stations. 
(2)  Automobile repair and service stations. 
(3)  Automobile and marine sales lots and sales and service agencies. 
(4)  Automobile and marine paint and body repair shops. 
(5)  Hospitals, care homes, boardinghouses and lodginghouses. 
(6)  Research or philanthropic institutions. 
(7)  Outdoor theaters. 
(8)  Drive-in or carry-out restaurants. 
(9)  Commercial parks. 
(10)  Sales, rental and service agencies for mobile homes, farm equipment, trucks and trailers, and machine equipment. 
(11)  Light industrial plants which will not create a nuisance by noise, vibration, smoke, odor or appearance. 
(12)  Off-street parking as a commercial or municipal use provided that such parking is limited to occupants of buildings located within 500 feet of such parking area whether or not within the same district. The planning board may impose conditions regarding fencing and screening, drainage, ingress and egress, signs and lighting, and total capacity of the parking area as it deems necessary to protect the character of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Trucking terminals and similar nonprocessing storage and distribution uses, except bulk storage of chemicals, petroleum products and other flammable, explosive or noxious materials. 
(14)  Convenience stores. 
(15)  Research, experimental and testing laboratories. 
(16)  Landscape services. 
(17)  Any new building of 5,000 square feet or more or any existing building which proposes a use permitted under subsection (a) of this section which will occupy an area of 5,000 square feet or more. 
(18)  Automotive towing and storage. 
(19)  Major retail development provided that it meets the conditions noted in section 60-45(g). 
(20)  Outpatient addiction treatment clinics. 
(21)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.62B; Ord. No. 11-11072016, 11-21-2016; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-500. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted, shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot width and depth. No building used for commercial or office uses shall be constructed on a lot having less than 10,000 square feet minimum lot area and measuring 100 feet in width. No lot shall be less than 100 feet in depth. Buildings used for residential uses shall have the same minimum lot area, width and depth as provided for buildings in the Multifamily Suburban District (MFS), section 60-307(1). 
(2)  Density. Not more than 30 percent of the total lot area shall be covered by buildings used for commercial or office uses. The density of residential uses shall be the same as that required for buildings in the Multifamily Suburban District (MFS), section 60-30(2). 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 35 feet or 35 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a distance of five feet between any side property line, plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every two feet or part thereof increase in street frontage over 60 feet to a maximum of 25 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. No front yard need to be any deeper than the average depth off front yards on the lots next thereto on either side. A vacant lot or a lot occupied by a building with a front yard more than 25 feet shall be considered as having a front yard of 25 feet. 
d.  Principal buildings. More than one principal building may be erected on a lot, provided that the building meet all yard setback requirements and are separated by a distance equivalent to the height of the higher building or 30 feet, whichever is greater. 
e.  Railroad tracks. Where the principal use requires access to a railroad, the yard requirements are disregarded for the side of the building adjacent to the railroad trackage. The engineering requisites for a safe and properly designed siding and building setback acceptable to the railroad shall take precedence. 
f.  Open and unbuilt spaces. Any yard, space or area required to be kept open and unbuilt on may be used, if otherwise lawful for outdoor storage and display of articles, supplies and materials. Such outdoor storage and display shall occupy no more than 20 percent of the lot with display areas not to exceed one-quarter of the total allowable area. Storage and display areas shall be clearly identified on the land in a fixed location. Storage areas shall be screened from the view of an abutting residential district or use and from the street by an evergreen tree line planted in staggered rows having the base of the trees not more than ten feet apart or by a solid fence not less than six feet in height. 
(4)  Height. No permitted structure shall exceed four stories or 45 feet in height. Religious buildings, municipal buildings or buildings listed by the state historic preservations commis- sion may have a steeple, cupola or tower to a maximum height of 90 feet, if said structure is limited to 15 percent of the footprint of the principal building. In the airport approach zone, Federal Aviation Administration regulations shall apply. Accessory structures, including windmills, that are necessary for the operation of an allowed principal use may exceed the above maximum height requirements, provided that the front yard, rear yard and each of the side yards shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height in excess of the yard required pursuant to this section. In the airport approach zone, Federal Aviation Administration regulations shall apply. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.62C; Ord. of 3-22-2010) 
Secs. 60-501-60-523. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - MINOT AVENUE (GBII) 

Sec. 60-524. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to allow commercial development to locate along the Minot Avenue corridor which is most compatible with local scale business. The corridor is also an arterial which requires that good sound access management design is incorporated into the uses consistent with the access management ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.63A) 
Sec. 60-525. - Use regulation. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Residential dwelling uses permitted in the Multifamily Suburban District (MFS) (division 9 of article IV of this chapter). 
(2)  Grocery stores and supermarkets. 
(3)  Clothing stores. 
(4)  Furniture stores. 
(5)  Department stores. 
(6)  Specialty shops. 
(7)  Hotels and motels. 
(8)  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(9)  Child day care centers. 
(10)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(11)  Retail bakeries. 
(12)  Retail laundries and dry cleaners. 
(13)  Banks, business and professional offices. 
(14)  Public transportation passenger offices. 
(15)  Governmental offices. 
(16)  Municipal, civic or public service buildings and other utility facilities. 
(17)  Restaurants, dining rooms or lunchrooms. 
(18)  Bowling alleys, ice and roller skating rinks, indoor theaters and similar places of indoor amusement or recreation. 
(19)  Animal hospitals and pet shops, but not kennels. 
(20)  Business equipment repair and business services. 
(21)  Radio and television studios. 
(22)  Printing shops, but not publishing plants. 
(23)  Carwashes. 
(24)  Accessory uses, buildings and structures. 
(25)  Greenhouses. 
(26)  Seasonal outdoor places of amusement. 
(27)  Churches and temples. 
(28)  Shelters for abused persons. 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted as special exceptions after approval by the planning board in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter: 
(1)  Commercial parks. 
(2)  Automobile repair and service stations. 
(3)  Hospitals, care homes, boardinghouses and lodginghouses. 
(4)  Research or philanthropic institutions. 
(5)  Outdoor theaters. 
(6)  Drive-in or carry-out restaurants. 
(7)  Sales, rental and service agencies for farm equipment, trucks and trailers, and construction equipment. 
(8)  Light industrial plants which support a retail store selling goods made on the premises and will not create a nuisance by noise, vibration, smoke, odor or appearance. 
(9)  Convenience stores. 
(10)  Research, experimental and testing laboratories. 
(11)  Landscape services and lawn maintenance services. 
(12)  Halls, private clubs and lodges. 
(13)  Outpatient addiction treatment clinics. 
(14)  Any new building of 5,000 square feet or more or any existing building which proposes a use permitted under section 60-499(a) which will occupy an area of 5,000 square feet or more. 
(15)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.63B; Ord. No. 11-11072016, 11-21-2016; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-526. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted, shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot width and depth. No building used for commercial office uses shall be constructed on a lot having less than 10,000 square feet minimum lot area and measuring 100 feet in width. No lot shall be less than 100 feet in depth. Buildings used for residential uses shall have the same minimum lot area, width and depth as provided for buildings in the Multifamily Suburban (MFS) District, section 60-307(1). 
(2)  Density. Not more than 30 percent of the total lot area shall be covered by buildings used for commercial or office uses. The density of residential uses shall be the same as that required for buildings in the Multifamily Suburban (MFS) District, section 60-307(2). 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 35 feet or 35 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a distance of five feet between any building and the side property line, plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every two feet or part thereof increase in street frontage over 60 feet to a maximum of 25 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet or 25 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. 
d.  Principal buildings. More than one principal building may be erected on a lot, provided that the building meet all yard setback requirements and are separated by a distance equivalent to the height of the higher building or 30 feet, whichever is greater. 
e.  Outdoor storage. Any yard, space or area required to be kept open and unbuilt on may be used, if otherwise lawful for outdoor storage and display of articles, supplies and materials, Such outdoor storage and display shall occupy no more than 20 percent of the lot with display areas not to exceed one-quarter of the total allowable area. Storage and display areas shall be clearly identified on the land in a fixed location. Storage areas shall be screened from the view of an abutting residential district or use and from the street by an evergreen tree line planted in staggered rows having the base of the trees not more than ten feet apart or by a solid fence not less than six feet in height. 
(4)  Height. No permitted structure shall exceed four stories or 45 feet in height, except in the airport approach zone where Federal Aviation Administration regulations shall apply. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.63C) 
Secs. 60-527-60-545. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - FORM BASED CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-03072016, adopted May 16, 2016, repealed former Div. 14, §§ 60-546-60-549, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Div. 14 pertained to the central business district and derived from Ord. of 9-21-2009, §§ 3.69A-3.69D; Ord. of 2-16-2010. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 60-546. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the form based code is to: 
(a)  Provide a building development pattern that is based upon the built environment's physical form and its relationship to the public realm and the private realm. 
(b)  Allow for a diversity of uses appropriate and compatible to the designated district area. 
(c)  Provide a more accelerated building design, review, approval and construction process. 
(d)  Deliver a more predictable building development outcome that is consistent with the traditional pedestrian-oriented street-building development pattern. 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-547. - Transects. 
    Form based code uses transects as a way to describe the areas under the regulating plan. A transect is a system of ordering human habitats in a range from the most natural to the most urban. Auburn's transects are organized using five form based code districts, (Transect 4.1, Transect 4.2, Transect 5.1, Transect 5.2 and Transect 6), which describe the physical character of a place at a certain scale, according to the density and intensity of land use and urbanism. 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-548. - Traditional Main Street Neighborhood (T-4.1) 

Illustrative View of T-4.1 (Main Street) 
  
Intent and Purpose:
Traditional Main Street Neighborhood (T-4.1) 
    The Main Street Neighborhood district is designed to continue the existing pattern of large houses set along Main Street. This area is characterized by front porches, residential front yards and front doors facing the street. T- 4.1 promotes a lower-density and less concentrated pattern of buildings along the street, while maintaining a pleasing, connective and compact multi-modal environment. 

  

Characteristic Features 
 Front lawns 
 Front facade detailing 
 Frontage fences 
 Porches 
 Bay windows 
 Foundation planting and yard landscaping 
 Street Trees 
 Lower Density 

Examples of Main Street Neighborhood - T-4.1 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-548.1. - Building placement and configuration T-4.1. 
Elevated Building Placement 

_____
Building Placement on Lot 

PRINCIPAL BUILDING PLACEMENT :  Front Setback, Principal: 15 ft. Min. 25 ft. Max. (A)  (Corner Lot) Front Setback, Secondary: 15 ft. Min., 25 ft. Max (B)  Side Setback: 5 ft. Min. (C)  Rear Setback: 10 ft. Min. (D)  Building Lot Coverage: 60% Max.  Useable Open Space: 20% Min.  Frontage Build-Out: 40% Min. (along Front Setback, Primary)  Lot Width: 24 ft. Min, 120 ft. Max PRINCIPAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION:  Building Width: 14 ft. Min., 64 ft. Max. (E)  Building Height Minimum: 2 Story Min. (F)  Building Height Maximum: 2 Story Max. 
(excluding attic story) (F)  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-548.2. - Building frontages types T-4.1. 

Common Yard 

Porch Yard 
BUILDING FRONTAGE TYPES: ..... Common Yard; Porch Yard BUILDING ENTRIES: ..... Primary entry door is encouraged along ground story facade facing a primary street. BUILDING ENVELOPE ARTICULATION: Ground Story Building Frontage Facade: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 25% and maximum 60% coverage of the total ground story facade frontage. Upper Story Building Frontage Facades: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 20% and maximum 40% coverage of the total upper story facade frontage. Ground Story Finished Floor Elevation: The ground story shall be a minimum of 2 feet and 6 feet maximum above the front yard elevation (average grade). Frontage Facade Wall: Blank lengths of wall exceeding 10 linear feet are prohibited.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-548.3. - External elements T-4.1. 
Front Yard Fence: A front yard fence a minimum of 2 feet and a maximum of 4 feet in height is encouraged to maintain spatial edge of street. Chain link, vinyl, split rail, or barbed wire is not allowed. Front Yard Fence/Wall Opening: A vehicle entry way, as part of a front fence/wall, shall be a maximum width of 20 feet; a pedestrian entry way shall be a maximum width of 6 feet. Building Projections: No part of any building, except overhanging eaves, awnings, balconies, bay windows, stoops and other architectural features shall encroach beyond the minimum or maximum front setback line. Porch & Stoop Encroachments: Porches & Stoops may encroach upon the minimum front setback line by the following distances: 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage 10 ft. maximum. 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage 10 ft. maximum. Garages: Detached garages shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any street right-of-way. Driveways: Driveways are encouraged to be on the secondary street frontage. Driveways shall be paved and a minimum of 8 feet wide and a maximum of 20 feet wide. Parking: Residential - Vehicle parking areas shall be located onlv on driveways or designated parking areas and shall not extend into the street right-of-way or sidewalk. 
Commercial - Parking shall be located to rear of the property to the greatest extent possible. Parking on a side yard is limited to no more than 60 feet wide or 40% of the lot width. Screening and/or street wall is required for parking areas along a street. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any street right-of-way and 5 feet from either side or rear property line. Landscaping: Landscaping is encouraged but shall not extend into any sidewalk or travel way. Street trees are encouraged. Foundation Planting: Foundation plantings are encouraged but should be pruned and maintained with enough clearance from the building facade to encourage air circulation.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60.549. - Traditional Downtown Neighborhood T-4.2. 
Illustrative View of T-4.2 (Spring Street) 

Intent and Purpose:
Traditional Downtown Neighborhood (T-4.2) 
    The Traditional Downtown Neighborhood district is characterized by a small to medium sized buildings with smaller front yards and stoops in a more compact urban environment, and includes and traditional neighborhood sized storefronts. The smaller minimum and maximum building set-backs form a moderately dense street-wall pattern, diverse architectural styles and pedestrian friendly streets and sidewalks. 



Characteristic Features 
 More public and private realm interaction 
 Front facade detailing 
 Small front yards 
 Bay windows 
 Neighborhood scaled storefronts with large windows 
 Frontage Fences 
 Street Trees 
 Moderate densities 
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-549.1. - Building placement and configuration T-4.2. 

Elevated Building Placement 
_____

Building Placement on Lot 
PRINCIPAL BUILDING PLACEMENT:  Front Setback, Principal: 5 ft. Min/, 15 ft. Max (A)  (Corner Lot) Front Setback, Secondary: 5 ft. Min., 15 ft. Max. (B)  Side Setback: 5 ft. Min. (C)  Rear Setback: 10 ft. Min. (D)  Building Lot Coverage: 70% Max.  Useable Open Space: 10% Min.  Frontage Build-Out: 60% Min (along Front Setback, Primary)  Lot Width: 24 ft. Min, 120 ft. Max. PRINCIPAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION:  Building Width: 14 ft. Min., 110 ft. Max. (E)  Building Height Minimum: 1 Story Min. (F)  Building Height Maximum: 3 Story Max. (F) (excluding attic story  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60.549.2. - Building frontages T-4.2. 

   Common or Porch Yard      Stoop Yard Frontage      Storefront Type    
BUILDING FRONTAGE TYPES: ..... Common Yard; Porch Yard, Stoop and Storefront BUILDING ENTRIES: Primary entry door is encouraged along ground story facade facing a primary street. BUILDING ENVELOPE ARTICULATION: Ground Story Building Frontage Facade: Residential - Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 25% and maximum 60% coverage of the total ground story frontage facade. 
Commercial - Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 40% and maximum of 90% coverage of the total ground story frontage facade. Upper Story Building Frontage Facade: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 20% and maximum 40% coverage of the total upper story building frontage facade. Ground Story Finished Floor Elevation: Residential - The ground storv elevation must be a minimum of 2 feet minimum and 6 feet maximum above the front yard elevation (average grade). 
Commercial - The ground storv elevation must be at a minimum of sidewalk grade to maximum of 2 feet. Frontage Facade Wall: Blank lengths of wall exceeding 10 linear feet are prohibited.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-549.3. - External elements T-4.2. 
Front Yard Fence: Residential - A front yard fence a minimum of 2 feet and a maximum of 4 feet in height is encouraged to maintain spatial edge of street. No chain link, vinyl, split rail, or barbed wire is allowed Front Yard Fence/Wall Opening: A vehicle entry way, as part of a front fence/wall, shall be a maximum width of 20 feet; a pedestrian entry way shall be a maximum width of 6 feet. Building Projections: No part of any building, except overhanging eaves, awnings, balconies, bay windows, stoops and other architectural features shall encroach beyond the minimum front setback line. Porch & Stoop Encroachments: Porches & Stoops may encroach upon the minimum front setback line by the following distances: 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage 5 ft. maximum. 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage 5 ft. maximum. Garages: Detached garages shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any street right-of-way. Driveways: Driveways are encouraged to be on the secondary street frontage. Driveways shall be paved and a minimum of 8 feet wide and a maximum of 20 feet wide. Parking: Residential - Vehicle parking areas shall be located only on driveways or designated parking areas and shall not extend into the street right-of-way or sidewalk. 
Commercial - Parking shall be located to rear of the property to the greatest extent possible. Parking on a side yard is limited to no more than 60 feet wide or 40% of the lot width. Screening and/or street wall is required for parking areas along a street. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any street right-of-way and 5 feet from either side or rear property line. Landscaping: Landscaping is encouraged but shall not extend into any street right-of-way or sidewalk. Street trees are encouraged. Foundation Planting: Foundation plantings are encouraged but should be pruned and maintained with enough clearance from the building facade to encourage air circulation.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-550. - Downtown Traditional Center T-5.1. 

Illustrative View of T-5.1 (Future Great Falls Plaza) 
Intent and Purpose:
Downtown Traditional Center (T-5.1) 
    The Downtown Traditional Center zone is characterized by medium to larger sized buildings in a compact urban environment that generates an active street life. There is interplay between the Public Realm of the busy street and sidewalk, and the Private Realm of the residential stoops, commercial storefronts and gallery building fronts. The increased building widths form a more solid and compact street wall pattern, generating an energized traditional downtown feel. 



Key Features 
 Vibrant and active interaction between public and private realms 
 Larger buildings 
 Front facade detailing 
 Bay windows 
 Balconies 
 Street trees 
 More urban density 

Examples of Downtown Traditional Center T-5.1 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-550.1. - Building placement and configuration T-5.1. 

Elevated Building Placement 
_____

Building Placement on Lot 
PRINCIPAL BUILDING PLACEMENT:  Front Setback, Principal: 0 ft. Min., 10 ft. Max. (A)  (Corner Lot) Front Setback, Secondary: 0 ft. Min., 10 ft. Max. (B)  Side Setback: 0*-5 ft. Min. (C) *Subject to Building Permit Approval  Rear Setback: 10 ft. Min. (D)  Building Lot Coverage: 75% Max.  Useable Open Space: 5% Min.  Frontage Build-Out: 75% Min. along Front Setback, Primary  Lot Width: 24 ft. Min, 160 ft.Max. PRINCIPAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION:  Building Width: 14 ft. Min., 150 ft. Max. (E)  Building Height Minimum: 2 Story Min. (F)  Building Height Maximum: 4 Story Max. 
(excluding attic story) (F)  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-550.2. - Building frontages T-5.1. 

   Stoop Frontage Yard      Storefront Frontage      Gallery Frontage    
BUILDING FRONTAGE TYPES: ..... Stoop, Storefront and Gallery BUILDING ENTRIES: ..... Primary entry door is encouraged along ground story facade facing a primary street. BUILDING ENVELOPE ARTICULATION: Ground Story Building Frontage Facade: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 25% and maximum 60% coverage of the total ground story facade frontage. Upper Story Building Frontage Facade: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 20% and maximum 40% coverage of the total upper story facade frontage. Ground Story Finished Floor Elevation: The ground story must be a minimum of 2 feet minimum and 6 feet maximum above the front yard elevation (average grade). Front Facade Wall: Blank lengths of wall exceeding 10 linear feet are prohibited.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-550.3. - External elements T-5.1. 
Front Yard Fence: 
(Residential) Residential - A front vard fence a minimum of 2 feet and a maximum of 4 feet in height is encouraged to maintain spatial edge of street. No chain link, vinyl, split rail, or barbed wire is allowed. Street Wall/Wall Opening: A vehicle entry way, as part of a street wall, shall be a maximum width of 20 feet (residential) and 24 feet (commercial); a pedestrian entry way shall be a maximum width of 6 feet. Building Projections: No part of any building, except overhanging eaves, awnings, balconies, bay windows, stoops and other architectural features shall encroach beyond the minimum front setback line.Stoop Encroachments: Stoops may encroach upon the front setback line by the following distances but not encroach in the street right-of-way. Garages: Detached garages shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any street right-of-way. Driveways: Driveways are encouraged to be on the secondary street frontage. Driveways shall be paved and a minimum of 8 feet wide and a maximum of 20 feet wide. Parking: Residential - Vehicle parking areas shall be located onlv on driveways or designated parking areas and shall not extend into the street right-of-way or sidewalk. 
Commercial - Parking shall be located to rear of the property to the greatest extent possible. Parking on a side yard is limited to no more than 60 feet wide or 40% of the lot width. Screening and/or street wall is required for parking areas along a street. Accessory 
Structures: Accessory structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any street right-of-way and 5 feet from either side or rear property line. Landscaping: Landscaping is encouraged but shall not extend into any street sidewalk or travel way. Street trees are encouraged. Foundation 
Planting: Foundation plantings are encouraged but should be pruned and maintained with enough clearance from the building facade to encourage air circulation.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-551. - Downtown City Center T-5.2. 

Illustrative View of T-5.2 (Court Street) 
Intent and Purpose:
Downtown City Center (T-5.2) 
    The Downtown City Center district is characterized by medium to large sized buildings in a compact urban environment. This setting will generate social and cultural activity and events, economic stimulation and human interaction. The streets will be important transportation corridors with large sidewalks. The large residential and commercial building widths, frontages and building heights form a solid, compact street wall pattern. The Downtown Center will generate regional economic development activity along with energized social and lifestyle options. 

Key Features 
 Vibrant street life 
 Front facade detailing 
 Articulated storefront entrance 
 Awnings for storefronts 
 Balconies 
 Wide sidewalks 
 Street Trees 
 Compact Urban Environment 


Examples of Downtown City Center - T-5.2 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-551.1. - Building placement and configuration T-5.2. 

Elevated Building Placement 
_____

Building Placement on Lot 
PRINCIPAL BUILDING PLACEMENT:  Front Setback, Principal: 0 ft. Min., 10 ft. Max (A)  (Corner Lot) Front Setback, Secondary: 0 ft. Min. 10 ft. Max. (B)  Side Setback: 0*-5 ft. Min. 
*Subject to Building Permit Approval (C)  Rear Setback: 10 ft. Min. (D)  Building Lot Coverage: 80% Max.  Useable Open Space: 5% Min.  Frontage Build-Out: 85% Min (along Front Setback, Primary)  Lot Width: 24 ft Min, 240 ft Max PRINCIPAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION:  Building Width: 12 ft. Min., 230 ft. Max. (E)  Building Height Minimum: 2 Story Min. (F)  Building Height Maximum: 6 Story Max. 
(excluding attic story) (F)  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-551.2. - Building frontages T-5.2. 

  Stoop Frontage Yard     Storefront Frontage     Gallery Frontage   
BUILDING FRONTAGE TYPES: ..... Stoop, Storefront and Gallery BUILDING ENTRIES: ..... Primary entry door is encouraged along ground story facade facing a primary street. BUILDING ENVELOPE ARTICULATION: Ground Story Building Frontage Facade: Residential: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 25% and maximum 60% coverage of the total ground story facade frontage. 
Storefront: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum 60% and maximum 90% coverage of the total ground story facade frontage. Upper Story Building Frontage Facade: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 20% and maximum 40% coverage of the total upper story facade frontage. Ground Story Finished Floor Elevation: Residential: Ground storv must be a minimum of 2 feet or 6 feet maximum above the average front yard elevation. 
Storefront: Ground story must be a minimum of at the average sidewalk elevation or a maximum of 2 feet above the front yard elevation. Front Facade Wall: Blank lengths of wall exceeding 15 linear feet are prohibited.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-551.3. - External elements T-5.2. 
Front Yard Fence: (Residential) A front yard fence a minimum of 3 feet and a maximum of 4 feet in height is encouraged to maintain spatial edge of street. Front Yard Fence/Wall Opening: A vehicle entry way, as part of a front fence/wall, shall be a maximum width of 20 feet; a pedestrian entry way shall be a maximum width of 6 feet. Required Street Wall Height: A street wall a minimum of 4 feet and maximum of 6 feet shall be required along the building line frontage that is not otherwise occupied by the principal building on the lot. The height of the street wall shall be measured from the adjacent public sidewalk or from the adjacent ground elevation once construction is complete. Building Projections: No part of any building, except overhanging eaves, awnings, balconies, bay windows, and other architectural features shall encroach beyond the minimum front setback line. Stoop Encroachments: Stoops may encroach upon the front setback line by the following distances but not encroach in the street right-of-way. Parking: Residential - Vehicle parking areas shall be located only on driveways or designated parking areas and shall not extend into the street right-of-way or sidewalk. 
Commercial - Parking shall be located to rear of the property to the greatest extent possible. Parking on a side yard is limited to no more than 60 feet wide or 40% of the lot width. Screening and/or street wall is required for parking areas along a street. Landscaping: Landscaping is encouraged but shall not extend into any street sidewalk or travel way. Street trees are encouraged.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-552. - Great Falls Metropolitan T-6. 

Illustrative View of T-6 (Turner Street) 
Intent and Purpose: 
Great Falls Metropolitan (T-6) 
    The Great Falls Metropolitan zone is characterized by large buildings up to 8 stories tall that will define the City of Auburn's emerging downtown. A new central square, "Great Falls Square" will provide a downtown focal point and center for professional enterprise and commerce. The Great Falls Metropolitan urban form will generate strong regional socio-economic gravitational pull, attract corporate investment and become a regional destination for visitors, events, entertainment, shopping and social gatherings. 

Key Features 
 High energy downtown center 
 Balconies 
 Articulated storefront entrances 
 Awnings for storefronts 
 Wide sidewalks 
 Street trees 
;enStreetscape elements (benches, planters) 
 Transportation hub 
 High density 

Examples of Great Falls Metropolitan T-6 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-552.1. - Building placement and configuration T-6. 

Elevated Building Placement 
_____

Building Placement on Lot 
PRINCIPAL BUILDING PLACEMENT:  Front Setback, Principal: 0 ft. Min., 10 ft. Max. (A)  (Corner Lot) Front Setback, Secondary: 0 ft. Min., 10 ft. Max. (B)  Side Setback: 0*-5 ft. Min. 
*Subject to Building Permit Approval (C)  Rear Setback: 10 ft. Min. (D)  Building Lot Coverage: 90% Max.  Useable Open Space: 5% Min.  Frontage Build-Out: 90% Min. (along Front Setback, Primary)  Lot Width: 24 ft. Min, 240 ft. Max PRINCIPAL BUILDING CONFIGURATION:  Building Width: 14 ft. Min, 230 ft. Max. (E)  Building Height Minimum: 4 Story Min. (F)  Building Height Maximum: 8 Story Max. 
(excluding attic story) (F)  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-552.2. - Building frontages T-6. 

   Storefront Frontage      Gallery Frontage       Arcade Frontage   
BUILDING FRONTAGE TYPES: ..... Storefront, Gallery and Arcade BUILDING ENTRIES: ..... Primary entry door is encouraged along ground story facade facing a primary street. BUILDING ENVELOPE ARTICULATION: Ground Story Building Frontage Facade: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum 60% and maximum 90% coverage of the total ground story facade frontage. Upper Story Building Frontage Fagade: Windows and doors shall comprise a minimum of 20% and maximum 40% coverage of the total upper story facade frontage. Ground Story Finished Floor Elevation Must be a minimum of the average sidewalk elevation and maximum of 2 feet. Front Facade Wall: Blank lengths of wall exceeding 15 linear feet are prohibited. Architectural jogs of up to 18 inches in depth are permitted.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-552.3. - External elements T-6. 
Street Wall Opening: A vehicle entry way, as part of a front fence/wall, shall be a maximum width of 18 feet; a pedestrian entry way shall be a maximum width of 6 feet. Required Street Wall Height: A street wall a minimum of 4 feet and maximum of 6 feet shall be required along the building line frontage that is not otherwise occupied by the principal building on the lot. The height of the street wall shall be measured from the adjacent public sidewalk or from the adjacent ground elevation once construction is complete. Building Projections: No part of any building, except overhanging eaves, awnings, balconies, bay windows, and other architectural features shall encroach beyond the minimum front setback line. Stoop Encroachments: Stoops may encroach upon the front setback line by the following distances but not encroach in the street right-of-way. Parking: Residential - Vehicle parking areas shall be located only on driveways or designated parking areas and shall not extend into the street right-of-way or sidewalk. 
Commercial - Parking shall be located to rear of the property to the greatest extent possible. Parking on a side yard is limited to no more than 60 feet wide or 40% of the lot width. Screening and/or street wall is required for parking areas along a street. Landscaping: Landscaping is encouraged but shall not extend into any street sidewalk or travel way. Street trees are encouraged.  
  
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-553. - Reserved. 
Sec. 60-554. - Form based code use and parking matrix. 
Key: S       = Special exception P       = Permitted X       = Prohibited sp       = Parking space sf       = Square foot of gross floor space DU       = Dwelling unit  
  
USE(1) T-4.1 T-4.2 T-5.1 T-5.2 T-6 PARKING REQUIREMENTS 2) Residential Type Use Single Family P P P 1 sp/DU Duplex P P P P P 1 sp/DU Townhouse P P P P P 1 sp/DU Multi-Family P P P P P 1 sp/DU plus 
1 guest space/4 DU Bed & Breakfast < 4 Rooms S P P P P 1 sp/employee plus 1 sp/guest Bed & Breakfast > 4 Rooms S S P P P 1 sp/employee plus 1 sp/guest Hotel X X S S P 1/2 sp/employee plus 1 sp/room Elderly/Child Care Facility S S S S P 1/2 sp/employee plus 
1 sp/ 8 users Home Occupation P P P P P Based on Use Type 
(Ch. 60, Art. IX) Community Based Residential Facilities P P P P P 1 sp/employee plus 1 sp/client Boarding House/Lodginghouse P P P S X 1 sp/guestroom plus 1 sp/employee Office/Service Type Use Professional Offices S S P P P 1 sp/400 sf Medical and Dental Clinics S S P P P 1 sp/400 sf Personal Services S P P P 1 sp/400 sf Retail Type Use General Retail S S P P P 1 sp/400 sf Age Restricted Retail (3) S S S S S 1 sp/400 sf Specialty Shops S P P P P 1 sp/400 Restaurant up to 30 seats w/16 outdoor X S P P P 1 sp/4 seats Restaurant over 30 seats w/16 outdoor S S P P 1 sp/4 seats Halls, Private Clubs, Indoor Amusement S S S P P 1 sp/400 sf Artist Studios, Performing Art Center S S P P P 1 sp/400 sf Civic Church or Places of Worship S S P P P 1 sp/5 seats Government Offices X X P P P 1 sp/400 sf Art Galleries S P P P P 1 sp/400 sf Transportation Facilities X X S S S 1 sp/400 sf Adaptive Reuse of Structures of Community Significance S S S S S To be determined by the planning board depending on use(s)  
  
Notes: 
(1)  Uses not listed are considered prohibited unless deemed similar by the director of planning or by the planning board through a special exception approval. 
(2)  *Parking requirements in T-5.1, T-5.2 and T-6 may be provided by the municipality or private parking resources within 1,000 feet of the principal building, subject to planning board approval. 
(3)  Where more than 50% of floor space is devoted to age restricted goods. 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Subdivision II. - Form Based Code Administration 

Sec. 60-555. - Form based code administration. 
    Form based code relation to zoning ordinance: 
(1)  The form based code shall regulate areas designated as form based code districts. 
(2)  All buildings and land uses located within a form based code district shall comply with section 60-33 et seq. (General Provisions) unless specifically stated otherwise in sections 60-546 to 60-558 of the form based code. 
(3)  Site plan/special exception. Any project located within a form based code district that requires special exception or site plan review shall comply with section 60-45. 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-556. - Form based code plan types. 
(a)  Administrative types. 
(1)  By right. No permits are required for projects such as normal maintenance or for new structures under 200 square feet. 
(2)  Minor administrative. Projects that require permits and comply with all form based code or zoning regulations, may be approved and permitted by the appropriate city departmental staff and will not require multiple departmental or planning board approval. These projects can be applied for at any time. 
(3)  Major administrative. Projects that do not qualify as a Subdivision. Special exception or site plan review type plans and comply with all form based code or zoning regulations, but due to multiple issues, will require review by the multiple city departmental staff. 
(b)  Discretionary type plans. The following plan types shall require review and action by the planning board. 
(1)  Subdivisions of three or more lots over a five-year period or a project creating more than three dwelling units. (Subdivision Review). 
(2)  Any project listed as special exception or "S" in section 60-554, Use and Parking Matrix Chart. (Special Exception and Site Plan Review). 
(3)  Any project within the form based code district proposing a total of 12,000 square feet of new construction, all floors included. (Special Exception and Site Plan Review). 
(4)  Any amendment to an existing discretionary plan that increases existing square footage more than 25 percent. 
(5)  Any project located within the form based code district area that seeks a waiver from the adopted form based code regulating development standards shall submit a complete Special Exception and Site Plan Review application for Planning Board review and action. 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-557. - Applicability. 
(a)  Any minor, major administrative type plan and/or discretionary plan, as defined in section 60-556, located within a form based code district, shall be required to submit a development review application prior to any issuance of building permits or development activity. 
(b)  Any development activity on or within property located with the form based code district shall be reviewed for compliance with applicable form based code or zoning ordinance regulations. 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 60-558. - Form based code development application procedure. 
(a)  Administrative type plan application process. 
(1)  Applicant identifies the subject property's zoning/transect district and determines what plan type the project is. 
(2)  Applicant reviews the project's compliance for form based code development standards, sections 60-548 through 60-552; including all sections on purpose, building placement and configuration, building frontages, external elements, lot layout, the Parking and Use Matrix Chart and administration; along with any other applicable zoning ordinance Regulations. 
(3)  Pre-development consultation. All administrative type plan applicants are encouraged to contact the Auburn Planning Office for a pre-development consultation to confirm the property's form based code or zoning district and discuss the form based code requirements and related zoning and/or other regulatory items. Failure to consult with the planning office may result in the delay of acceptance, review and approval of the application. 
(4)  Any minor or major administrative plan or discretionary plan applicant in a form based code district shall complete and submit a cover letter describing the project, a development review application, a form based code development checklist and the appropriate application fee and number of applications to the planning office. 
(5)  All form based code applications will be reviewed by the planning staff for completeness and applicant will be notified within five working days if the plan is deemed complete and whether the plan is administrative or discretionary. The applicant is responsible for working with the planning staff to correct any deficiencies needed to be accepted for further review. 
(6)  Type 2 and 3 administrative plans will be reviewed by the appropriate city departmental staff or other relevant agencies who will recommend approving, disapproving or postponing to allow for time to correct the application. The director of planning will notify the applicant of the decision in writing within 15 calendar days of its receipt of a completed application. 
(7)  The director of planning shall have the authority to require an administrative plan to be considered by the planning board and notify the applicant the justifications for doing so. 
(b)  Discretionary project application process. 
(1)  Applicant identifies subject property's zoning/transect and determines what plan type the project is. 
(2)  Applicant reviews the project's compliance for the applicable form based code development standards sections 60-548 through 60-552; including all sections on purpose, building placement and configuration, building frontages, external elements, lot layout, the Parking and Use Matrix Chart and administration; along with any other applicable zoning ordinance regulations. 
(3)  Pre-development consultation. All potential development and project applicants are encouraged to contact the Auburn Planning Office for a pre-development consultation to confirm the form based code or zoning regulations and discuss the form based code requirements and related zoning and/or other regulatory items. Failure to consult with the planning office may result in the delay of acceptance, review and approval of the application. 
(4)  Discretionary plan applicants will submit; a development review application, a form based code development checklist the appropriate application fee and number of applications to the planning office for review and consideration by the planning board according to their normal submission deadline and meeting schedule. 
(5)  Applications not meeting all the requirements of the form based code may include waiver as per section 60-1312 or variance requests as part of their application. 
(c)  Waiver requests. 
(1)  Any waiver request of form based code standards and requirements must identify what is regulation is being requested for the waiver and include a narrative explaining how the waiver, if approved, will allow the project to meet the purpose of the form based code and the objective of section 60-1277, Site plan law [review]. 
(d)  Planning board approval. 
(1)  The planning board shall approve, approve with conditions, disapprove or postpone based on its review of the application meeting all existing requirements, conditions, criteria and provisions of special exception, site plan review. Subdivision law and any other relevant procedural requirement of Chapter 60, Zoning, as part of its consideration of a form based code application. 
(2)  The planning board shall provide findings for approval or disapproval based on the application's meeting the purpose of the form based code. 
(Ord. No. 04-03072016, 5-16-2016) 
Secs. 60-559-60-576. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-577. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to provide for those manufacturing, processing, transportation and storage uses which should be separated from other uses by reason of characteristics which may conflict with other uses. The exclusion of residential and commercial uses is intended to promote the economic welfare of the city by reserving especially suited areas for industry. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.71A) 
Sec. 60-578. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted, provided that the use proposed will not be noxious, offensive or detrimental to the neighborhood or to the city by reason of danger of fire or explosion; pollution of waterways or groundwater; vibration; emission of corrosive, toxic or unhealthful fumes, gas, smoke, soot obnoxious dust, disagreeable odors, offensive noises or other objectionable characteristics: 
(1)  Farming of field crops, row crops, orchards and truck gardens. 
(2)  Plant and tree nurseries, wholesale nurseries, landscape services and greenhouses; on-premises sales permitted. 
(3)  Farm dwellings on premises actively farmed. 
(4)  Financial institutions. 
(5)  Office buildings. 
(6)  Post offices. 
(7)  Telephone exchanges or telephone business offices. 
(8)  Public transportation passenger stations. 
(9)  Churches or temples. 
(10)  Municipal uses buildings. 
(11)  Airports. 
(12)  Wholesale businesses, warehouses, trucking terminals and similar nonprocessing storage and distribution uses, except bulk storage of chemicals, petroleum products and other flammable, explosive or noxious material. 
(13)  Manufacture, compounding, processing or packaging of foods and food products, except uses approved by resolution of the city council allowing review and recommendation of the planning board in the same manner as a special exception. 
(14)  Manufacture, compounding or assembling of articles using the following prepared materials: bone or shell, cellophane, fur, glass, leather, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, rubber textiles or cloth products, tobacco, or wood, bark or wood products. 
(15)  Manufacture of ceramic products, brick and cinder blocks. 
(16)  Manufacture or assembling from prepared material of the following: musical instruments, clocks or watches, toys or novelties, electrical devices, light sheet metal products, office equipment. 
(17)  Building material sales yard and contractor's equipment storage yard and plant. 
(18)  Research, experimental or testing laboratories. 
(19)  Lumber yard, including planning, milling and other processing. 
(20)  Ice manufacturing and storage plant. 
(21)  Beverage bottling plants. 
(22)  Public utilities uses, such as electric substations, storage of material and trucks, repair facilities, offices and electric generating plants. 
(23)  Accessory uses and buildings, including but not limited to: 
a.  Retail sales of products manufactured on premises. 
b.  Dwellings used as living quarters for caretakers or watchmen and their families. 
c.  Storage boxes or space trailers as defined in section 60-666(12) used for the storage of nonhazardous material by the commercial or industrial use which occupies the property. 
(24)  Training schools. 
(25)  Uses similar to those in this subsection (a) and not elsewhere named in the following subsections, provided that the use will not be noxious. 
(26)  Any new or existing building proposed as a complex of three of more business and/or offices provided that they are approved by the planning board as a subdivision under division 4 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(b)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted as special exceptions after approval by the planning board in accordance with division 3 of article XVI of this chapter; upon determination that such a use will not unduly disturb or harmfully influence other uses in the areas adjoining: 
(1)  Uses similar to those found in subsection (a) of this section and not elsewhere named in the following subsection; that in the determination of the municipal officer charged with enforcement do not meet the requirements subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Automobile filling stations. 
(3)  Automobile and marine repair and service stations, automobile and marine paint and body repair shops. 
(4)  Restaurants and diners, including drive-in and carry-out restaurants. 
(5)  Retail food stores. 
(6)  Microwave, radio, radar, television or radio-telephone transmitting or broadcasting towers, including studios or offices for such transmitting or broadcasting, provided that: 
a.  Every such tower shall be installed in a location and manner that ensures its safe operation and the safety of surrounding residents, building occupants, land uses and properties. 
b.  In no case shall such tower be located less than 11/2 times its height from the nearest property line. 
(7)  Motels and hotels. 
(8)  Automobile scrap yards. 
(9)  Off-street parking accessory, to a permitted use whether or not located on the same lot. 
(10)  Outdoor advertising. 
(11)  Junkyard. 
(12)  Airplane manufacture or assembly. 
(13)  Alcohol, methanol, or ethanol manufacture. 
(14)  Automobile or automotive manufacture or assembly. 
(15)  Brewery or distillery. 
(16)  Manufacture, or bulk storage of chemicals, petroleum products and other flammable, explosive or noxious materials. 
(17)  Machinery and machine tool manufacture. 
(18)  Metal fabrication plant. 
(19)  Municipal incinerator or sewage treatment plant. 
(20)  Manufacture of cosmetics, toiletries and pharmaceuticals. 
(21)  Asphalt batching plant. 
(22)  Grain processing and storage. 
(23)  Concrete or cement products manufacture. 
(24)  Coal distillation and derivation of coal products. 
(25)  Iron or steel foundry. 
(26)  Meat products manufacture. 
(27)  Packinghouse, including meat and poultry canning and curing, processing or freezing. 
(28)  Plastic and pyroxylin manufacture. 
(29)  Uses similar to the uses of this section and not elsewhere named in the following subsections. 
(30)  Accessory uses building and structures, including but not limited to: 
a.  Retail sales of products manufactured on the premises and products accessory to the industry. 
b.  A single dwelling unit for security personnel. Such dwelling unit shall be located in the principal building. 
(31)  Hospital. 
(32)  Automobile and marine sales lots and agencies. 
(33)  Child day care centers over 5,000 square feet (building area). 
(34)  Outpatient addiction treatment clinics. 
(35)  Any new building of 10,000 square feet or more or any existing building which proposes a use permitted under subsection (a) of this section which will occupy an area of 10,000 square feet or more. 
(36)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(c)  Uses allowed only by resolution of the city council. The following uses and others of a similar nature are prohibited, unless approved by resolution of the city council following review and recommendation of the planning board in the same manner as a special exception: 
(1)  Uses similar to those found in subsection (a) of this section and not elsewhere named in the following subsections; that in the determination of the municipal officer charged with enforcement do not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Fish smoking, curing or canning. 
(3)  Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture. 
(4)  Stove or shoe polish manufacture. 
(5)  Textile dyeing or bleaching. 
(6)  Acetylene gas manufacturing or storage. 
(7)  Ammonia or bleaching powder manufacture. 
(8)  Asphalt manufacture or refining. 
(9)  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture. 
(10)  Chlorine or hydrochloric, nitric, picric or sulfuric acid manufacture. 
(11)  Creosote manufacture or treatment. 
(12)  Distillation of bones. 
(13)  Explosives, fireworks or gunpowder manufacture or storage of same. 
(14)  Fertilizer manufacture. 
(15)  Gas manufacture from coal. 
(16)  Offal or dead animal reduction or dumping. 
(17)  Petroleum refining or storage in more than tank car lots. 
(18)  Processing or canning of fish. 
(19)  Processing of vinegar or yeast. 
(20)  Rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
(21)  Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment. 
(22)  Soap manufacture. 
(23)  Sodium compound manufacture. 
(24)  Slaughterhouse, stockyard, abattoir, dressing plant. 
(25)  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ore, including blast furnace or blooming mill. 
(26)  Steel furnace or rolling mill. 
(27)  Tanning or curing raw hides. 
(28)  Tar distillation, tar products manufacture. 
(29)  Wool fueling or scouring. 
(30)  Private dumps for liquid or solid waster disposal. 
(31)  Processing of fish or poultry wastes. 
(32)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, lacquer or varnish manufacture. 
(33)  Paper mills. 
(34)  The treatment, storage, processing or disposal of solid waste, (except those materials included in subsection (a)(19) of this section, oily waste, hazardous waste or radioactive waste, by any person, partnership, corporation or other entity designed for the primary purpose of such treatment, processing, storage or disposal. 
(35)  Any use which is found by the city to be a public nuisance by reason of the emission of dust, fumes, gas, smoke, odor, noise, vibration or other disturbance is and shall be expressly prohibited. No such finding shall be made by the planning board except after a hearing upon reasonable notice, and any person, the planning board or the city council may file a petition with the planning board for such hearings. 
(36)  Adaptive reuse of structures of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.71B; Ord. 11-09062011-02, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 2, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-579. - Dimensional regulations. 
    All structures in this district, except as noted, shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot width and depth. Each lot shall have not less than 150 feet width. No lot shall be less than 250 feet in depth. 
(2)  Density. Not more than 40 percent of the total lot area shall be covered by buildings. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
a.  Rear. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of 50 feet or 20 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. 
b.  Side. There shall be a distance of five feet between any building and the side property line, plus the side yard setback shall be increased one foot for every three feet or part thereof increased in street frontage over 60 feet to a maximum of 35 feet for side yard setback. 
c.  Front. There shall be in front of every building a front yard having a minimum depth of 35 feet or 15 percent of the average depth of the lot, whichever is less. No front yard need be any deeper than the average depth of front yards on the lots next thereto on either side. A vacant lot or a lot occupied by a building with a front yard more than 35 feet shall be considered as having a front yard of 35 feet. 
d.  Principal buildings. More than one principal building may be erected on a lot provided that the building meet all yard setback requirements and are separated by a distance equivalent to the height of the higher building or 30 feet, whichever is greater. 
e.  Railroad tracks. Where the principal use requires access to a railroad, the yard requirements are disregarded for the side of the building adjacent to the railroad trackage. The engineering requisites for a safe and properly designed siding and building setback acceptable to the railroad shall take precedence. 
f.  Open and unbuilt spaces. Any yard, space or are required to be kept open and unbuilt on may be used, if otherwise lawful, for outdoor storage of articles, supplies and materials except that such storage shall be screened from the view of abutting residential property owners and/or street by a solid wall or evergreen hedge. 
g.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided and maintained as follows: 
1.  Within a parking lot, landscaping shall be provided in an amount equal to ten percent of the area of the parking lot. 
2.  The perimeter of a principal building, except for entrances and loading doors, shall be landscaped in an amount equal to 20 percent of the building footprint. Emphasis shall be given to the front and sides of the building. 
3.  All lots which abut the side or rear lot line of a lot in a residential district or use shall be screened from said lot by an evergreen tree line planted in staggered rows having the base of the trees not more than ten feet apart. The minimum width of the screened buffer line shall be 30 feet. 
4.  Side and rear lot lines between nonresidential uses shall be planted with evergreen trees in the same manner as subsection (3)g3 of this section, except that the width of the screened buffer line shall not be less than 15 feet. 
5.  Landscaping is considered to be vegetative treatment with trees, shrubs, flowering plants and grass and/or bark mulch. Grass only is not deemed to satisfy this requirement. Evergreen trees shall be used as required in subsections (3)g3 and (3)g4 of this section Trees shall be a minimum of six feet at the time of planting. Where possible, existing trees shall be preserved, building shall be oriented with respect to natural landscape features, topography and natural drainage areas. 
(4)  Height. Buildings shall not exceed 75 feet in height, except in the airport approach zone where Federal Aviation Administration height regulations shall apply. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 3.71C) 
Secs. 60-580-60-606. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 60-607. - General provisions and design standards. 
    Development of the parking and loading spaces required by this section is subject to the following general provisions and design standards: 
(1)  There shall be provided, at the time of erection of any main building or structure or development of a site in its permitted use, the minimum number of off-street parking and loading spaces specified in the following subsections, within or without a structure. In calculating the spaces, any fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
(2)  Each individual parking space shall consist of an effective area of nine feet by 18 feet in dimension and shall be accessible to a public way, except for residential uses in Multifamily Urban Districts (MFU) containing five or more dwelling units. Such uses may develop tandem parking spaces but shall be limited to not more than two vehicles in depth. 
(3)  Loading spaces shall have the following dimensions: 
a.  Buildings having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or less: 25-foot length, 20-foot width; 
b.  Buildings having a gross floor area of greater than 10,000 square feet: 50-foot length, ten-foot width. Each loading space shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. Required loading spaces shall not be counted as meeting part of the parking space requirements. 
(4)  Interior driveways and ingress and egress points serving parking areas shall be at least 20 feet in width to allow safe and expeditious movement of vehicles. Ingress and egress points shall be separated wherever possible and so signed. Ingress and egress points for one-way vehicular movement only, may be reduced to not less than 14 feet for angle parking areas or 12 feet for perpendicular parking areas. 
(5)  The required parking and/or loading spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the principal use, building or structure they are required to serve. For buildings other than dwellings, parking spaces may be located not more than 300 feet there from should practical difficulties prevent their provision on the same lot. 
(6)  No required parking area or driveways servicing same shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, material, supplies or merchandise. 
(7)  On any residential property or in any residential district, outdoor off-street parking may include the parking or storage of not more than one unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle per lot. If a vehicle is both unregistered and uninspected, the vehicle must be stored within a building. 
(8)  In any residential district, off-street parking may include not more than one commercial vehicle per lot. 
(9)  In any residential district, no portion of the front yard space, other than the driveway, shall be utilized for off-street parking. 
(10)  Any parking or loading space serving a business or industrial use which abuts the side or rear lot line of a lot in a residential district or use shall be screened from said lot by a tight evergreen shrub hedge or similar landscaping, a fence, a solid wall or a combination of two or more of the foregoing. The screen landscaping, wall or fence shall be at least six feet high and may be extended no closer than 15 feet from the street line. 
(11)  Exterior lighting provided in any parking or loading area shall be arranged and shielded so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties used for residential purposes and from any public highway. 
(12)  All uses containing over five parking and/or loading spaces shall either contain such spaces within structures or be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  All access drives, parking, loading and service spaces shall be graded and surfaced with a solid paving material that is impermeable to water and so as to be dust free and properly drained. Materials which satisfy this criteria include but are not limited to: bituminous pavement, concrete, geotextiles and brick or cobblestone or other paving block provided that it is mortared. 
b.  Parking and loading spaces shall be suitably marked by painted lines or other appropriate markings. 
c.  A substantial bumper of concrete, masonry, steel or heavy timber or a curb of similar material or an earthen berm shall be placed at the head of each parking or loading stall that abuts a structure, rear or side setback or property line, sidewalk, street right-of-way, or landscaped area to prevent vehicles from rolling into such areas. 
d.  Where, in nonresidential districts, parking is planned to occupy a portion of the required front yard area, parking shall not be placed nearer than ten feet from the street right-of-way line. The area between the parking area and the street right-of-way line shall be landscaped. 
(13)  Parking and loading spaces shall be so arranged as not to require backing of vehicles onto any public street. No loading platforms or receiving doors shall be located on the street side of any retail store or other commercial building unless such platforms or receiving doors be located not less than 60 feet from the sideline of any street right-of-way lines. 
(14)  No portion of any entrance or exit driveway serving a residential use or building shall be closer than 50 feet from the nearest public street intersection unless prevented by dimensional or physical difficulties. No portion of any entrance or exit driveway serving a commercial or industrial use of building shall be closer than 100 feet from the nearest public street intersection unless prevented by dimensional or physical difficulties. 
(15)  On lots where one entrance and exit driveway or curb-cut is constructed, the curb-cut shall not exceed 32 feet in width. Where two or more driveways or curb-cuts are constructed, the curb cuts shall not exceed 20 feet in width. For automotive service stations, the curb cut widths may be increased to 32 feet for each driveway or access, but shall not exceed two driveways. These widths may be increased up to a maximum of 44 feet on arterial roads if required by the city engineering department or the state department of transportation. 
(16)  A parking lot cluster containing more than 80 stalls shall contain landscaped areas within the perimeter of the overall lot, in the form of landscaped perimeter and islands. 
(17)  For those developments subject to site plan review (division 2 of article XVI of this chapter) the relaxation of the requirements of this section shall be reviewed by the planning board. 
(18)  Required off-street parking in the Auburn Downtown Action Plan for Tomorrow area for lots which cannot provide their own parking because of location, lot size or existing development may be substituted by parking facilities which, in the public's interest may be provided for by the municipality or private parking resources. No such public or private off-street parking shall be considered as a substitute unless located within 1,000 feet of the principal building or use as measured along lines of public access. 
(19)  In calculating the required number of off-street parking spaces, the gross leasable area shall be used. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.1A; Ord. No. 0403212016, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 60-608. - Parking requirements. 
    A minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided with each use permitted, erected, altered or changed, in accordance with the following standards: 
Off-Street Land Use Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Residential Single-family; farm Two per each dwelling unit Multifamily; two-family 11/2 per dwelling unit Elderly** One-half per dwelling unit Commercial Retail, business or institution One per 300 square feet of gross floor area Office, business, medical or dental One per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus one per each doctor Wholesale, warehouse One per 1,200 square feet of storage gross floor area Industrial or Manufacturing One-half per employee for combined employment of the two largest overlapping shifts. Hotel, motel, boarding and lodging and lodginghouses, tourist homes One per guestroom plus one-half per employee Places of assembly Restaurants One per each three seats or equivalent bench seating capacity Stadiums, outdoor amphitheaters One per each four seats or equivalent bench seating capacity Churches, temples, synagogues One per each five seats or equivalent bench seating capacity Indoor theaters One per each five seats Auditoriums One per each ten seats Meeting halls, convention exhibition halls One per 100 square feet of floor area and floor area used for assembly Hospitals One per bed Nursing homes One-half per bed Educational institutions Elementary/middle One per classroom High school Four per classroom College, business, vocational schools One per 200 gross square feet of classroom area Dormitories One-third per bed Home Occupation One per 50 square feet of gross floor area used for home occupation Recreational Uses Golf course Six per green Tennis court Three per court Swimming pool One per 100 square feet of gross area per facility Skating rink One per 100 square feet of gross area of facility Ranges (golf, skeet) 11/2 Campgrounds 11/2 per campsite Ski areas 50 percent of the lift capacity Shopping centers 41/2 per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area Mixed uses Sum of various uses computed separately unless it can be demonstrated to the planning board's satisfaction that the need for parking by each occurs at different times. Uses not listed or The required number of similar to those parking spaces shall be noted above determined by the municipal officer charged with enforcement and shall conform to the number of spaces for similar uses as listed in the latest planning publication on file in the office of community development and planning. **Applies to elderly housing as constructed under special local, state or federal guidelines restricting occupancy to elderly persons.  
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.1B) 
Sec. 60-609. - Off-street loading space requirements. 
    Loading and unloading from a public street is prohibited except in permitted loading and unloading areas. Each building hereafter erected and every use hereafter established in an existing building or area shall be provided with a minimum number of loading space located at the rear of the building as follows: 
Land Use Minimum Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces All uses under 5,000 square feet of gross floor area No minimum All buildings Sufficient provisions to eliminate all loading on the street pursuant to normal economic activity Retail trade, manufacturing and hospital 
establishment with over 5,000 square feet 
of gross One per 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area up to two spaces; one additional space for each 60,000 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area over 40,000 square feet used for ambulance receiving at a hospital is not to be used to meet these loading 
requirements Business services, other services, community facilities (schools, church, municipal building, 
recreation, etc.) or public utility establishment 
with over 5,000 square feet of gross floor area One per 75,000 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area up to two spaces; one additional space for each 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area over 150,000 square feet  
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.1C) 
Secs. 60-610-60-636. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS 

Sec. 60-637. - General provisions; regulations. 
    Signs in all districts shall be subject to the following general provisions and regulations: 
(1)  Unless otherwise in this article, no sign shall be erected until a sign permit has first been issued by the municipal officer charged with enforcement. 
a.  An application for a sign permit may be obtained at the department of community development and planning. 
b.  No sign permit shall be issued unless the municipal officer charged with enforcement is satisfied that the sign supporting devices and electrical appurtenances and connections are in conformance with the city's building and electrical codes. 
c.  A processing fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall accompany all applications for a sign permit. 
(2)  No sign shall contain any moving, flashing or animated lights, or visible moving or movable parts, except such portions of a sign as consist solely of indicators of time and/or temperature or changeable message signs permitted by the director of planning and permitting or his designee pursuant to the following standards: 
a.  The property must be located in the General Business, General Business II, or Industrial Zoning District. 
b.  The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the chief of police that the sign will not constitute a driving hazard. 
c.  Each message shall be a fixed static display with a five second hold rate of change minimum between changes including the use of subtle transitions such as fade, dissolve, travel and scrolling or similar transitions and with frames that appear to move or change in size, or be revealed sequentially rather than at once including the movement of illumination or the scintillation or varying of light intensity as long as the intermittent lighting is used to change messages and not solely to attract attention. Definitions related to changeable message signs shall have the meanings from 23 M.R.S.A. § 1914(11-A). Time and temperature signs are allowed to change display with a two second message hold rate. 
d.  The changeable message portion of the sign shall not comprise more than 50 percent of the sign area allowed pursuant to section 60-638(c). 
e.  Those provisions of 23 M.R.S.A. § 1914 that are applicable to changeable message signs as they apply to controlled-access highways or ramps remain in effect. A flashing sign or message with graphic, pictorial, animated, or photographic images is prohibited. 
(3)  Signs may be illuminated only by the following means: 
a.  By a white, steady, stationary light of reasonable intensity shielded and directed solely at the sign and not casting light off the premises. 
b.  By interior nonexposed lights of reasonable intensity. 
c.  An illuminated sign or lighting device shall not be so placed or directed so that it constitutes a traffic hazard or nuisance through glare or reflection upon a public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises. 
(4)  No illuminated sign shall contain red, green or amber colors or lights if same would, in the opinion of the chief of police, constitute a driving hazard. 
(5)  No sign shall project beyond the property line of the lot on which it is placed. 
(6)  No sign may be located so as to obstruct a traffic control device or in a manner which would obscure the view of approaching or merging traffic. 
(7)  Wall, projecting and roof signs shall be firmly affixed to the building. Wall signs shall not project more than 12 inches from the face of the wall to which it is attached. Projecting signs shall not project more than four feet perpendicularly from the face of the wall to which they are attached. Roof signs shall not project more than four feet above the roofline. 
(8)  No sign which advertises or calls attention to any products, businesses or activities which are no longer sold or carried on shall remain on the premises for more than six months after the product, business or activity has ceased being sold or carried on. 
(9)  Temporary movable signs are not permitted except for the following uses: 
a.  To call attention to and/or to advertise the name of a new business and the products sold or activities to be carried on in connection with a new business. In such cases, no sign shall remain at premises for more than 90 days. 
b.  To advertise a special sale. In such cases a sign shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 90 days in any calendar year. 
c.  Signs or other advertising devices as may be permitted by the city council to promote community or civic activities. Petitions for such signs shall be made directly to the city council and shall include a scaled map of the sign site, size and design of the sign, how the sign may be electrified, period of use, written permission of property owner if not the city, a description of the reason for the sign, a recommendation from the police department and the department of community development and planning and any other information the city may require. Such signs shall not be required to satisfy the requirements of subsection (1) of this section. 
(10)  Signs legally erected before the adoption of this chapter which do not conform to the provision of this chapter may continue to be maintained, provided, however, that no such sign shall be permitted if it is, after the adoption of this chapter, enlarged, reworded (other than in the case of theater or cinema signs or signs with automatic or manually changing messages), redesigned or altered in any way excluding repainting in a different color, except to conform to the requirements of this chapter; and provided further that any such sign which has deteriorated to such an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed 35 percent of the replacement cost of the sign at the time of restoration shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered except to conform to the requirements of this chapter. Any exemption provided in this article shall terminate with respect to any sign which: 
a.  Shall have been abandoned for at least 12 consecutive months; 
b.  Advertises or calls attention to any products, businesses or activities which are no longer sold or carried on, whether generally or at the particular premises; or 
c.  Shall not have been repaired or properly maintained within 30 days after notice to that effect has been given by the municipal officer charged with enforcement. 
(11)  For those developments subject to site plan review (division 2 of article XVI of this chapter) the relaxation of the number and location of signs shall be reviewed by the planning board. The modifications to the sign requirements shall be allowed as the planning board may deem necessary to carry out the objectives and intent of site plan review. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.2A) 
Sec. 60-638. - Signs, on-premises. 
(a)  All districts. The following signs are permitted in any use district, except where otherwise prohibited by law, and shall not be subject to the issuance of a sign permit. 
(1)  One sign not exceeding one square foot used to display the street number and/or name of the occupants of the premises. 
(2)  One nonilluminated sign not exceeding two square feet used to describe a home occupation, boardinghouse or lodginghouse, or tourist home located on the premises. 
(3)  One sign not exceeding 24 square feet on the premises of public or semipublic buildings, funeral homes and charitable or religious institutions. This sign may incorporate a bulletin board. 
(4)  One real estate sign not exceeding eight square feet relating to the sale, rental or lease of the premises. Such sign shall be removed within one week after the property transaction. 
(5)  One sign each for a building contractor, architect or engineer, each sign not exceeding 16 square feet, relating to construction projects. Such sign shall be removed within one week after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy (completion). 
(6)  Building name and date sign and/or memorial tablet, not exceeding an aggregate of ten square feet, showing the name of the building and date of erection and/or historic information, when cut into masonry, formed of bronze or similar noncombustible material. 
(7)  One professional name plate sign not exceeding eight square feet. 
(8)  Two signs, not exceeding 16 square feet each, describing farm products for sale on the premises. Instead of two signs, a single double-faced sign may be erected with a display area, not exceeding 16 square feet on each side. 
(9)  Political signs, not exceeding 16 square feet in total area for single-faced signs on one standard, or eight square feet on each side of double-faced signs on one standard, provided that: 
a.  Such signs shall not be erected more than 30 days prior to the election to which they pertain; 
b.  Such signs are removed within seven days after the election to which they refer; 
c.  Removal of such signs shall be the joint responsibility of the candidate and the property owner on whose premises the signs are displayed. 
(10)  One portable or sandwich board or easel sign shall be permitted per property with the following conditions, and such signs shall not require a permit: 
a.  Said sign shall be located immediately in front of the building for which it advertises, with at least a 36 inch wide clearance when placed within any public pedestrian right-of-way; 
b.  Said sign shall be no larger than four feet in height and shall not exceed six square feet per side in area; 
c.  Said sign shall have no illumination of any kind and may be displayed only during the time when the business is open to the public. 
d.  Said sign shall not create a sight distance hazard or any other safety hazard as determined by the director of planning and permitting. If such a hazard is created the director of planning and permitting or his designee sign may require that the sign owner or property owner remove or relocate the sign immediately to eliminate the hazard. 
e.  A second sandwich board or easel sign shall be allowed on lots with frontage on a second street. 
(11)  Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger signs, directional signs, noncommercial and temporary signs or street banners related to public or charitable purposes may be approved by the city clerk along with stipulations as to the size, location, message, period of display and other requirements such as insurance and approval of building owners on whose property the banner will be attached. 
(b)  Residence districts. The following sign regulations apply in residence districts: 
(1)  Except where specifically permitted, all signs shall be single-faced, mounted flat on the wall of a structure or standing. 
(2)  No off-premises signs are permitted, except as provided for in chapter 42. 
(3)  No projecting or roof signs are permitted. 
(4)  One identification sign, not exceeding 40 square feet in area, at any public entrance to a subdivision or multifamily development. 
(5)  Signs permitted pursuant to a site plan review. 
(6)  In Agriculture and Resource Protection, Low Density Country Residential, Rural Residence and Suburban Residence Districts one nonilluminated sign, not exceeding 16 square feet, used to display the name of the business and products or services sold from a use which is permitted in the district. 
(c)  Business and industrial districts. The following sign regulations apply in business and industrial districts: 
(1)  Sign shall relate to the premises on which they are located and shall only identify the occupants of said premises or advertise the nature of the products and services available within said premises. In the case of a multitenant or condominium development, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or property manager of such premises to allocate sign space upon the premises, under the terms of this article. 
(2)  Wall signs and roof signs are permitted provided that the aggregate area of the signs shall not exceed 15 percent of the area of the wall on or over which the signs are located. Signs proposed for placement at an angle at the intersection of two walls shall use 15 percent of the area of the wall with the smallest dimensions. 
(3)  Projecting and standing signs, one of each per premises, are permitted subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The aggregate area of sign surface for any one premises shall not exceed four square feet per foot of street to the maximum of 250 square feet or one square foot per foot of street frontage, whichever is larger. These dimensions shall be halved in Neighborhood Business (NB) Districts. 
b.  Standing signs may be located within the required front yard space but not nearer than 12 feet from either side lot line unless written permission is obtained from the abutting property owner to erect such sign nearer than that distance from the common side lot line between the two properties. 
c.  The maximum height of standing signs shall be 25 feet above grade. 
d.  Two projecting and two standing signs are permitted where the premise fronts on two streets; one sign of each type per street. 
e.  Compliance with all the state sign regulations when applicable. 
(4)  In addition to the foregoing sign, one directory of the establishments occupying a building may be affixed to the exterior wall of the buildings at each public entrance to the building. Such directory shall not exceed an area determined on the basis of one square foot for each establishment occupying the building. 
(5)  Signs painted or placed on the inside of the glass of a window may be permitted in addition to the above, provided that the aggregate area of such signs does not exceed 50 percent of the area of the window glass. 
(6)  Sign permitted pursuant to site plan review. 
(7)  Commercial and industrial subdivisions and planned unit developments are allowed to have a single standing sign at each public entrance to the development to advertise the individual uses within the development, not to exceed in size the aggregate area of sign surface allowed by subsection (c)3 of this section for lots within the development. Individual standing signs for lots within the development are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.2B; Ord. of 6-7-2010) 
Secs. 60-639-60-664. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND MOBILE HOMES 

Sec. 60-665. - General provisions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Permanent use of manufactured housing means occupancy while in a parked position for any purpose permitted by section 60-666(1) and (2) including storage. Manufactured housing units and mobile homes must meet all federal, state and city codes. 
    Temporary use of manufactured housing, mobile homes, trailer homes and office trailers means an occupancy that must be recorded with the municipal officer charged with enforcement and requires a permit issued for each period of use prior to the beginning of such use. 
(b)  A mobile home shall be construed to remain a mobile home, subject to all regulations applying thereto, whether or not wheels, axles, hitch or other E-G of mobility are removed and regardless of nature of the foundation provided. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.3A) 
Sec. 60-666. - Uses of-Manufactured housing, trailers, office trailers. 
    The use of manufactured housing, trailers and office trailers is prohibited except as follows: 
(1)  As permanent single-family residences on individual lots in all residential districts (applies only to manufactured housing units that meet all federal, state and city codes). 
(2)  As permanent single-family residence in approved mobile home developments in Rural Residence (RR), and Suburban Residence (SR) Districts (applies only to manufactured housing units that meet all federal, state and city codes). 
(3)  As permanent single-family residence on individual lots in the Manufactured Housing Overlay (MHO) Districts (applies only to manufactured housing units that meet the requirements of division 6 of article XII of this chapter). 
(4)  As temporary residences for farm laborers or supervisory personnel employed on a seasonal basis on the farm of their employer and limited to the period of such seasonal employment. 
(5)  As temporary field headquarters or office space on construction sites for persons or firms actually engaged in construction work. 
(6)  As temporary office space for persons or firms actually engaged in the business of selling manufactured housing, mobile homes and trailers. 
(7)  As temporary living quarters for construction workers located on or within one-quarter of a mile from the construction site on which they are employed. Such occupancy shall be limited to the period during which construction is in progress. 
(8)  As temporary living quarters for persons whose need arises from emergency resulting from loss of their homes through accident, natural disaster, or other physical causes. The period of occupancy permitted by this subsection shall be limited to 12 months together with any additional period during which a valid building permit for construction of replacement living quarters may be in effect (applies to manufactured housing only). 
(9)  As temporary office space for a business enterprise during the period in which permanent office space is being constructed for which a valid building permit has been issued. 
(10)  As temporary living quarters for employees of itinerant businesses such as carnivals during the period when such businesses are actually being conducted within the city and in no case for longer than 30 days (applied to trailers only). 
(11)  As temporary classroom space at an existing school facility for educational activities conducted by the city's department of education. 
(12)  Storage boxes or space trailers used as storage space for nonhazardous materials by the commercial or industrial use which occupies the property. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "storage box" or "space trailer" means a fully enclosed structure manufactured for storage use only and does not include tractor-trailer bodies, cargo container boxes or railroad cars. 
(13)  As office space for excavation and sawmill operations for the period of active use. If such operations are discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months, such use shall be considered abandoned and the office trailer shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.3B) 
Sec. 60-667. - Same-Mobile homes. 
    The uses of mobile homes are prohibited except as follows: 
(1)  As permanent single-family residences in approved mobile home developments in Rural Residence (RR) and Suburban Residence (SR) Districts. 
(2)  All uses permitted by section 60-666(3) through (9). 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.3C) 
Sec. 60-668. - Mobile homes in floodplain districts. 
(a)  Mobile homes shall be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Mobile homes shall be anchored as follows: 
(1)  By the use of over-the-top or frame ties; or 
(2)  As provided for in the FEMA manual, Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas, published in September 1985. 
(b)  Mobile homes shall be elevated as follows: 
(1)  General requirements that the lowest floor of the mobile home be elevated to or above the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  As provided for in the FEMA manual, Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas, published in September 1985. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.3D) 
Sec. 60-669. - Mobile home park standards. 
    Mobile home parks proposed to be established must have a minimum of three lots and be located within 1,500 feet of municipal sewer and water. Mobile home parks shall meet all of the following standards set forth in this division: 
(1)  Minimum lot size. 
a.  The minimum lot size shall be 5,000 square feet. 
b.  The following frontage and setbacks shall apply: 
Frontage 50 feet Front setback 15 feet Side 10 feet Rear 10 feet  
(2)  Parking in front yard to zero lot line. Setbacks may be reduced along rear lot lines of lots adjacent to abutting property where buffers are proposed along the perimeter of the proposed park. 
(3)  Siting. All mobile home lots shall be laid out on the proposed subdivision and site plan showing approximate pad locations prior to final approval. On sites/lots which abut rear lot lines, the pads shall be offset as to not obstruct view from the rear portion of each unit. Units/lots that abut public roads shall meet front yard setbacks established by the zone in which the park is proposed. 
(4)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Off-street parking in the form of parking lots or carports for mobile home parks shall meet the same standards as provided in articles V through XI of this chapter. 
b.  Residential parking spaces need not be located on lots occupied by the dwelling units served, but at least two such spaces per unit shall be reserved for, and located within 100 feet walking distance of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. No on-street parking will be provided. 
c.  Parking on each individual lot will be allowed to infringe the principal structure setbacks. All off-street parking must be of an impervious material. All off-street parking lots proposed must be shown on the site and subdivision plans at time of planning board review. 
d.  Lots with 50 feet of frontage will allow parking within the ten-foot side yard setback and associated front setback. 
(5)  Buffering and landscaping. 
a.  All parks shall provide and maintain a buffer strip of 50 feet around the perimeter of the mobile home park. If the per acre density of homes within the mobile home park is at least two times greater than: 
1.  The density of residential development on immediately adjacent parcels of land; or 
2.  If the immediately adjacent parcels of land are undeveloped, the maximum net residential density permitted by applicable municipal ordinances or state law. This buffer must include either a wooden stockade fence, a chainlink fence with vegetative cover at a minimum height of six feet or the buffer must be heavily vegetated with coniferous trees that at the time of planting must be six feet in height. Heavily vegetated is considered to mean trees planted in a row at least eight feet on center. The buffer vegetation shall not exceed 25 feet in width. Each row shall be offset from the adjacent row. The planning board may allow a reduction in the buffer width, if the developer can prove that the intent of this provision is not impaired. 
b.  Where possible, existing trees shall be preserved, mobile home sites shall be oriented with respect to scenic vistas, natural landscape features, topography and natural drainage areas. Areas such as wetlands shall be preserved in accordance with the Army Corps of Engineers standards. 
c.  Open space, storage or recreation requirements shall not exceed ten percent of the combined area of the individual lots within a mobile home park. If the developer wishes to develop more than ten percent open space, storage and/or recreation area, he may do so. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and utility sheds. 
a.  Utility sheds or accessory buildings will be allowed along the rear portion of the lot and along the rear lot line and shall not exceed two percent of the lot size. 
b.  At least one large storage facility may be required in the park in order to store such items as recreation vehicles, boats, snowmobiles and all other licensed and unlicensed recreation vehicles which might otherwise be stored in a parking space to be utilized by an individual unit. This area shall in total not be less than 50 square feet for each mobile home lot and shall have screening around the storage area on all four sides. Fully enclosed security fencing is encouraged. 
(7)  Street design standards. Privately owned and maintained streets shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Streets shall have a right-of-way of 23 feet in width, and pavement shall be 20 feet in width. 
b.  Intersections proposed as part of the mobile home park which will tie directly into city accepted streets, shall meet minimum intersection geometric design standards as developed by the institute of transportation engineers or the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
c.  All street design plans must be stamped and signed by a registered professional engineer. 
(8)  Refuse. Refuse containers shall be conveniently located throughout the site at a rate of one eight yard garbage container for every 20 mobile home units and shall be fenced in on three sides in order to protect the health and safety of the park residents. This standard is based on a weekly pickup and may be reduced if pick-up is more frequent. In the event lot-to-lot pickup is provided by the park management, this provision shall be waived. 
(9)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be placed at a distance of no more than 1,000 feet apart in order to service the complete mobile home park. 
(10)  Mailboxes. Must be established in such a manner that at a minimum five vehicles may be able to either park or be queued in order to pick up mail at the proposed mail box location. This location must also be approved in writing by the local postmaster. 
(11)  Design and anchoring of units. All units being established within an approved mobile home park are subject to all standards noted in section 60-1010(d)(1) through (10). 
(12)  Site plan standards for review. Provisions of this section are subject to both division 4, subdivision, and division 2, site plan review, of article XVI of this chapter for review. 
(13)  PUDs. Planned unit developments (PUDs) are encouraged under section 60-385. If a developer proposes a park under the PUD section, then all standards and sections of that article must be met. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.3E) 
Secs. 60-670-60-696. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCAVATION PERMIT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 60-697. - Activities requiring resource extraction permits. 
(a)  The excavation of sand, gravel, stone or other earth material from any land in the city is hereby prohibited except such excavation as may be authorized in any zoning district by a permit issued by the planning board or as otherwise permitted under this chapter. 
(b)  The commercial excavation of sod, loam, topsoil, peat or other organic material for landscaping and site development related activities exceeding 300 cubic yards per site per year from any land in the city is hereby prohibited except such excavation as may be authorized in any zoning district by a permit issued by the department of community development and planning or as otherwise permitted under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.4A) 
Sec. 60-698. - Items to be considered in application review. 
(a)  In judging whether or not an resource extraction permit shall be issued, the planning board shall after a public hearing, determine the setback allowances, ingress and egress to provide a site distance that meets minimum safety standards, and access road location and maintenance. 
(b)  In judging whether or not an resource extraction permit shall be issued, the planning board shall address the following, if applicable: 
(1)  Maintenance of safe and healthful conditions such as the posting of danger areas, the installation of gates to prevent access, etc.; 
(2)  The prevention and control of erosion and sedimentation; 
(3)  The proximity of water bodies and wetland areas; 
(4)  The effect on the aesthetic, scenic or natural beauty of the immediate area; 
(5)  Whether the size of the resource deposit in relation to the area affected justifies the excavation activity; 
(6)  The compatibility of the use with the surrounding uses and the neighborhood. Under this criteria items to be addressed are as follows: hours of operation, noise emitted from the operation, types of machinery to be used, dust, provisions of screening, orientation of the excavation operation, etc. 
(c)  In judging whether or not an resource extraction permit should be issued, the planning board shall address the following: 
(1)  Adequacy of the applicant's reclamation plan; 
(2)  The applicant must demonstrate proof of bonding capacity or security adequate to ensure compliance with an approved reclamation plan. 
(d)  In judging whether or not an resource extraction permit should be issued for the excavation of organic material, the department of community development and planning shall consider compliance with the criteria cited in subsection (a) of this section and shall address, if applicable, the criteria in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.4B) 
Sec. 60-699. - Submission of application and review procedure. 
(a)  A written application for an resource extraction permit required under section 60-697(a) shall be submitted with a processing fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule to the department of community development and planning. The planning board shall conduct an on-site inspection of the proposed excavation location prior to the public hearing. Notice of such inspection shall be given to the applicant and others by mail at such addresses as may be known to the department of community development and planning or as appear in the city property tax list. Comments concerning the proposed excavation operation will be solicited from all persons in attendance. Failure of the applicant or others to receive a mailed notice of such on-site inspection shall not constitute grounds for objections by the applicant or others and shall not invalidate any action taken by the planning board shall hold a public hearing on such application. 
(b)  An application of an resource extraction permit required under section 60-697(a) shall be submitted to the department of community development and planning not less than 30 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning board. The planning board shall schedule a public hearing, the notice of which shall be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city not less than 12 days prior to the meeting of the planning board. Upon holding the public hearing and reviewing the application, the planning board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application based on the criteria set forth in section 60-698. The planning board shall notify the applicant in writing of any conditions and the reasons for its action. 
(c)  A written application for an resource extraction permit required under section 60-697(b) shall be submitted with a processing fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule to the department of community development and planning. 
(d)  When an application for an resource extraction permit under section 60-697(b) is submitted, the department of community development and planning shall have 15 working days to complete its review of the application. The department of community development and planning can approve, conditionally approve or deny the application based on the criteria set forth in section 60-698. The department of community development and planning shall notify the applicant in writing of any conditions and the reasons for its action. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.4C) 
Sec. 60-700. - Application. 
(a)  The written application submitted to the department of community development and planning shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Legal description of the property and description of he site to be affected by the excavation operation; 
(2)  Status of title of land; 
(3)  Description of the scope of activities to be undertaken on the site: i.e., area, depth of proposed excavation, etc.; 
(4)  Narrative description addressing the items required under section 60-698(a); 
(5)  Narrative description addressing any items listed under section 60-698(b) that the applicant feels are applicable to his proposed operation; and 
(6)  Proof of bonding capacity or security adequate to ensure compliance with an approved reclamation plan. 
(b)  At the time of submission of the written application, the applicant shall submit an inked original and 15 copies of a site plan map drawn to the following specifications: 
(1)  Sheet size not to exceed 24 inches by 30 inches; 
(2)  A plan prepared to a scale of one inch equals 40 feet is preferred but where appropriate, a scale up to one inch equals 100 feet is acceptable; 
(3)  Name and address of owner and developer, and interest of the applicant if other than the owner or developer; 
(4)  Name of development and north point; 
(5)  Names and addresses of all owners of record of all adjacent property as appear on assessor's records; 
(6)  Current zoning classification and district boundaries; 
(7)  Easements, rights-of-way, or other reservations adjacent to or intersecting the property; 
(8)  Existing and proposed topography, at contour intervals of not more than five feet; 
(9)  Location of watercourses, marshes and wooded areas within 150 feet of property lines; 
(10)  Location of buildings existing on the site to be developed and on adjacent land; 
(11)  Existing public street rights-of-way and proposed ingress and egress facilities; and 
(12)  Proposed temporary and permanent drainage methods to be approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  At the time of submission of the written application and site plan, the applicant shall submit a reclamation plan which shall include such items as slope of finished banks, vegetation to be introduced, etc. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.4D) 
Sec. 60-701. - Posting of bond or security. 
    Upon approval of an application for an resource extraction permit and prior to the excavation of any earth or organic materials, the applicant shall tender a certified check payable to the city a performance bond running to the city and issued by a surety company or secured by deposits issued by institutions authorized to issue the same by the laws of the state or the United States or irrevocable letters of credit issued by said banking institutions, in a dollar amount to be determined by the planning board and/or the department of community development and planning in an amount adequate to guarantee fulfillment of conditions imposed. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.4E) 
Sec. 60-702. - Enforcement procedure and penalty. 
(a)  The planning staff shall conduct at least an annual review of the excavation operation and forward its findings to the planning board at the next regular scheduled meeting. The review process shall take into consideration the conditions of compliance, adjustment of the performance bond, if warranted, and any other applicable concerns. 
(b)  If after the review of the planning staff findings the planning board determines that the conditions of the permit have substantially changed, the owner of an resource extraction permit may be required to submit a new application in the same manner as prescribed in sections 60-699 and 60-700. 
(c)  If after the review of the planning staff findings the planning board determines that the owner of an resource extraction permit has violated the conditions of the permit, the planning board may revoke such permit provided the owner of such permit is given a reasonable time to abate the violations as prescribed in section 60-1403. 
(d)  Any person being the owner or tenant of, or having the control or use of land or part thereof in the city, who excavates, grades, transfers or removes any earth or organic materials prior to receiving an resource extraction permit and who intends to initiate an excavating operation shall be guilty of a civil infraction and penalized as provided for by section 1-15. This section is not intended to prohibit exploratory excavation for earth material deposits. 
(e)  Complaints against an excavation operation permitted under this article shall be received and reviewed in the manner provided by section 60-1403. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.4F) 
Sec. 60-703. - Resource extraction permit exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall be deemed not to prohibit the excavation of earth or organic materials as may be incidental to any lawfully permitted use of land or of a building or incidental to any necessitated by any building construction for which a building permit has lawfully been issued under the city zoning chapter prior to such materials excavation. 
(b)  This article shall also be deemed not to prohibit the excavation from any lot or way of materials so far as may be necessitated by the construction or installation of utilities, public ways or other engineering works for public service on such lot or in such way. 
(c)  This article shall also be deemed not to prohibit the excavation, grading, or transferring of any earth materials noted under section 60-697(a) from one part of a lot, tract, or parcel of land to another part of the same lot, tract or parcel of land in the same ownership, or excavation for sale at a rate not exceeding ten cubic yards per acre per year. 
(d)  This article shall not apply to excavation activities in existence on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provisioned and registered with the department of community development and planning within six months of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived provision as long as the total land area affected by the excavation activity is not expanded by more than one acre. Excavation activities which expand in depth must file a reclamation plan to be approved by the department of community development and planning. The applicant shall post a bond of security in a dollar amount to be determined by the department of community development and planning in an amount adequate to guarantee completion of reclamation activities. Any excavation activity which is discontinued for 12 consecutive months shall require a permit to reopen. 
(e)  In order for an excavation to be considered grandfathered, in addition to the registration requirements outlined in this article, the owner/operator must file a reclamation plan for the entire area proposed to be excavated. In addition, the owner/operator shall tender a certified check payable to the city, a performance bond running to city, or other surety acceptable to the city, in a dollar amount to be determined by the department of planning and permitting services to guarantee completion of pit reclamation. To be considered grandfathered, any excavation that is located wholly or partly in the Lake Auburn Watershed Overlay Zone or which proposes to extend excavation into an area affecting that zone shall, within six months of registering, also be required to comply with the following: 
(1)  The excavation area must be registered under the provisions of 38 M.S.R.A. § 490 and 38 M.S.R.A. §§ 490-A to 490-M or be fully licensed under state site development law as provided in 38 M.S.R.A. 484-A. 
(2)  The owner/operator must provide a basic site plan of the entire property proposed to be excavated based upon the most current versions of the City of Auburn GIS Mapping Systems. 
(3)  The owner/operator must provide a written or plan view excavation plan that illustrates how the excavation will be maintained as an internally drained pit. 
(4)  The owner/operator must agree to operate any new excavation areas in compliance with existing state permits. For excavations registered under the provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. § 490 and 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 490-A to 490-M, any new excavation area shall occur without variance to the rules, unless the variance request is approved by the state department of environmental protection, the department of planning and permitting services and the Lake Auburn Watershed Protection Commission. 
(f)  The Lake Auburn Watershed Protection Commission and gravel pits grandfathered this article are exempt from strict adherence to the requirements of this article when the Lake Auburn Watershed Protection Commission makes a determination that the proposed activity will result in significant improvement in water quality with Lake Auburn and the Lake Auburn Watershed. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.4G) 
Secs. 60-704-60-734. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - HOME OCCUPATION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 60-735. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Home occupation means the accessory use of a dwelling unit for a business or commercial venture engaged in, by the person residing in the dwelling unit, and which allows up to one person who does not reside on the premises to be employed by that home occupation. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.5B) 
Sec. 60-736. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this home occupation article is to allow the secondary and incidental use of a residence for the conduct of appropriate occupations whose external activity levels and impacts are so limited as to be compatible with and not adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood. Additionally, the city wishes to provide all residents freedom from excessive noise, excessive traffic, nuisances, fire hazards and other possible impacts of business activities being conducted in residential buildings. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.5A) 
Sec. 60-737. - Objectives. 
    The following objectives will be those standards provided to the code enforcement officer for guidance to determine if the proposed home occupation meets the appropriate standards set forth in the article: 
(1)  The proposed home occupation will be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit, with the exception of required outdoor play areas at child day care homes, and shall not be extended to any accessory structures. 
(2)  The provisions for vehicular loading, unloading and parking and for vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site and onto adjacent public streets will not create hazards to safety. 
(3)  The location or operation of the proposed home occupation will not be detrimental to and adversely affect the use and values of existing development in the neighborhood or the health or safety of persons residing or working therein. 
(4)  The provisions for exterior lighting will not create safety hazards for motorists traveling on adjacent streets and will be adequate for the safety of occupants and users of the site, and will not create a nuisance affecting adjacent properties. 
(5)  The proposed home occupation will not unduly burden off-site sewer drainage or water systems. 
(6)  The proposed home occupation will not create a fire/safety concern beyond what currently exists as determined by the fire department. 
(7)  The proposed home occupation does not violate provisions of the zoning regulations applicable to the site or other applicable laws, regulations or ordinances. 
(8)  The proposed home occupation shall not unduly impact the ability to provide municipal services. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.5C) 
Sec. 60-738. - Criteria. 
    A home occupation shall: 
(1)  Require a permit, which shall be reviewed and renewed annually. 
(2)  Be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit, with the exception of required outdoor play areas at child day care homes, and involve not more than one person other than members of the family residing in the dwelling, employed on the premises in conjunction with the home occupation. 
(3)  Be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and not involve the use of more than 25 percent, or a maximum of 50 percent for child day care homes, of the habitable floor area occupied by the applicant. 
(4)  Present only incidental visible exterior evidence of the home occupation. Structural alterations of the dwelling, related to the home occupation, shall be consistent with the residential character of the dwelling. 
(5)  Exterior signage shall be limited to one nonilluminated sign, not exceeding a total area of two square feet in size. 
(6)  Not involve the use of any accessory buildings located on the property, nor any exterior storage of materials used in the home occupation. Storage or use of any highly explosive or combustible material is prohibited. 
(7)  Not involve any retail sales, other than incidental, which are associated with the home occupation. 
(8)  Not involve deliveries or pickups made by vehicles larger than a single unit truck with three or fewer axles. Overall deliveries shall be limited to not more than five per week. 
(9)  Provide one parking space on the property for each 150 square feet of area designated for home occupation use. 
(10)  Not generate any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare which is detectible to normal sensory perception at or beyond the property boundaries. The home occupation shall also not interfere with radio or television reception in the area. 
(11)  Not involve the use, on the premises, of any equipment other than that normally used within a residential household or general office. 
(12)  Only be permitted with the written consent of the property owner if the property is not owned by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.5D) 
Sec. 60-739. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  A completed home occupation application, and fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall and submitted. Fees for new home occupation applications will be prorated on a monthly basis to December 31 of the calendar year. The fees shall not be applied to businesses that are required to obtain a separate business license through the city. 
(b)  The abutting property owners, as defined under article 60-1476, shall be notified in writing and given a 14-day comment period to raise issues of concerns with the proposed use of the property. 
(c)  Decision and required conditions for the use of the property for a home occupation will be forwarded by the code enforcement officer within 21 days of the date of the application. 
(d)  There shall be a 30-day appeal period from the date of the code enforcement officer's written decision. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.5G) 
Sec. 60-740. - Appeals. 
    If either the applicant or the abutters to the proposed home occupation do not agree with the decision rendered by the code enforcement officer, that party has 30 days from the date of the code enforcement officer's letter to the applicant advising he of the decision. The appeal shall be made in accordance with section 60-1186. The board of appeals shall render its decision based on the criteria found in sections 60-735, 60-737 and 60-738 as applicable. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.5H) 
Sec. 60-741. - Enforcement. 
    Home occupation applicants shall permit a reasonable inspection of the premises by the code enforcement officer on an annual basis. Any violation of the home occupation approval shall be followed up in accordance with section 60-1403. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.5I) 
Sec. 60-742. - Renewal. 
    The applicant will be required to pay a renewal fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule for a home occupation permit on a yearly basis. The permit will be based on the calendar year with renewals occurring on January 1. There shall be a 30-day grace period for all renewals. If a home occupation permit has not been renewed during that time period a late fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule will be charged. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.5J) 
Sec. 60-743. - Applicability. 
    Any person presently operating a home occupation in the city as defined herein, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall comply with the terms of this article by obtaining a permit within six months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.5K) 
Secs. 60-744-60-769. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 60-770. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions are applicable to an access management program for development along arterial and collector roadways and, where applicable, local roads serving land abutting arterial and collector roadways. Definitions found in other chapters or in other municipal ordinances which relate to access management may be used to assist in gaining greater understanding of the city's overall intentions. 
    Acceleration lane means a speed-change lane for the purpose of enabling a vehicle entering a roadway to increase its speed to a rate at which it can safely merge with through traffic. 
    Access means the ability to enter or leave a public street or highway from an adjacent driveway or another public street. 
    Access management means the control of driveways and intersections to maintain highway safety and the traffic carrying capacity of an arterial. 
    Annual average daily traffic (AADT) means the annual average two-way daily traffic volume. It represents the total annual traffic on a road for the year, divided by 365. 
    Arterial means major roadways which serve long distance through traffic. Access to abutting land can generally be provided. Also see Major arterial highway and Minor arterial highway in section 60-2. 
    Collector street means roadways which connect streets to arterials and generally provide access to abutting lands. Also see Minor arterial highway in section 60-2. 
    Corner clearance means the minimum dimension, measured parallel to a highway, between the curb, pavement or shoulder lines of an intersecting highway and the nearest edge of a driveway. 
    Corner lot means a single lot with frontage on two or more intersecting roads. Also see Corner lot in section 60-2. 
    Deceleration lane means a speed-change lane for the purpose of enabling a vehicle to leave the through traffic lane at speed equal to or slightly less than the speed of traffic in the through lane and to decelerate to a stop or make a slow speed turn. 
    Design hourly volume means the hourly traffic volume used to evaluate or design a highway or driveway. 
    Driveway means an entrance used by vehicular traffic to access property abutting a highway. As used in this chapter, the term "driveway" includes private residential driveways as well as commercial and other nonresidential driveways. 
(1)  Low volume driveways means driveways with a traffic volume of less than 500 vehicle trips per day and less than 50 vehicle trips per peak hour. 
(2)  Medium volume driveways means driveways with a traffic volume of 500 to less than 1,500 vehicle trips per day and 50 to less than 150 vehicle trips per peak hour. 
(3)  High volume driveways means driveways with a traffic volume of 1,500 or more vehicle trips per day and 150 or more vehicle trips per peak hour. 
    Driveway width means the narrowest width of the driveway, measured parallel to the highway right-of-way. 
    Highway capacity means the maximum number of vehicles that a highway can handle during a specific unit of time at a given level of service. 
    Lane means the portion of a roadway for the movement of a single line of vehicles which does not include the gutter or shoulder of the roadway. 
    Peak hour traffic means the highest number of vehicles found to be passing over a section of a lane or roadway during any 60 consecutive minutes. Typically, there is a peak hour condition in the morning and a peak hour condition in the afternoon for which the roadway or intersection is analyzed for capacity and level of service. 
    Service road/frontage road means a local street or road located parallel to an arterial for service to abutting properties for the purpose of controlling access to the arterial. 
    Shared driveway means a single driveway serving two or more lots. A shared driveway may cross a lot line or be on the lot line, and the owners may have an easement for the shared used and maintenance. 
    Storage length means additional lane footage added to a turning lane to hold the maximum number of vehicles likely to accumulate during a peak period so as not to interfere with the through travel lanes. 
    Traffic congestion means a condition resulting from more vehicles trying to use a given road during a specific period of time than the road can handle with what are considered to be acceptable levels of delay or inconvenience. 
    Trip generation means the estimated volume of traffic going to and from a particular location. 
    Uncontrolled access means the unlimited number, spacing and/or unstandardized design of driveways onto a street or road. 
    Vehicle trip means the vehicle moving from an origination point to a destination point. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6B) 
Sec. 60-771. - Purpose. 
    The access management program is the sum of all actions taken by the city to maintain the safety and traffic carrying capacity of its arterials and collector roadways. The following standards are enacted to provide for safe driving conditions, reduced potential traffic hazards, relieve congestion, and achieve a sustainable level of vehicle carrying capacity within identified commercial corridors and abutting lands. The effective application of these standards, coupled with other associated municipal ordinances, will assist in preserving highway capacity, reducing accidents and avoiding or minimizing costly road improvements. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6A) 
Sec. 60-772. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall apply as follows: 
(1)  See section 60-2, definitions of major or principal highway and minor arterial highway for a listing of roadways subject to access management standards. 
(2)  Proposed changes in use requiring the issuance of any land use permit. 
(3)  Properties which meet the following threshold standards: 
a.  Any building or addition which results in a building footprint of greater than 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Uses generating more than 100 vehicle trips in the peak hour. 
c.  Uses with a drive-through facility which generateS more than 50 vehicle trips in the peak hour. 
(4)  Subdivisions consisting of three or more lots. 
(5)  The following municipal uses where large or emergency vehicles are commonly used: fire, public works, parks and recreation, police and schools. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6C) 
Secs. 60-773-60-797. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 60-798. - Purpose. 
    The following standards are designed to ensure safety and maintain the traffic carrying capacity of identified roadways. In the review of a development proposal, a primary consideration shall be for the safety of people traveling on the arterial and a secondary consideration shall be for people entering and leaving the proposed development. Design elements should conform to the standards as contained in the most current version of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) manual and commonly used by the state department of transportation (MDOT). 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6D(intro. ¶)) 
Sec. 60-799. - Safe site distance. 
    Driveways and other accesses for all developments, including individual residences, subdivisions and commercial and other nonresidential developments shall be located to meet a minimum sight distance measured in each direction along the arterial or collector while maintaining adequate distances from adjacent driveways and intersections. For the purpose of the site distance standard, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The site distance shall be based on the posted speed limit. For those developments requiring planning board review and/or the submission of a traffic impact study, the developer shall provide an analysis of the sight distance for both the posted speed limit and the 85th percentile speed, either one of which the board may require the plan to be designed to. 
(2)  Measurements shall be from the driver's seat of a vehicle that is ten feet behind the curb (or edge of shoulder) line with the height of the eye 31/2 feet above the pavement and the height of the object 41/4 feet. 
(3)  Where truck traffic from a development onto a roadway is expected to be significant, increase the sight distance by 50 percent. Height of eye shall be six feet with the height of the object no more than 41/4 feet. 
(4)  For low and medium volume driveways and intersection road placement, the unobstructed sight distance shall be according to the following schedule: 
Highway Speed (mph) Minimum Sight Distance (in feet) 20 200 25 250 30 300 35 350 40 400 45 450 50 500 55 550  
(5)  For high volume driveways and intersection road placement, an unobstructed sight distance shall be according to the following schedule: 
Highway Speed (mph) Minimum Sight Distance (in feet) 25 300 30 380 40 580 50 840 55 990  
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6D(1)) 
Sec. 60-800. - Curb cut and driveway spacing. 
(a)  For those developments requiring planning board review, the developer shall provide a design for curb cuts and driveways for both the posted speed limit and the 85th percentile speed, either one of which the board may required the plan to be designed to. the minimum distances shall apply to driveways on the same lot or on adjoining lots to the maximum possible to minimize traffic safety impacts. The minimum distance between curb cuts and driveways shall be measured from the centerline of the driveways at the right-of-way line and shall be a function of the posted corridor road speed according to the following table: 
Highway Speed (mph) Minimum Spacing (in feet) 20 85 25 105 30 125 35 150 40 185 45 230 50 275  
(b)  When a lot lacks sufficient corridor road frontage for spacing, the distance can be reduced to the next lowest level as shown on the table in this section. For example, on a 40 mph road requiring an 185 foot spacing, the distance may be reduced to no less than 150 feet; or the property owner can establish a shared driveway or common frontage road with an adjacent property owner. 
(c)  Where adjoining nonconforming frontage lots or conforming and nonconforming frontage lots are owned in common, those lots shall be considered combined for the purposes of meeting the frontage and access requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6D(2)) 
Sec. 60-801. - Number of driveways per lot. 
    The maximum number of driveways to a particular site shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  No low volume traffic generator, including single-family dwellings and duplexes, shall have more than one two-way access onto a single roadway. 
(2)  No medium or high volume traffic generator shall have more than one two-way access or two one-way accesses in total onto a single roadway. 
(3)  All driveways shall comply with the spacing requirements. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6D(3)) 
Sec. 60-802. - Access to planned developments. 
    Where a proposed development involves the construction of two or more uses, or where the potential for two or more uses being developed over time exists, access to the development shall be as follows: 
(1)  Direct access to an arterial to any individual lot or to a single place of business shall be prohibited unless it is determined that physical conditions peculiar to the parcel justify the granting of a waiver. A waiver may be granted only if there will be no further subdivision of the parcel and one of the following conditions is met: 
a.  There is too little road frontage to reasonably allow the creation of a new way; 
b.  The shape or physical condition of the parcel does not permit access to or creation of a street other than an arterial; or 
c.  Common access will be utilized which will allow other proposed lots to be serviced by one new curb cut. 
(2)  If there is more than one developer or if development proceeds piecemeal over time, smaller sites may be served by an individual entrance until such time as adjacent lots are developed. These temporary individual commercial driveways shall be closed or consolidated into one or two access points and connected to a common service road. 
(3)  Permitted access to the development may include one or more of the following: 
a.  A common frontage road running parallel to the corridor road provided that such frontage road shall be located at least 35 feet from the edge of the right-of-way. 
b.  A common driveway or subdivision street which may intersect the arterial and which serves the individual lots or businesses or a common parking lot adjacent to the individual lots or businesses. 
c.  One or more minor roads to be constructed by the developer according to the standards of this article which shall serve the development. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6D(4)) 
Sec. 60-803. - Corner lot access. 
    Where a proposed development is to be located at the intersection of an arterial and a minor or collector road, entrance to and exit from the site shall be located only on the minor or collector road. This requirement may be waived where it can be demonstrated that existing site conditions preclude the location of a driveway on the minor or collector road or that the location of the driveway on the minor or collector road would significantly interfere with a predominately residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6D(5)) 
Sec. 60-804. - Shared driveways. 
    Shared driveways shall be encouraged for adjacent sites in order to minimize the number of driveways along the arterial. When two or more adjacent property owners agree to a shared curb cut, driveway or common frontage road, the development may be granted a bonus of lot size and road frontage up to 15 percent for each property owner. In addition, the percentage of the total lot area to be covered by buildings may be increased by up to ten percent for each development that uses a shared driveway. No additional parking shall be required as a result of building space. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6D(6)) 
Sec. 60-805. - Interconnections. 
    For all projects, provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation connections to future projects on adjacent properties shall be provided wherever feasible and to the maximum extent possible. When the developer agrees to establish vehicular connections to adjacent developments of a type, scale and intensity similar to the proposed development, a reduction up to five percent of lot size, road frontage and parking requirements may be granted. Developers are further encouraged to provide pedestrian and bicycle linkages, separated from vehicular connections between adjacent developments and residential developments in the area. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6D(7)) 
Sec. 60-806. - Access management standards. 
    An applicant for a project subject to site plan review or a developer or owner of property which is subject to the access management standards may request, with the exception of section 60-799, a modification of such standards. Such requests shall be made to the planning board. Modifications to the access management standards may be allowed upon a demonstration of need by the applicant provided the planning board makes a finding that the objectives of access management have been satisfied. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.6D(8)) 
Secs. 60-807-60-835. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 

Sec. 60-836. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions presented in sections 60-1 and 60-2, the following definitions are applicable to this article: 
    Antenna means any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission of radio or electromagnetic frequency signals. 
    Colocation means the use of a WCF by more than one wireless communications provider. 
    Expansion of WCF means the addition of antennas, towers, or other devices to an existing structure. 
    Parabolic antenna means an antenna which is bowl-shaped, designed for the reception and/or transmission of radio frequency communication signals in a specific directional pattern (also known as a satellite dish antenna). 
    Targeted market coverage means the area which is targeted to be served by a WCF. 
    Wireless communications facility (WCF) means any structure, antenna, tower or other device which provides radio/television transmission, commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile radio telecommunications (SMR), common carrier wireless exchange phone services, common carrier wireless exchange access services, and personal communications service (PCS) or pager services. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.7B) 
Sec. 60-837. - Purpose. 
    The city recognizes that wireless communications facilities provide a valuable and necessary service to the public. The city also recognizes that the proliferation of these facilities could result in unintended interference with public safety communications and the potential for avoidable visual impacts in the community. These regulations are intended to balance the interests of the telecommunication providers, their customers, public safety agencies and the public by: 
(1)  Establishing clear standards and submission requirements for wireless communication facilities (WCFs). 
(2)  Creating a two-tier process in which minor WCFs can be reviewed and approved by a staff review committee while all other WCFs are subject to planning board review and approval. 
(3)  Encouraging the collocation of proposed WCFs on existing facilities and requiring new towers to be designed to permit collocation. 
(4)  Encouraging the use of finishes and colors to minimize visual impact by matching or blending the appearance of the new facilities with the surrounding natural or built environment. 
(5)  Ensuring that new WCFs, either by themselves or in combination with other existing on- or off-site WCFs, will not interfere with any public safety communications. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.7A) 
Sec. 60-838. - Applicability. 
    This section shall apply to all WCFs except the following: 
(1)  WCFs for municipal use. 
(2)  Parabolic antennas less than seven feet in diameter, that are an accessory use of the property. 
(3)  Maintenance, repair or reconstruction of a WCF and related equipment, provided that it does not constitute an expansion of a WCF and there is no change in the height or any other dimension of the facility. 
(4)  An antenna that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.7C) 
Sec. 60-839. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  A WCF that includes construction of a new tower, structural modification to an existing tower or an increase of ten percent or more in total WCF height shall be permitted by special exception in all zoning districts after approval by the planning board in accordance with the provisions of division 2 of article XVI of this chapter as well as the supplemental provisions described in these regulations. The planning board shall not approve such WCF if it is closer than one-half miles radius from an existing public safety WCF. 
(b)  Unless subject to the provisions subsection (a) of this section or listed as an exempt activity in section 60-838, any other WCF, including the replacement of an existing antenna or the addition and/or collocation of a new antenna on an existing tower, shall be permitted by right in all zoning districts subject to review and approval in accordance with these regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.7D) 
Sec. 60-840. - Application requirements. 
(a)  WCF permitted by special exception. In addition to the submissions requirements of site plan review, an application for a WCF permitted as a special exception shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A copy of the federal license for the WCF, or a signed statement from the owner or operator attesting that the facility will comply with FCC regulations. 
(2)  A USGS 7.5 minute topographic map showing the locations of all WCFs above 100 feet in height above ground level, except rooftop antennas, within a five miles radius of the proposed WCF. 
(3)  A site plan prepared and certified by a professional engineer registered in the state indicating the location, type, and height of the proposed WCF, antenna capacity, on-site and abutting off-site land uses, means of access, and setbacks from property lines. The site plan must include said engineer's certification that the proposed WCF complies with all American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and other applicable technical codes. 
(4)  Elevation drawings of the proposed WCF and any other proposed structures, showing height above ground level, guy wires and existing and proposed tree line within 100 feet of the property line. 
(5)  Details of the tower base, support structures, access road, fencing and gate. 
(6)  Written description of how the WCF fits into the applicant's communications network. 
(7)  Photos of the site showing existing conditions at the perimeter of the site, within setback areas and in the vicinity of proposed improvements. 
(8)  An estimate of the cost of construction and removal of the WCF prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state and evidence of financial capacity to construct and operate the WCF. 
(9)  A letter of commitment from a financial institution agreeing to provide an irrevocable letter of credit sufficient to cover the cost of removal of the WCF. 
(10)  For proposals to construct a new tower, evidence that no existing building, site or structure can accommodate the proposed facility. Such evidence may consist of the following: 
a.  Evidence that no existing facilities are located within the targeted market coverage area as required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient height, structural strength or capacity and cannot be reasonably improved to address these deficiencies to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Evidence that the fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner of an existing facility in order to permit collocation on an existing facility are unreasonable. Costs exceeding the pro rata share of a new facility development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(11)  A letter signed by the applicant for a new tower agreeing to allow future collocation of WCFs based on a reasonable charge for shared use, based on community rates and generally accepted accounting principles. Such charge may include but is not limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning and project administration, land costs, site design, construction, permitting, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the above costs by the facility owner shall be accomplished at a reasonable rate, over the useful life span of the facility. 
(12)  An analysis prepared and certified by an RF Engineer or qualified engineer registered in the state demonstrating that WCF will not interfere with any public safety communications. Such analysis shall include the following: 
a.  Location in longitude and latitude of the antenna. 
b.  Frequency in megahertz. 
c.  Ground elevation. 
d.  Antenna centerline. 
e.  Antenna model number. 
f.  ERP. 
g.  Cumulative field measurements of frequency emissions of all antennas installed on an existing WCF. 
(b)  WCF permitted by right. An application for a WCF that is permitted by right as described in section 60-839 shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of owner and developer and interest of the applicant if other than the owner or developer. 
(2)  Names and addresses of all owners of all adjacent properties as they appear on assessor's records. 
(3)  Copy of city tax topographic map showing the location of the proposed facility. 
(4)  A copy of the federal license for the WCF, or a signed statement from the owner or operator attesting that the facility will comply with FCC regulations. 
(5)  Written description of how the WCF fits into the applicant's communications network. 
(6)  If the applicant is the owner of the structure on which a proposed antenna is to be located, a letter agreeing to allow future collocation of WCFs based on a reasonable charge for shared use, based on community rates and generally accepted accounting principles. Such charge may include but is not limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning and project administration, land costs, site design, construction, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the above costs by the facility owner shall be accomplished at a reasonable rate, over the useful life span of the facility. 
(7)  An analysis prepared and certified by an RF engineer or qualified engineer registered in state demonstrating that the WCF will not interfere with any public safety communications. Such analysis shall include the following: 
a.  Location in longitude and latitude of the antenna. 
b.  Frequency in megahertz. 
c.  Ground elevation. 
d.  Antenna centerline. 
e.  Antenna model number. 
f.  ERP. 
g.  Cumulative field measurements of frequency emissions of all antennas installed on an existing WCF. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.7E) 
Sec. 60-841. - Approval. 
(a)  WCF permitted by special exception. The planning board is authorized to retain experts at the applicant's expense to evaluate technical information or conduct studies that it finds necessary in order to determine whether these standards will be met. In addition to the criteria in sections 60-1304 and 60-1336, the planning board shall consider the following standards: 
(1)  A WCF consisting of a new or expanded tower structure is designated to accommodate future collocation of at least three additional WCFs or providers. 
(2)  A new or expanded WCF complies with the setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, or setback 150 percent of its height from all property lines, whichever is greater. The setback may be satisfied by including areas outside the property boundaries if secured by an easement. Such setback may be reduced by the planning board upon a showing that the WCF is designed to collapse in a manner that will not harm an abutting property. 
(3)  The landscaping plan demonstrates that existing and proposed vegetation is sufficient to create a minimum six foot high continuous vegetative buffer within required setback areas. 
(4)  A gated eight foot high perimeter fence adequately protects improvements from trespassers. 
(5)  Lighting is limited to shielded nighttime security lighting as well as any illumination required by state or federal regulations. 
(6)  Proposed color and materials are designed to allow the structures as well as cables to match or blend with the surrounding natural or built environment to the maximum extent practicable. Unless otherwise required, this may be accomplished by muted colors, earth tones and subdued hues. There shall be no environmental impact or potential impact including noise, fuel leakage, etc. 
(7)  A new or expanded WCF complies with the current Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision Standard entitled, "Structural Standards for Steel Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures". 
(8)  The applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the planning board that the WCF will not, either by itself or in combination with other existing on- or off-site WCFs, interfere with any public safety communications. 
(9)  The applicant has submitted a letter of commitment from a financial institution agreeing to provide an irrevocable letter of credit sufficient to cover the cost of removal of the WCF. Such letter of credit shall be in force prior to the issuance of a building permit, be adjusted annually to reflect any changes in consumer price index, and include a covenant requiring the city be provided a minimum of 180 days notice prior to the cancellation of said letter of credit. 
(b)  WCF permitted by right. An application for a WCF permitted by right shall require review and approval by a staff review committee consisting of the city planner, city engineer and a representative of Lewiston-Auburn 911 Committee. The committee shall disapprove the WCF if it finds that the applicant has not demonstrated to the satisfaction of the committee that the WCF, either by itself or in combination with other existing on- or off-site WCFs, will not interfere with any public safety communications. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.7F) 
Sec. 60-842. - Abandonment. 
(a)  A WCF that is not operated as a WCF for a continuous period of 12 months or for which the city has received notice that the irrevocable letter of credit is to be canceled shall be considered abandoned. The code enforcement officer shall notify the owner of an abandoned WCF in writing and order the removal of the facility within 60 days of receipt of a written notice. The owner of the facility shall have 30 days from the receipt of the notice to demonstrate to the code enforcement officer that the facility has not been abandoned. If the owner fails to show that the facility has not been abandoned, the owner shall have 60 days to remove the facility. If the facility is not removed within the time period, the city may draw on the line of credit to pay for the costs of removing the WCF and returning the site to its pre-construction condition, including removal of roads an reestablishment of vegetation. 
(b)  The owner who removes an abandoned WCF may apply to the planning board for release of the surety when the facility and related equipment are removed to the satisfaction of the planning board. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.7G) 
Sec. 60-843. - Appeals. 
(a)  An appeal from a decision of the planning board on a WCF permitted by special exception shall be in accordance with the provisions of division 4 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(b)  An appeal from a decision of the staff review committee on a WCF permitted by right shall be to the board of appeals and shall be limited to the potential for the WCF, either by itself or in combination with other existing on- or off-site WCFs, to interfere with any public safety communications. The board of appeals is authorized to retain experts at the applicant's expense to evaluate technical information or conduct studies that the board of appeals determines may be necessary in order to render a decision on the appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 4.7H) 
Secs. 60-844-60-864. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 60-865-60-891. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-892. - Purpose and establishment. 
(a)  Certain areas of the city are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. Therefore, the city has chosen to become a participating community in the national flood insurance program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this division. It is the intent of the city to require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards. 
(b)  The city has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3001-3007, 4352, 4401-4407, and Title 38 M.R.S.A., §§ 440. 
(c)  The national flood insurance program, established in the aforesaid act, provides that areas of the city having a special flood hazard be identified by the federal emergency management agency and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. this division establishes a flood hazard development permit system and review procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard areas of the city. 
(d)  The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE for the city, identified by the federal emergency management agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Androscoggin County, Maine" dated July 8, 2013 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map" dated July 8, 2013 with panels: 183E, 184E, 191E, 192E, 193E, 194E, 203E, 211E, 212E, 213E, 214E, 302E, 304E, 306E, 307E, 308E, 309E, 312E, 316E, 317E, 320E, 326E, 327E, 328E, 329E, 336E, 337E, 338E, 339E, 341E, 343E, 430E, derived from the county wide digital Flood Insurance Rate Map entitled "Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map, Androscoggin County, Maine" are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this division. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-893. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. 
    Adjacent grade means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in section 60-892 of this division. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, commonly called the 100-year flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See "structure." 
    Certificate of compliance. A document signed by the code enforcement officer stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this division. 
    Code enforcement officer. A person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451 (including exceptions in subsection 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable comprehensive planning and land use laws and ordinances. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building. 
(1)  Built, in the case of a building in Zones A or AE, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts"; and 
(2)  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood. 
In the case of Zones A or AE, elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters, as required in Section 60-897.L. 
    Elevation certificate. An official form (FEMA Form 81-31) that: 
(1)  Is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program; and 
(2)  Is required for purchasing flood insurance. 
    Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (1)a. of this definition. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study. See flood elevation study. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents. 
    Floodway. See "regulatory floodway." 
    Floodway encroachment lines mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and local floodplain maps. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Historic Structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Locally established datum means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or any other established datum and is used in areas where mean sea level data is too far from a specific site to be practically used. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements described in section 60-897(l) of this division. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    Minor development means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50 percent of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in section 60-897(j), mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means the national vertical datum, whose standard was established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called 1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)." 
    New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) means the national datum whose standard was established in 1988, which is the new vertical datum used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) for all new flood insurance rate maps. NAVD is based upon vertical datum used by other North American countries such as Canada and Mexico and was established to replace NGVD because of constant movement of the earths crust, glacial rebound, and subsidence and the increasing use of satellite technology. 
    100-year flood. See "Base flood." 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway. 
(1)  Means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot; and 
(2)  When not designated on the community's flood insurance rate map, it is considered to be the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area. See "Area of special flood hazard." 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure. 
    Substantial damage means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the community's board of appeals. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-893.5. - Required. 
    Before any construction or other development (as defined in Section 60-904), including the placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in section 60-892, a flood hazard development permit shall be obtained from the planning and development department. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-894. - Application for permit. 
    The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be submitted to the planning and development department and shall include: 
(a)  The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor; 
(b)  An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site; 
(c)  A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot dimensions; 
(d)  A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development; 
(e)  A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor; 
(f)  A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed; 
(g)  Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development; 
[Items (h)-(k)(2) apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.] 
(h)  The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North AmericanVertical Datum (NAVD) or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the: 
(1)  Base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is determined: 
a.  In Zones AE, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Androscoggin County, Maine" as described in section 60-892; or 
b.  In Zone A: 
1.  From any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2 model, FEMA 265), including information obtained pursuant to Section 60-897(k) and 60-899(d); 
2.  From the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in the absence of all other data; 
3.  To be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the proposed building. 
(2)  Highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building; 
(3)  Lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and 
(4)  Level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed; 
(i)  A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for which elevation standards apply as required in section 60-897; 
(j)  A written certification by a professional land surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect, that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are accurate; 
(k)  The following certifications as required in section 60-897 by a registered professional engineer or architect: 
(1)  A floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), to verify that the floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 60-894(h)(4), section 60-897(g) and other applicable standards in section 60-897; 
(2)  A hydraulic openings certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in foundation walls will meet the standards of section 60-897(l)(2)a.; 
(3)  A certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of section 60-897(m); 
(4)  A certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of section 60-897(n); 
(l)  A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; and 
(m)  A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in section 60-897 will be met. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-895. - Application fee and expert's fee. 
    A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 for all minor development and $100.00 for all new construction or substantial improvements shall be paid to the city. 
    An additional fee may be charged if the planning and development department and/or board of appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant within ten days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-896. - Review standards for flood hazard development permit. 
    The planning and development department shall: 
(a)  Review all applications for the flood hazard development permit to assure that proposed developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of section 60-897 (Development standards) have been, or will be met; 
(b)  Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development permit applications: 
(1)  The base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Androscoggin County, Maine" as described in section 60-892; 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data are not provided, the code enforcement officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained pursuant to section 60-894(h)(1)b., section 60-897(k); and section 60-899(d), in order to administer section 60-897 of this division; and, 
(3)  When the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in section 60-894(h)(1)b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management Program. 
(c)  Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps described in section 60-892 of this division; 
(d)  In the review of flood hazard development permit applications, determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33U.S.C. 1344; 
(e)  Notify adjacent municipalities, the department of environmental protection, and the state floodplain management program prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course and submit copies of such notifications to the federal emergency management agency; 
(f)  If the application satisfies the requirements of this division, approve the issuance of one of the following flood hazard development permits based on the type of development: 
(1)  A two-part flood hazard development permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the code enforcement officer with an elevation certificate completed by a professional land surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect based on the Part I permit construction, "as built," for verifying compliance with the elevation requirements of section 60-897, paragraphs (f), (g), or (h). Following review of the elevation certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application, the code enforcement officer shall issue part ii of the flood hazard development permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or 
(2)  A flood hazard development permit for floodproofing of non-residential structures that are new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of section 60-897(g)(1)a.,b., and c. The application for this permit shall include a floodproofing certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
(3)  A flood hazard development permit for minor development for all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50 percent of the market value of the structure. Minor development also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in section 60-897(j), mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves and piers. 
(g)  Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard development permit applications, corresponding permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the board of appeals on variances granted under the provisions of section 60-900 of this division, and copies of elevation certificates, floodproofing certificates, certificates of compliance and certifications of design standards required under the provisions of section 60-894, 60-897 and 60-898 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-897. - Development standards. 
    All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards: 
(a)  All development. All development shall: 
(1)  Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  Use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and 
(4)  Use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during flooding conditions. 
(b)  Water supply. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. 
(c)  Sanitary sewage systems. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters. 
(d)  On site waste disposal systems. On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods. 
(e)  Watercourse carrying capacity. All development associated with altered or relocated portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse. 
(f)  Residential. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located within: 
(1)  Zones AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to section 60-894(h)(1)b.; section 60-896(b); or section 60-899(d). 
(g)  Non-residential. New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure located within: 
(1)  Zones AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall: 
a.  Be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a flood hazard development permit, as required by section 60-894(k) and shall include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is floodproofed. 
(2)  Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to section 60-894(h)(1)b., section 60-896(b) or section 60-899(d); or 
a.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodproofing standards of section 60-897(g)(1). 
(h)  Manufactured homes. New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within: 
(1)  Zones AE shall: 
a.  Be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; 
b.  Be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and 
c.  Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home, plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require one additional tie per side); or by, 
2.  Frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional ties per side). 
3.  All components of the anchoring system described in section 60-897(h)(1)c.1. and 2. shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds. 
(2)  Zone A shall: 
a.  Be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in section 60-897(h)(1)b., such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to section 60-894(h)(1)b., section 60-896(b), or section 60-899(d); and 
b.  Meet the anchoring requirements of section 60-897(h)(1)c. 
(i)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles located within: 
(1)  Zones A and AE shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
c.  Be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in section 60-897(h)(1). 
(j)  Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as defined in section 60-904, located within Zones A and AE, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in section 60-897(f) and (g) above, if all other requirements of Section 60-897 and all the following requirements are met. Accessory structures shall: 
(1)  Be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3,000.00; 
(2)  Have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation; 
(3)  Have hydraulic openings, as specified in section 60-897(l)(2), in at least two different walls of the accessory structure; 
(4)  Be located outside the floodway; 
(5)  When possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the primary structure; and 
(6)  Have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the special flood hazard area. 
(k)  Floodways. 
(1)  In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which is designated on the community's flood insurance rate map, unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  In Zones A and AE riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in section 60-897(k)(3) unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing development and anticipated development: 
a.  Will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community; and 
b.  Is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic Analyses," Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37). 
(3)  In Zones A and AE riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain. 
(l)  Enclosed areas below the lowest floor . New construction or substantial improvement of any structure in Zones A and AE that meets the development standards of section 60-897, including the elevation requirements of section 60-897, paragraphs (f), (g), or (h) and is elevated on posts, columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided all the following criteria are met or exceeded: 
(1)  Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in section 60-904; 
(2)  Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement must either: 
a.  Be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
b.  Meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of the enclosed area; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher than one foot above the lowest grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means; 
(3)  The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and 
(4)  The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage. 
(m)  Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones A and AE shall be designed such that: 
(1)  When possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; and 
(2)  A registered professional engineer shall certify that: 
a.  The structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements of this section and the floodway standards of section 60-897(k); and 
b.  The foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. 
(n)  Containment walls. New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall located within: 
(1)  Zones A and AE shall: 
a.  Have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a flood hazard development permit, as required by section 60-894(k). 
(o)  Wharves, piers and docks. New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and docks are permitted in Zones A and AE, in and over water and seaward of mean high tide, if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations; and 
(2)  For commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-898. - Certificate of compliance. 
    No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the planning and development department subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  For new construction or substantial improvement of any elevated structure the applicant shall submit to the planning and development department an elevation certificate completed by a professional land surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with section 60-897, paragraphs (f), (g), or (h). 
(b)  The applicant shall submit written notification to the planning and development department that the development is complete and complies with the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Within ten working days, the planning and development department shall: 
(1)  Review the elevation certificate and the applicant's written notification; and 
(2)  Upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this division, shall issue a certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-899. - Review of subdivisions and development proposals. 
    The planning board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on five or more disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that: 
(a)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(c)  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(e)  Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that structures on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a special flood hazard area, are to be constructed in accordance with section 60-897 of this division. Such requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed by the planning board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-900. - Appeals and variances. 
    The board of appeals of the City of Auburn may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the code enforcement officer or planning board in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
    The board of appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this division consistent with state law and the following criteria: 
(a)  Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(b)  Variances shall be granted only upon: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; and 
(2)  A determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and 
(3)  A showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws or ordinances; and 
(4)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which in this sub-section means: 
a.  That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and 
b.  That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and 
c.  That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and 
d.  That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner. 
(c)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the board of appeals may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  Other criteria of section 60-900 and section 60-897(k) are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of historic structures upon the determination that: 
(1)  The development meets the criteria of section 60-900, paragraphs (a) through (d) above; and 
(2)  The proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(f)  Any applicant who meets the criteria of section 60-900, paragraphs (a) through (e) shall be notified by the board of appeals in writing over the signature of the chairman of the board of appeals that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 per $100.00 of insurance coverage; 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and 
(3)  The applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located in a floodplain. 
(g)  Appeal procedure for administrative and variance appeals. 
(1)  An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the board of appeals by an aggrieved party within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the code enforcement officer or planning board. 
(2)  Upon being notified of an appeal, the code enforcement officer or planning board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the board of appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from. 
(3)  The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within 35 days of its receipt of an appeal request. 
(4)  The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  The board of appeals shall decide all appeals within 35 days after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals. 
(6)  The board of appeals shall submit to the planning and development department and code enforcement officer a report of all variance actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the planning and development department to issue a flood hazard development permit, which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit. 
(7)  Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the board of appeals may take an appeal to superior court in accordance with state laws within forty-five days from the date of any decision of the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 60-901. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this division pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452. 
(b)  The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this division. 
(c)  In addition to any other actions, the code enforcement officer, upon determination that a violation exists, may submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of; 
(1)  The name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location; 
(2)  A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law, regulation, or ordinance; 
(3)  A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation to that authority; 
(4)  Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and 
(5)  A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Secs. 60-902. - Abrogation. 
    The ordinance from which this division derives repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended). 
(Ord. No. 09-06172013, 7-1-2013) 
Secs. 60-903-60-920. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAYLOR POND OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-921. - Purpose. 
(a)  The Taylor Pond Overlay District is intended to address both the present and future special circumstance of the land uses surrounding Taylor Pond. In the past, improper land use development, caused by the allowance of seasonal and yearround living within the same area, the creation of smaller sized lots, the erection of summer camps without compliance with a building code, the placement of such camps on these small lots in close proximity to each other, the use of cesspools, holding tanks, outhouses and septic tank systems installed under the old percolation test for residential waste disposal, the granting of right-of-way easements for private roads without defined widths, and the long continued use of these roads has resulted in pollution of the pond and present land use problems surrounding the pond. With the installation of public sewers, it is the intention of the city to ensure that the improper land use development that has taken place in the past will not continue into the future, while recognizing that it is impractical to attempt to correct all of the past development mistakes. To ensure that public investment in the cleaning up of Taylor Pond is protected, and that where practical, past land use practices are not continued, it is the policy of the to guide the growth of the land uses surrounding Taylor Pond through regulations which allow for the conversion of summer camps and the erection of new dwellings on private roads provided such buildings are connected to a public sewer and that the applicable city codes are complied with. 
(b)  In permitting the conversion of summer camps and the erection of new dwellings on unaccepted private roads, it is recognized by the city that these persons who wish to live at Taylor Pond on a yearround basis assume certain responsibilities for maintaining and plowing their access road and realize that because such access roads are not constructed to city street standards, the travel of personal, service and maintenance vehicles over such access roads can be hindered. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as requiring additional city services to properties on unaccepted private roads not already receiving those services. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.2A) 
Sec. 60-922. - Boundaries. 
    The Taylor Pond Overlay District includes that limited area of the city which is 250 feet horizontal from the high-water mark of Taylor Pond plus the south easterly portion of Taylor Pond as delineated on an overlay map on file in the office of the department of community development and planning, the city clerk and the Androscoggin Country Registry of Deeds. Undersized lots which are divided by the overlay zone shall be subject to the provisions of the overlay zone. In addition, adjacent undersized lots shall also be subject to the provisions of the overlay zone. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.2B) 
Sec. 60-923. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(2)  Conversion of summer camps into yearround single-family dwellings. 
(3)  One-family detached dwelling. 
(4)  Existing private, commercial and public water-related recreational uses. 
(5)  Existing summer camps. 
(b)  Standards for the conversion of summer camps into yearround dwellings and for the erection of new dwellings. 
(1)  Connecting to public sewer is required. 
(2)  Compliance with the city zoning chapter, building code, housing code, electrical code, life safety code, plumbing code for construction, enlargements, extensions, additions, alterations, or change in use or occupancy of building and structure is required. 
(3)  A summer camp which is proposed to be converted to yearround use shall have, if one story, 600 square feet of area; if 11/2 story, not less than 600 square feet on the first floor and not less than 200 square feet above the first floor; if two story, not less than 600 square feet on each floor. 
(4)  The erection of a new dwelling must meet the rear, side, and front yard setback requirements as contained in regulations for the underlying district and the shoreland overlay district, whichever is greater. The horizontal enlargement, extension or addition to an existing dwelling must meet the rear, side yard setback requirements as contained in regulations for the underlying district and a nonconforming front yard setback from the high-water mark may be extended but in no case shall the setback be reduced to a distance less than what exists. For the purposes of this provision, a nonconforming front yard setback from the high-water mark is considered to be less than the distance permitted by section 60-985(a). 
(c)  Nonconforming dwellings and undersized lots. 
(1)  A summer camp which was permitted to be occupied as a yearround residence pursuant to the city ordinances at the time of occupation and subsequently was occupied as a yearround residence prior to October, 1979, is not required to secure a conversion permit as specified in subsection (c)(2) of this section. Such dwelling shall be connected to public sewer. A summer camp which was occupied as a yearround residence prior to June 6, 1968 is not required to secure a conversion permit as specified in subsection (c)(2) of this section. Such dwellings shall be connected to public sewer. 
(2)  The lot area and lot width requirement of any of the underlying district shall not apply to any lot intended to be used for the erection of a dwelling if such lot was lawfully laid out and duly recorded by plan or deed prior September 14, 1960. 
(3)  Adjacent undersized lots, not separated by a private or public road, under one ownership or joint ownership shall be considered as one lot. Adjacent conforming and undersized lot not separated by a private or public road, under one ownership or joint ownership shall be considered as one lot. However, this subsection shall not prevent the division of a lot on which more than one existing dwelling or summer camp is located in two separate lots provided the rear, side and front setback requirements as contained in regulations for the underlying district are met. 
(d)  Permit required. No person shall convert a summer camp into yearround use without first applying to the department of community development and planning for a permit to do so. A permit for such conversion shall be issued to any person who can establish that the converted building will comply with the requirements of subsection (c)(2) of this section. A processing fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall accompany all requests for conversion permits. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.2C) 
Secs. 60-924-60-949. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LAKE AUBURN WATERSHED OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-950. - Purpose. 
    The Lake Auburn Watershed District is intended to maintain safe and healthful environmental conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning ground for fish, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitats; control building sites; provide visual and physical points of access to waters and natural beauty; and protect and maintain the present quality and volume of potable water supplied from the Lake Auburn Watershed to the population of the Auburn-Lewiston area. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.3A) 
Sec. 60-951. - Boundaries and definitions. 
    The Lake Auburn Watershed District is that section of the city in which surface and subsurface waters ultimately flow or drain into Lake Auburn as such section is delineated on a watershed map and survey by the city water district on file in the office of the city water district, the city department of planning and permitting services and the city clerk. The Lake Auburn Watershed District shall be superimposed over underlying districts within such section. Permitted uses in the underlying districts shall continue subject to compliance with the provisions of the Lake Auburn Watershed District. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.3B) 
Sec. 60-952. - Use and environmental regulations. 
(a)  Agricultural uses. All uses of land for chicken farms, cattle farms, horse farms, egg farms, piggeries, sheep farms, stables, crop farming and other agricultural purposes shall be subject to the approval of the city water district. Such approval shall be granted upon a showing that such uses will not cause groundwater contamination or contaminate or disturb the normal course of surface water runoff. 
(b)  Agricultural buffer strip. Where land adjoining Lake Auburn or its perennial tributaries is tilled for agricultural purposes, an untilled buffer strip 50 feet wide shall be retained between the tilled area and the normal high-water mark. This subsection (b) shall not be interpreted as permitting agricultural tillage in any zoning district in which it is not otherwise permitted. 
(c)  Municipal and manure sludge disposal. All spreading and disposal of municipal sludge shall be accomplished in conformance with the Rules of Municipal Sludge Utilization on Land, published by the department of environmental protection in September, 1980. All spreading and disposal of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with Maine Guidelines for Manure and Manure Sludge Disposal on Land, published by the Life Sciences and Agriculture Experiment Station and the Cooperative Extension Service, University of Maine at Orono, and the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission in July, 1972. 
(d)  Erosion control. The following provisions shall be observed for the control of erosion in the Lake Auburn Watershed: 
(1)  Any earth cutting, moving or removal activities that will result in erosion or runoff which is likely to increase sedimentation of Lake Auburn, or any tributaries or other water bodies in the watershed is prohibited. 
(2)  Vegetative cover shall not be removed except in a manner which will minimize erosion. Harvesting of trees shall be permitted only after a plan prepared by a qualified forester is submitted to and approved by the water district. Such plan will be approved or disapproved on the basis of its conformance with good watershed management practice for domestic water supplies. 
(3)  Trees may be cleared, provided the cleared areas are covered with other vegetation, for approved construction and landscaping. Where such clearing is extended to the shoreline, a cleared opening or openings not greater than 30 feet in width for every 100 feet of shoreline (measured along the high-water mark) may be created in the strip extending 50 feet inland from the normal high-water mark. For purposes of this section, clearing is the removal of adjacent dominant trees which extend into the canopy and shrubs within ten feet of the shoreline. Where natural vegetation is removed, it shall be replaced with other vegetation which is equally effective in retarding erosion and preserving natural beauty. When the vegetative cover is changed in areas greater than three acres, a plan shall be filed with the city water district indicating the changes so that a record can be maintained of watershed water yields to the system. 
(e)  Private sewage disposal systems. The following regulations shall be adhered to in the development of private sewage disposal systems in the Lake Auburn Watershed: 
(1)  Subsurface absorption areas shall not be permitted on sites on which the highest seasonal groundwater table, bedrock, or other impervious layer is less than 36 inches below the bottom of the organic horizon. Not less than 24 inches of suitable soil shall be present below the bottom of the subsurface absorption area. The bottom of such subsurface absorption area shall not be less than 12 inches below the bottom of the organic horizon measured from the lowest point on the subsurface absorption area. 
(2)  Within areas containing soils described as deep, loose and sandy or gravelly and which contain more than 70 percent sand as shown on table 9-3 of the state plumbing code, part II (April 25, 1975), no subsurface absorption area shall be installed closer than 300 feet to the normal high-water mark of any lake, pond, or yearround or intermittent stream. Where the daily sewage flow is or is reasonably likely to be in excess of 2,000 gallons, the system shall be located at least 1,000 feet from the normal high-water mark of any lake, pond or yearround or intermittent stream. 
(3)  The city water district shall have the right to inspect any system within the Lake Auburn Watershed District during its construction and operation and may notify the health office, police chief, local plumbing inspector or housing inspector who shall require the abatement of such defects or malfunctions. 
(4)  The local plumbing inspector shall furnish a copy of all site investigation reports in the Lake Auburn Watershed District to the city water district. 
(5)  Replacement or reconstruction of private residential sewage disposal systems in existence and in use on December 17, 1983 shall not be subject to the requirements of this section but shall be required to comply with the current state plumbing code. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.3C) 
Sec. 60-953. - Dimensional regulations; building setbacks. 
    All buildings and structures, except those requiring direct access to the water as an operational necessity, shall be constructed not less than 75 feet inland from the normal high-water mark. Operational necessity shall include private docks, but shall not include boathouses, storage sheds, garages or other structures. Marinas and boat rental facilities shall not be permitted within 75 feet of the normal high-water mark of Lake Auburn. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.3D) 
Sec. 60-954. - Conflicts. 
    In any case in which a provision of this section conflicts with a provision of any other section of this chapter, the provision which establishes the more stringent standard shall apply. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.3E) 
Secs. 60-955-60-981. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT (SLO)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, §§ 5.4A-5.4BB, adopted Sept. 7, 2010, repealed the former div. 5, §§ 60-982-60-990, and enacted a new div. 5 as set out herein. The former div. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 21, 2009, §§ 5.4A-5.4I. 

Sec. 60-982. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this Shoreland Overlay District (SLO) is to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect freshwater wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4A, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-983. - Authority. 
    This SLO district has been created in accordance with the provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 435-449. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4B, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-984. - Applicability. 
    This SLO district applies to all land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of those areas noted on the official shoreland zoning map for the city and all land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream. 
    This SLO district also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other structure extending or located below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4C, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-985. - Effective date. 
    The SLO district has been adopted by the municipal legislative body on September 7, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4D, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-986. - Severability. 
    Should any section or provision of this division be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the division. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4E, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-987. - Conflicts with other ordinances. 
    Whenever a provision of this division conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this chapter or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the municipality, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4F, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-988. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Unless otherwise set forth on the official shoreland zoning map, district boundary lines are property lines, the centerlines of streets, roads and rights-of-way, and the boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. The perimeters of the SLO district shall be superimposed over the underlying zoning districts. The provisions of the underlying zoning district shall be adhered to subject to compliance with the provisions of the SLO district. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the board of appeals shall be the final authority as to location. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4G, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-989. - Land use requirements. 
    Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4H, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-990. - Nonconformance. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of this district to promote land use conformities, except that nonconforming conditions that existed before the effective date of this division or amendments thereto shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in section 60-990. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a nonconforming condition shall not be permitted to become more nonconforming. 
(b)  General. 
(1)  Transfer of ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and the new owner may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Repair and maintenance. This section allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations that do not involve expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and such other changes in a nonconforming use or structure as federal, state, or local building and safety codes may require. 
(c)  Nonconforming structures. 
(1)  Expansions. A nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the structure and is in accordance with subparagraphs a. and b. below. 
a.  After January 1, 1989, if any portion of a structure is less than the required setback from the normal high-water line of a water body or tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland, that portion of the structure shall not be expanded, as measured in floor area or volume, by 30 percent or more, during the lifetime of the structure. If a replacement structure conforms with the requirements of section 30-990(c)(3), and is less than the required setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland, the replacement structure may not be expanded if the original structure existing on January 1, 1989, had been expanded by 30 percent in floor area and volume since that date. 
b.  Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a nonconforming structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the director of planning and permitting, basing a decision on the criteria specified in section 60-990(c)(2). Relocation, below. If the completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure, except for expansion in conformity with section 60-990(c)(1)a. above, and the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by more than three additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the structure (from original ground level to the bottom of the first floor sill), it shall not be considered to be an expansion of the structure. 
(2)  Relocation. A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the director of planning and permitting, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of state law and the State of Maine subsurface wastewater disposal rules (rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the law and said rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming. 
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical extent, the director of planning and permitting shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order to relocate a structure, the director of planning and permitting shall require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows: 
a.  Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native tree, three feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than 50 percent of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that were removed. 
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed. 
b.  Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof. 
(3)  Reconstruction or replacement. Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed, or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced provided that a permit is obtained within 18 months of the date of said damage, destruction, or removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the director of planning and permitting or its designee in accordance with the purposes of this section. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its non-conformity. If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback it shall not be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to subsection (c)(1) above, as determined by the nonconforming floor area and volume of the reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of floor area and volume of the original structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with subsection (c)(2) above. 
Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50 percent or less of the market value, or damaged or destroyed by 50 percent or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the code enforcement officer within one year of such damage, destruction, or removal. 
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback to the greatest practical extent the director of planning and permitting or its designee shall consider, in addition to the criteria in section I(3)(b) above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any. 
(4)  Change of use of a nonconforming structure. The use of a nonconforming structure may not be changed to another use unless the director of planning and permitting, after receiving a written application, determines that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream, or wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than the existing use. 
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the director of planning and permitting shall require written documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and historic resources, and functionally water-dependent uses. 
(d)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Expansions. Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited, except that nonconforming residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the planning board, be expanded within existing residential structures or within expansions of such structures as allowed in subsection (c)(1)a. above. 
(2)  Resumption prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a nonconforming use except that the planning board may, for good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one-year extension to that time period. This provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five-year period. 
(3)  Change of use. An existing nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent properties and resources than the former use, as determined by the planning board. The determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made according to criteria listed in subsection (c)(4) above. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4I, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-991. - Establishment of Shoreland Resource Protection District Overlay. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this overlay zone is to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect freshwater wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in natural resource areas. 
    The resource protection district includes areas in which development would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural values. This district shall include the following areas: 
(1)  Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater wetlands, and wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers, which are rated "moderate" or "high" value waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data layer maintained by either MDIF&W or the department as of May 1, 2006. For the purposes of this paragraph "wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers" shall mean areas characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils that are contiguous with a great pond or river, and have a surface elevation at or below the water level of the great pond or river during the period of normal high water. "Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers" are considered to be part of that great pond or river. 
(2)  Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20 percent or greater. 
(3)  Areas of two or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal high water. 
(4)  Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or river bed movement. 
(5)  Properties owned by or under development restriction easements controlled by the Lake Auburn Watershed Protection Commission that are deemed to be appropriate for resource protection zoning by a vote of the commission. 
(b)  Use regulations. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted subject to the requirements of article V of this chapter: 
a.  Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures. 
b.  Forest management activities except for timber harvesting and land management road. 
c.  Soils and water conservation practices. 
d.  Fire prevention activities. 
e.  Wildlife management practices. 
f.  Surveying and resource analysis. 
g.  Emergency operations. 
h.  Structures accessory to allowed uses. 
i.  Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and trails. 
j  Mineral exploration. 
k.  Individual private camp sites. 
l.  Filling and earth moving of less than ten cubic yards. 
m.  Uses similar to allowed uses. 
n  Conversion of seasonal residences to yearround residences. 
(2)  Special exception uses. The following uses are permitted by special exception after approval by the planning board in accordance with the provisions of article XVI, div. 3, and article XII [of this chapter]: 
a.  Mineral extraction including sand and gravel extraction. 
b.  Agriculture. 
c.  Aquaculture. 
d.  Principal structures and uses including driveways. 
e.  Filling and earth moving of greater than ten cubic yards. 
f.  Uses similar to uses requiring special exception approval. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. All structures in this district except as noted shall be subject to the following dimensional regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area, width and depth. No lot shall be created and/or no building shall be erected on a lot containing less than the minimum lot size or measuring less than the minimum lot width or lot depth required for the underlying zoning district identified for the property where any activity is proposed. 
(2)  Density. The density of dwelling units shall not exceed the required density for the underlying zoning district identified for the property where any activity is proposed. 
(3)  Yard requirements. The rear, side and front yard requirements shall not be less than that required for the underlying zoning district for the property where any activity is proposed. 
(4)  Height. The height of all principal or accessory structures shall be limited to 35 feet in height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission towers, windmills, antennas and similar structures having no floor area. 
(5)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4J, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-992. - Principal and accessory structures. 
(a)  All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of great ponds classified GPA and rivers that flow to great ponds classified GPA, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, except that in general development areas the setback from the normal high-water line shall be at least 25 feet, horizontal distance. Lots less than 120 feet deep measured at right angles to the shoreline which were in existence on or before December 17, 1973, shall have a shoreline setback requirement of 50 percent of the lot depth. In the resource protection district the setback requirement shall be 250 feet, horizontal distance, except for structures, roads, parking spaces or other regulated objects specifically allowed in that district in which case the setback requirements specified above shall apply. 
    For the purpose of this section the term "general development areas" includes all areas were the underlying zoning is identified as General Business, General Business II, Central Business I, Central Business II, Central Business III, Industrial or Multi-Family Urban districts, except where these districts fall within the Taylor Pond or Lake Auburn watersheds or on the east shore of Bobbin Mill Brook. 
    In addition: 
(1)  The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to structures which require direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining walls, nor to other functionally water-dependent uses. 
(2)  On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and it is not possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream or wetland setbacks, the code enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a single accessory structure, with no utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such accessory structure shall not exceed 80 square feet in area nor eight feet in height, and shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream as practical and shall meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary stream than the principal structure. 
(b)  Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are permitted in the underlying zoning district, shall not exceed 35 feet in height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area. 
(c)  The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures, including basements, shall be elevated and constructed in accordance with provisions of this chapter, art. XII, div. 2, Floodplain Overlay District. Accessory structures may be placed in accordance with the standards of that division and need not meet the elevation requirements. 
(d)  The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces, within the SLO district shall not exceed 20 percent of the lot or a portion thereof, located within the SLO district, including land area previously developed, except in the general development areas adjacent to rivers that do not flow to great ponds classified GPA, where lot coverage shall not exceed 70 percent. 
(e)  Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not exist; 
(2)  The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland; 
(3)  The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a site eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with vegetative plantings; 
(4)  The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24 inches; 
(5)  Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers, streams, and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) flood insurance rate maps or flood hazard boundary maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils. 
(6)  The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the setback area, including patios and decks; and 
(7)  A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet the following characteristics: 
a.  The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation. Where natural ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark mulch; 
b.  Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
c.  Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area; 
d.  A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required, measured perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland; 
e.  A footpath not to exceed the standards in section 60-1004(b)(1), may traverse the buffer; 
(f)  Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the code enforcement officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided: that the structure is limited to a maximum of four feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4K, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-993. - Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland. 
(a)  Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as to control erosion. 
(b)  The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas. 
(c)  The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries. 
(d)  The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf shall not be wider than six feet for non-commercial uses. 
(e)  No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity. 
(f)  New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to the planning board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained from the department of environmental protection, pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act. 
(g)  No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any district. 
(h)  Except in the general development areas, structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed 20 feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4L, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-994. - Campgrounds. 
    Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under state licensing procedures and the following: 
(1)  Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land, not including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site. 
(2)  The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility and service buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4M, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-995. - Individual private campsites. 
    Individual private campsites not associated with campgrounds are allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this section, or 30,000 square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is less, may be permitted. 
(2)  Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland. 
(3)  Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The recreational vehicle shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle. 
(4)  The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a resource protection district shall be limited to 1,000 square feet. 
(5)  A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the local plumbing inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land owner is required. 
(6)  When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than 120 days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met, including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4N, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-996. - Commercial and industrial uses. 
    The following new commercial and industrial uses are prohibited within the shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and rivers and streams which flow to great ponds classified GPA: 
(1)  Auto washing facilities 
(2)  Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops 
(3)  Chemical and bacteriological laboratories 
(4)  Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, other than amounts normally associated with individual households or farms 
(5)  Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping 
(6)  Dry cleaning establishments 
(7)  Electronic circuit assembly 
(8)  Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer 
(9)  Metal plating, finishing, or polishing 
(10)  Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property as use occurs and except for storage and sales associated with marinas 
(11)  Photographic processing 
(12)  Printing 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4O, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-997. - Parking areas. 
(a)  Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements for structures for the district in which such areas are located. The setback requirement for parking areas serving public boat launching facilities in districts other than the general development areas shall be no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if the planning board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline or tributary stream. 
(b)  Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site. 
(c)  In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Typical parking space: Approximately ten feet wide and 20 feet long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be 40 feet long. 
(2)  Internal travel aisles: Approximately 20 feet wide. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4P, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-998. - Roads and driveways. 
    The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features. 
(1)  Roads and driveways shall be set back at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river that flows to a great pond classified GPA, and 75 feet, horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the planning board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or driveway setback requirement shall be no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. 
On slopes of greater than 20 percent the road and/or driveway setback shall be increased by ten feet, horizontal distance, for each five percent increase in slope above 20 percent. 
Section 60-997(a) does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or driveways that provide access to permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and driveways providing access to permitted structures within the setback area shall comply fully with the requirements of this section except for that portion of the road or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure. 
(2)  Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of their setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland. 
(3)  New roads and driveways are prohibited in a resource protection district except that the planning board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to permitted uses within the district. A road or driveway may also be approved by the planning board in a resource protection district, upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the district. When a road or driveway is permitted in a resource protection district the road and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. 
(4)  Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two horizontal to one vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation control contained in section 60-1004. 
(5)  Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten percent except for segments of less than 200 feet. 
(6)  In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least 50 feet plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip. 
(7)  Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply: 
a.  Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along the road, or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table: 
Grade 
(Percent) Spacing 
(Feet) 0-2 250 3-5 200-135 6-10 100-80 11-15 80-60 16-20 60-45 21 + 40  
b.  Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is ten percent or less. 
c.  On sections having slopes greater than ten percent, ditch relief culverts shall be placed at approximately a 30-degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the centerline of the road or driveway. 
d.  Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate materials. 
(8)  Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other stormwater runoff control installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective functioning. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4Q, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-999. - Stormwater runoff. 
(a)  All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize stormwater runoff from the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas, shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwaters. 
(b)  Stormwater runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper functioning. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4R, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1000. - Septic waste disposal. 
    All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following: a) clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated fill extensions, shall not extend closer than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland and b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the SLO district. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4S, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1001. - Essential services. 
(a)  Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways and existing service corridors. 
(b)  The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not allowed in a resource protection district, except to provide services to a permitted use within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists. Where allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts. 
(c)  Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and related equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4T, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1002. - Agriculture. 
(a)  All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. §§ 4201-4209). 
(b)  Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, or within 75 feet horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. All manure storage areas within the shoreland zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated stormwater. 
(c)  Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000 square feet in surface area, within the shoreland zone shall require a conservation plan to be filed with the planning board. Nonconformance with the provisions of said plan shall be considered to be a violation of this division. 
(d)  There shall be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies; nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and freshwater wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this division and not in conformance with this provision may be maintained. 
(e)  Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of other water bodies; nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a conservation plan. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4U, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1003. - Timber harvesting. 
(a)  In a resource protection district abutting a great pond, timber harvesting shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  Within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line, timber harvesting may be conducted when the following conditions are met: 
a.  The ground is frozen; 
b.  There is no resultant soil disturbance; 
c.  The removal of trees is accomplished using a cable or boom and there is no entry of tracked or wheeled vehicles into the 75-foot strip of land; 
d.  There is no cutting of trees less than six inches in diameter; no more than 30 percent of the trees six inches or more in diameter, measured at four and one-half feet above ground level, are cut in any ten-year period; and a well-distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation remains; and 
e.  A licensed professional forester has marked the trees to be harvested prior to a permit being issued by the municipality. 
(2)  Beyond the 75-foot strip referred to in subsection (a)(1) above, timber harvesting is permitted in accordance with subsection (b) below except that in no case shall the average residual basal area of trees over four and one-half inches in diameter at four and one-half feet above ground level be reduced to less than 30 square feet per acre. 
(b)  Except in areas as described in subsection (a) above, timber harvesting shall conform with the following provisions: 
(1)  Selective cutting of no more than 40 percent of the total volume of trees four inches or more in diameter measured at four and one-half feet above ground level on any lot in any ten-year period is permitted. In addition: 
a.  Within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be no clearcut openings and a well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation, including existing ground cover, shall be maintained. 
b.  At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of other water bodies or the upland edge of a wetland, harvesting operations shall not create single clearcut openings greater than 10,000 square feet in the forest canopy. Where such openings exceed 5,000 square feet they shall be at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such clearcut openings shall be included in the calculation of total volume removal. Volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area. 
(2)  Timber harvesting operations exceeding the 40 percent limitation in subsection (b)(1) above, may be allowed by the planning board upon a clear showing, including a forest management plan signed by a Maine licensed professional forester, that such an exception is necessary for good forest management and will be carried out in accordance with the purposes of the SLO district. The planning board shall notify the commissioner of the department of environmental protection of each exception allowed, within 14 days of the planning board's decision. 
(3)  No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body. In all other areas slash shall either be removed or disposed of in such a manner that it lies on the ground and no part thereof extends more than four feet above the ground. Any debris that falls below the normal high-water line of a water body or tributary stream shall be removed. 
(4)  Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as travel routes except when: 
a.  Surface waters are frozen; and 
b.  The activity will not result in any ground disturbance. 
(5)  All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert, except in areas with low banks and channel beds which are composed of gravel, rock or similar hard surface which would not be eroded or otherwise damaged. 
(6)  Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and designed so as to prevent water runoff from directly entering the water body or tributary stream. Upon completion of timber harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be removed and areas of exposed soil revegetated. 
(7)  Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where the operation of machinery used in timber harvesting results in the exposure of mineral soil shall be located such that an unscarified strip of vegetation of at least 75 feet, horizontal distance, in width for slopes up to ten percent shall be retained between the exposed mineral soil and the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland. For each ten percent increase in slope, the unscarified strip shall be increased by 20 feet, horizontal distance. The provisions of this paragraph apply only to a face sloping toward the water body or wetland, provided, however, that no portion of such exposed mineral soil on a back face shall be closer than 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4V, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1004. - Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber harvesting. 
(a)  In a resource protection district abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line, except to remove safety hazards. 
    Elsewhere, in any resource protection district the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district. 
(b)  Except in areas as described in section 60-1003(a), above, and except to allow for the development of permitted uses, within a strip of land extending 100 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows: 
(1)  There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a footpath not to exceed six feet in width as measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created. 
(2)  Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of section 60-1003(b)(2) a "well-distributed stand of trees" adjacent to a great pond classified GPA or a river or stream flowing to a great pond classified GPA, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of 24 or more in each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1,250 square feet) area as determined by the following rating system. 
Diameter of Tree at 41/2 feet 
Above Ground Level (inches) Points 2 - < 4 in. 1 4 - < 8 in. 2 8 - < 12 in. 4 12 inches or greater 8  
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a "well-distributed stand of trees" is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular area. 
The following shall govern in applying this point system: 
a.  The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the landowner or lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer; 
b.  Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot; 
c.  Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed except as otherwise allowed by this division; 
d.  Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to the minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by this division; 
e.  Where conditions permit, no more than 50 percent of the points on any 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter. 
For the purposes of section 60-1003(b)(2) "other natural vegetation" is defined as retaining existing vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at least five saplings less than two inches in diameter at four and one-half feet above ground level for each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not exist, no woody stems less than two inches in diameter can be removed until five saplings have been recruited into the plot. 
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40 percent of the total volume of trees four inches or more in diameter, measured at four and one-half feet above ground level may be removed in any ten-year period. 
(3)  In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as described in section 60-1003 paragraphs (b) and (b)(1) above. 
(4)  Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom one-third of the tree is allowed. 
(5)  In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present. 
Section 60-1003(b) does not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas as long as cleared areas are limited to the minimum area necessary. 
(c)  At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any ten-year period, selective cutting of not more than 40 percent of the volume of trees four inches or more in diameter, measured four and one-half feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included in the 40 percent calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area. 
    In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to, principal and accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate, 25 percent of the lot area within the shoreland zone or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously cleared. This provision shall not apply to the general development areas. 
(d)  Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this section. 
(e)  Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of section 60-1003. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4W, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1005. - Erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a)  All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall also require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions for: 
(1)  Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil. 
(2)  Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches. 
(3)  Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or rip-rap. 
(b)  In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible. 
(c)  Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion. 
(d)  Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one week from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within nine months of the initial date of exposure. In addition: 
(1)  Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one bale per 500 square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established. 
(2)  Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be required to maintain the mulch cover. 
(3)  Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences. 
(e)  Natural and manmade drainageways and drainage outlets shall be protected from erosion from water flowing through them. Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry water from a 25-year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4X, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1006. - Soils. 
    All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4Y, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1007. - Water quality. 
    No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the state any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair designated uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or wetland. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4Z, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1008. - Archaeological site. 
    Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least 20 days prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments received from the commission prior to rendering a decision on the application. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4AA, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 60-1008.1. - Installation of public utility service. 
    A public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind may not install services to any new structure located in the shoreland zone unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under this or any previous ordinance has been issued by the appropriate municipal officials or other written arrangements have been made between the municipal officials and the utility. 
(Ord. No. 011-09072010-07, § 5.4BB, 9-7-2010) 
DIVISION 6. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 60-1009. - Manufactured Housing Overlay District (MHO). 
    This district is intended to establish minimum standards for the placement of manufactured housing in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4358, Regulation of Manufactured Housing, to restrict the location of older mobile homes and trailers, to require that manufactured housing, as defined in this division, be aesthetically compatible in terms of design standards with site-built homes and to provide alternatives for the location of affordable and safe housing within the city. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.5A) 
Sec. 60-1010. - Boundaries and definitions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Manufactured housing means a structural unit designed for occupancy, and constructed in a manufacturing facility and then transported by the use of its own chassis, or placed on an independent chassis, to a building site. The term "manufactured housing" includes any type of building which is constructed at a manufacturing facility and then transported to a building site where it is utilized for housing and may be purchased or sold by a dealer in the interim. For purposes of this section, two types of manufactured housing are included. They are: 
(1)  Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called "newer mobile homes," which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development standards, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, are 14 body feet or more in width and are 700 or more square feet, and which are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term "manufactured housing" includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this subsection (1) of this definition, except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the state's department of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, section 5401 et seq.; and 
(2)  Those units commonly called "modular homes," which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the State's Manufactured Housing Act and regulations, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, which are not constructed on a permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or electrical systems contained therein. 
(b)  Overlay district boundaries. The manufactured housing overlay districts are those sections of the city shown on an overlay map on file in the offices of the department of community development and planning and the city clerk. The manufactured housing overlay district shall be superimposed over underlying zoning districts and any use shall be subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of the underlying district. Permitted uses in the underlying districts shall continue subject to compliance with the provisions of their overlay district. Nothing in this section shall permit uses in districts where such uses are not otherwise permitted. 
(1)  Site-built home. A building constructed on-site which is designed to be used as a dwelling on foundations when connected to the required utilities. 
(2)  Older mobile homes, trailers. Any factory-built home which fails to meet the definition of manufactured housing and more specifically, any mobile constructed prior to June 15, 1976, shall be restricted to approved mobile home parks. 
(3)  Design standards. Shall include, but are not limited to requirements for building width, roof pitch, roof material, siding material, foundations, additions and siting that are similar in character to traditional site-built residential homes. Design standards shall not apply to manufactured housing located in approved mobile home parks. 
(c)  Siting. Siting of a dwelling on a lot is considered to be the angle at which a dwelling is placed in relation to frontage, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Design standards. All dwelling units in this district shall be subject to the following minimum design standards: 
(1)  Building dimensions. No building shall be less than 14 body feet in width and shall contain not less than 700 square feet of habitable living space. 
(2)  Roof construction. All roofs shall be covered with standard asphalt shingles and have a minimum pitch of 3.5 to 12. Roofs covering manufactured housing shall provide certified engineering data to show that roof additions will meet the performance criteria of the Auburn Building Code for snow and wind loads; the roof shall extend for the full length of the structure. 
(3)  Exterior walls. Exterior walls shall have traditional site-built appearance and may be materials such as clapboards, shingles and shakes, including synthetic or metal siding manufactured to closely resemble clapboards, shingles and shakes. Walls may also include masonry, wood, board-and-batten, and Texture 111 exterior plywood, but shall not include artificial masonry or fake board-and-batten made from metal. 
(4)  Skirting. Skirting is required except for dwellings placed on a frost wall or full foundations. Skirting shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  The material used is consistent with the materials permitted by subsection (b) of this section; 
b.  The skirting is extended either to the foundation or as close to the slab as possible that will still permit proper ventilation; 
c.  The skirting shall totally enclose the unit and be permanently affixed and fully supported by suitable framing to the unit. 
(5)  Foundations. The foundation shall be a permanent concrete reinforced six inches slab; concrete or masonry frost wall, wood or full basement. Al foundations shall meet the performance criteria of the Auburn Building Code. 
(6)  Enclosed additions. Additions shall have the same exterior wall material as permitted by subsection (b) of this section, except that glass may be used for greenhouse additions. All additions shall have an asphalt shingled roof with a minimum pitch of 3.5 to 12. 
(7)  Anchoring. All mobile homes shall be anchored to the foundation or slab by attaching the frame to six-inch eye bolts, set at the four corners of the foundation or slab, with one-quarter inch steel cable or equivalent. All mobile homes shall be anchored to the foundation and elevated as required by section 60-668. 
(8)  Transportation components. Appendages required for transportation, which shall include but not limited to the tongue, axles and wheels shall be removed or enclosed so as not to be visible. 
(9)  Siting. Dwellings shall be sited on the lot subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Dwellings less than 24 feet in width. 
1.  Dwellings sited in excess of 15 degrees but less than 30 degrees shall have an enclosed addition equal to 15 percent of the floor area of the structure. The addition shall project out not less than 20 percent of the length of the structure at not greater than a 60 degree angle. Additions shall not be permitted attached to and extended from the narrow side of the dwelling. 
2.  Dwellings sited in excess of 30 degrees but less than 45 degrees shall meet all of the criteria set forth in subsection (9)a1 of this section provided that such addition be located on the street side area of the lot. 
3.  No dwellings less than 24 feet in width shall be allowed to be sited on a lot in excess of 45 degrees unless it is sited a minimum of 100 feet from the front yard setback and screened from view of the public right-of-way. 
b.  Dwellings 24 feet or greater in width shall not be subject to siting standards. 
c.  Additions shall include enclosed structures such as breezeways, garages and extensions to the interior living space. Carports, open breezeways, decks and patios shall not be counted as an addition. 
d.  Angles of siting are based upon the lot frontage being the horizontal or parallel line. 
e.  Dwellings to be located on a curve shall have the angle of siting determined by locating a tangent point at the midpoint of the curve arc. Lines shall then be drawn parallel and perpendicular to such point. 
(10)  Fuel storage tank. Any fuel storage tank must be placed either in the basement, crawl space or in an attached addition or be screened so as not to be visible from adjacent properties or any street, within one year of installation. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, §§ 5.5B, 5.5C) 
Secs. 60-1011-60-1033. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 60-1034. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the standards in this article relating to smoke, noise, vibration, odors, air pollution and electrical disturbance of infrastructure is to ensure that no new development occurs which may have an environmental impact that could be detrimental to the city or property owners or that may have a direct impact to property caused by nuisances directly or indirectly associated with the above environmental issues. The standards provided in this article shall apply to all nonresidential uses in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.6A) 
Sec. 60-1035. - Smoke. 
(a)  For the purposes of determining the density of equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart, as adopted and published by the United States Department of Interior, Bureau of Mines Information Circular 8333, May 1967, shall be used. The Ringlemann number referred to in this section refers to the number of the area of the Ringlemann Chart that coincides most nearly with the visual density of equivalent opacity of the emission of smoke observed. For example, a reading of Ringlemann No. 1 indicates a 20 percent density of the smoke observed. 
(b)  All measurements shall be taken as close to the point emission of the smoke as reasonably possible. 
(c)  In all zones, no development may emit from a vent, stack, chimney or combustion process any smoke that exceeds a density or equivalent capacity of Ringlemann No. 1, except that an emission does not exceed a density or equivalent capacity of Ringlemann No. 2, is permissible for a duration of not more than four minutes during any eight-hour period if the source of such emission is not located within 250 feet of a residential district. 
(d)  In the industrial zone, no development use may emit from a vent, stack, chimney or combustion process any smoke that exceeds a density or equivalent capacity of Ringlemann No. 2, except that an emission that does not exceed a density or equivalent capacity of Ringlemann No. 3 is permissible for a duration not more than four minutes during any eight-hour period if the source of emission is not located within 500 feet of a residential district. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.6B) 
Sec. 60-1036. - Noise. 
(a)  A decibel is a measure of a unit of sound pressure. Since sound waves having the same decibel level sound louder or softer to the human ear depending upon the frequency of the sound wave in cycles per sound (i.e., whether the pitch of the sound is high or low) and A-weighted filter constructed in accordance with the specifications of the American National Standards Institute, which automatically takes account of the varying effect on the human ear of different pitches, shall be used on any sound level meter taking measurements required by this section. And accordingly, all measurements are expressed in dB(A) to reflect the use of this A-weighted filter. 
(b)  The standards established in the table set forth in subsection (c) of this section are expressed in terms of the equivalent sound level (Leq), which must be calculated by taking 100 instantaneous A-weighted sound levels at then-second intervals and computing the Leq. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the following table establishes the maximum permissible noise levels for nonresidential uses. Measurements shall be taken at the boundary line of the lot where the nonresidential use is located, and, as indicated, the maximum permissible noise levels vary according to the zoning of the lot adjacent to the lot on which the use is located. 
Zoning of Adjacent Lot Residential General Business Light Industrial Maximum sound level 50 60 70  
(d)  Impact noises are sounds that occur intermittently rather than continuously. Impact noises generated by sources that do not operate more than one minute in any one-hour period are permissible up to a level of ten dB(A) in excess of the figures listed in the table, except that this higher level of permissible noise shall not apply from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. when the adjacent lot is zoned residential. The impact noise shall be measured using the fast response of the sound level meter. 
(e)  Noise resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.6C) 
Sec. 60-1037. - Vibration. 
(a)  No development in any zone may generate any ground-transmitted vibration that is perceptible to the human sense of touch measured at: 
(1)  The outside boundary of the immediate space occupied by the enterprise generating the vibration if the enterprise is one of several located on a lot; or 
(2)  The lot line if the enterprise generating the vibration is the only enterprise located on a lot. 
(b)  No development in any zone may generate any ground-transmitted vibration in excess of the limits set forth in subsection (e) of this section. Vibration shall be measured at any adjacent lot line or residential district line as indicated in the table set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)  The instrument used to measure vibrations shall be a three-component measuring system capable of simultaneous measurement of vibration in three mutually perpendicular directions. 
(d)  The vibration maximums set forth in subsection (e) of this section are stated in terms of particle velocity, which may be measured directly with suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and frequency. When computed, the following formula shall be used: 
    PV = 6.28 F × D 
Where: ;b0;[W1] PV = Particle velocity, inches-per-second 
F = Vibration frequency, cycles-per-second 
D = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration, inches 
The maximum velocity shall be the vector sum of the three components recorded. 
(e)  Table of maximum ground-transmitted vibration: 
Particle velocity, inches-per-second Adjacent Lot Line Residential District 0.020 0.02  
(f)  The values stated in subsection (e) of this section may be multiplied by two for impact vibrations, i.e., discrete vibration pulsations not exceeding one second in duration and having a pause of at least one second between pulses. 
(g)  Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(h)  Vibration resulting from the railroads passing through the city shall be exempt from these standards. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.6D) 
Sec. 60-1038. - Odors. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "odor threshold" is defined as the minimum concentration in air of a gas, vapor, or particulate matter than can be detected by the abutters of the property in question. 
(b)  No development in any zone may generate any odor that reaches the odor threshold, measured at the lot line of the enterprise generating the odor. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.6E) 
Sec. 60-1039. - Air pollution. 
(a)  Any development that emits an air contaminant as defined by the state department of environmental protection shall comply with applicable state standards concerning air pollution. 
(b)  No zoning or special exception permit may be issued with respect to any new development covered by subsection (a) of this section until the state department of environmental protection has certified to the city that the appropriate state permits have been received by the developer, or that the developer will be eligible to receive such permits and that the development is otherwise in compliance with applicable air pollution laws. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.6F) 
Sec. 60-1040. - Electrical disturbance or interference. 
    No use may: 
(1)  Create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operations or equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance; or 
(2)  Otherwise cause, create or contribute to the interference with electronic signals (including television and radio broadcasting transmissions) to the extent that the operation of any equipment not owned by the creator of such disturbance is adversely affected. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.6G) 
Secs. 60-1041-60-1063. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PHOSPHORUS CONTROL 

Sec. 60-1064. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to provide protection against additional phosphorus export to Taylor Pond and Lake Auburn from new land uses and changes in existing land uses by ensuring that development within the watersheds does not generate more phosphorus than the water bodies can handle and by eliminating or reducing existing sources of phosphorus. 
(b)  Phosphorus, a nutrient, stimulates algal growth, the main cause of water quality decline. The primary source of new and increasing phosphorus loading in the state lakes is land development: residential, commercial and industrial. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.7A) 
Sec. 60-1065. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acceptable increase in lake phosphorus concentration (C) is based upon water quality and the city's selected level of protection. For Taylor Pond the number is 0.75; for Lake Auburn the number is 0.5. 
    Direct watershed means any land area which contributes storm-water runoff by either surface or subsurface flow to Taylor Pond or Lake Auburn without such runoff first passing through an upstream lake. 
    Future area to be developed (D) means an estimate of the acreage in the city's share of the direct watersheds that will be developed during the planning period of 50 years. For Taylor Pond, the estimated future developed acreage is 715.3; for Lake Auburn, the estimated future developed acreage is 1,180.0. 
    Lake Auburn means the Lake Auburn Watershed regulated by this chapter is all land areas within the direct watershed of Lake Auburn as defined on the attached map entitled Lake Auburn Watershed Map. 
    Per-acre phosphorus allocation (P) means the acceptable increase of phosphorus export per acre in the watershed as determined by solving the following equation (P) = (FC)/(D). For Taylor Pond, the phosphorus allocation is 0.036; for Lake Auburn, the phosphorus allocation is 0.047. 
    Phosphorus export coefficient (F) means the amount of phosphorus export from the watershed each year that will produce a one ppb increase in the lake's phosphorus concentration. For Taylor Pond, the phosphorus coefficient is 35.26 lbs/ppb/year; for Lake Auburn, the phosphorus coefficient is 109.9 lbs/ppb/year. 
    Taylor Pond means the Taylor Pond Watershed regulated by this chapter is all land areas within the direct watershed of Taylor Pond as defined on the attached map entitled "Taylor Pond Watershed Map". 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.7B) 
Sec. 60-1066. - Applicability. 
    This division shall apply to all land areas within the direct watersheds of Taylor Pond and Lake Auburn. The following land uses shall be required to obtain a phosphorus control permit and conform to the standards contained in this division: 
(1)  Any new building or structure with more than 575 square feet of ground floor area. 
(2)  Any expansions or series of expansions of ground floor area of any existing building which increases the area of the ground floor by more than 30 percent of that which exists at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(3)  Any earth moving, brush and tree cutting which impacts 10,000 square feet or more whether accomplished as a single activity or as a series of activities beginning on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall only meet the criteria contained in section 60-1069. 
(4)  Road or driveway construction and reconstruction and parking area construction which affects more than 1,500 square feet of land area whether accomplished as a single activity or as a series of activities beginning on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall only meet the criteria contained in section 60-1069. 
(5)  All projects for which special exception, site plan and subdivision review is required. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.7C) 
Sec. 60-1067. - Exemptions. 
    This division shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Changes of use within an existing structure where no ground floor expansion and/or road, driveway and parking area expansion is planned. 
(2)  Timber management or harvesting operations conducted according to a management plan prepared and supervised by a registered forester (unless required by division 4 of article XII of this chapter) or the city water district. 
(3)  Agricultural uses conducted according to a soil and water conservation plan approved by the Androscoggin County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.7D) 
Sec. 60-1068. - Best management practices. 
    Agriculture, silviculture, mining, chemical use and storage and waste disposal activities should be conducted in accordance with the best management practices (BMPs) as recommended by the department of environmental protection, the state soil and water conservation commission, the cooperative extension service or other appropriate public service agency. New roads and the reconstruction of existing roads, driveways, drainage diversions, ditches and roadside buffers should be designed for the worst storm conditions in accordance with the best management practices (BMPs) recommended by the department of environmental protection, the state soil and water conservation commission, the cooperative extension service or other appropriate public service agency. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.7E) 
Sec. 60-1069. - Erosion and sedimentation controls. 
    A comprehensive erosion and sedimentation control plan, including a proposed program for the maintenance and periodic inspection of all control facilities which will remain after the project is completed and a designation of the responsible party, shall be submitted as follows: 
(1)  Taylor Pond Watershed. A plan designed in accordance with the applicable sections of chapter 8 of the DEP Phosphorous Control and Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide to Evaluating New Development, the latest edition of the Maine Erosion and sediment Control Handbook and all building and environmental protection requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Lake Auburn Watershed. A plan designed in accordance with the applicable sections of chapter 8 of the DEP Phosphorous Control and Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide to Evaluating New Development, the latest edition of the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, and all building and environmental protection requirements of this Code and criteria of the city water district or commission. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.7F) 
Sec. 60-1070. - Submission requirements. 
    All projects subject to review under the provisions of this division shall submit a phosphorus control plan and maintenance provisions meeting the standards set forth in the manual Phosphorus Control and Lake Watersheds A Technical Guide to Evaluating New Development (Maine DEP et al., September 1989, with the Simple Review Method revised in May 1990). 
(1)  Plan submission. Plans shall be submitted and processed in accordance with article XVI of this chapter. In addition to the requirements for submission under this article, the following instructions shall be provided: 
a.  A long-term maintenance plan for all phosphorus control measures including provisions for inspection and repair, designation of responsible parties, contractual obligations and proposed deed restrictions. 
b.  Hydrologic soil class of all areas to be cleared or where clearing will be permitted, with the area indicated in square feet of each lot using the appropriate method as described in the phosphorus control manual. 
c.  All calculations and worksheets in the format of those contained in the phosphorus control manual and detailed construction specifications and diagrams for all control measures. 
d.  A comprehensive erosion and sedimentation control plan, designed in accordance with the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management Practices, March 1991, and and all building and environmental protection requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Review method. 
a.  All projects shall use the standard review method and shall conform to the Phosphorus Allocation standard set forth in this division including the following: Expansions of four lot subdivisions which were previously approved using the simple review method. 
b.  Projects meeting the following criteria may employ the simple review method: 
1.  Minor subdivisions with four or fewer lots provided that these developments contain less than 200 feet of new or upgraded roads and/or all driveways serving residential uses are less than 150 feet in length. 
2.  Activity which includes less than 200 feet of new or upgraded road construction. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial development and expansions. Commercial and industrial development and expansions of commercial and industrial developments and the expansion of multifamily dwelling units, which involve less than 15,000 square feet of disturbed area. All other subdivisions including expansions of previously approved four-lot subdivisions which were reviewed using the simple review method and all other projects shall utilize the standard review method. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.7G) 
Secs. 60-1071-60-1093. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - HISTORIC AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES 

Sec. 60-1094. - Purpose. 
    The provisions set forth in this article are intended to protect the public health and safety, promote the general welfare of the community and conserve the environment by assuring that all projects requiring planning board review are designed and developed in a manner which ensures that adequate provisions are made for protection of historic and archaeological resources; minimizing the adverse impacts on adjacent properties; and fitting the project harmoniously into the fabric of the community. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.8A) 
Sec. 60-1095. - Submission requirements. 
    The location of historic and/or archaeological resources, must be indicated on the plans if the area is located within identified historic or archaeological areas shown on the Maine Historic Preservation Commission Maps in the Community Development Office. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.8B) 
Sec. 60-1096. - Standards of approval. 
    The plan for the development will reflect the natural capabilities of the site to support development. Building lots and support facilities will be clustered in those portions of the site that have the most suitable conditions for development. The development shall include appropriate measures for protecting these resources including, but not limited to, modification of the proposed design of the site, time of construction, and limiting the extent of excavation. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 5.81C) 
Secs. 60-1097-60-1115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - BOARD OF APPEALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 60-1116-60-1129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 60-1130. - Membership. 
    There shall be a board of appeals consisting of seven members and two associate members appointed by the city council. Each member shall be at all times a resident of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.1A) 
Sec. 60-1131. - Term of office. 
    The members and associate members of the board shall serve no more than three consecutive three-year terms. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.1B) 
Sec. 60-1132. - Associate members. 
    An associate member shall have a vote only in the event that one or more regular members of the board are absent or are disqualified from serving on a particular matter because of a conflict of interest. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.1C) 
Sec. 60-1133. - Jurisdiction. 
    The board of appeals shall have jurisdiction over: 
(1)  Interpretation of provisions of the zoning chapter called into question; 
(2)  Administrative appeals from decisions or lack thereof of the building inspector or code enforcement officer in regard to an application for a permit under the zoning chapter; 
(3)  The granting of variances from the requirements of the zoning chapter would cause undue hardship. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.1D) 
Sec. 60-1134. - Board rules. 
    The board shall adopt, and may from time to time amend, rules and regulations to govern the conduct of its business. The tape recording of the board's proceedings, the transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in the proceedings, shall constitute the record. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and conclusion and the appropriate order, relief or denial thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.1E) 
Sec. 60-1135. - Quorum. 
    Five members shall constitute a quorum at any meeting. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.1F) 
Secs. 60-1136-60-1150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS PROCEDURE 

Sec. 60-1151. - Petition. 
    Written petitions for appeal signed by any party in interest shall be filed in duplicate in the office of the municipal officer charged with enforcement of the zoning ordinance, together with the fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, within 30 days from the date of the decision or order. The municipal officer shall forward to the board of appeals, planning director, the chairman of the planning board and the city solicitor, one copy of such petition. The planning director, or in his absence, the chairman of the planning board, shall forward to the board of appeals as soon as possible any pertinent city planning information in his possession bearing on such appeal. The city solicitor shall forward to the board of appeals as soon as possible any pertinent legal information bearing on such appeal. Where no such information is received by the board of appeals by the time of the meeting at which such appeal is scheduled to be heard, it shall be presumed that none was available at that time. In any case in which such planning and legal information is received, it shall be summarized at the public hearing and an opportunity afforded for comment by those interested in the appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.2A) 
Sec. 60-1152. - Public hearing. 
(a)  On each such petition, the board shall hold a public hearing, within 65 days of the filing of the appeal petition. Notice of the time, date, place, appellant name and subject of each such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on two separate dates not more than 12 nor less than three days before the date of such hearing. Notification of the public hearing shall also be sent to the appellant, the planning director, the building inspector, the city manager and all owners of abutting property and property located directly across the street from the site of the property which is the subject of the appeal by mailing to them copies of such notice as published. Notices shall be mailed to such property owners at the addresses appearing for them in the then current property tax listing of the city. Failure of any property owner to receive such mail notice of any such public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing and shall not constitute grounds for objection by such property owner and shall not invalidate any action by the board of appeals on such appeal or application for variance. 
(b)  The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, shall preside at the public hearing. All hearings of the board of appeals shall be open to the public. 
(c)  The chairman shall open the hearing and determine whether a quorum of the board of appeals is present. For each appeal heard, the chairman shall summarize the nature of the appeal, identify all relevant information submitted, determine the board's jurisdiction and the appellant's standing, determine the parties to the action and proceed to accept oral and written testimony from the appellant and the public for and against the appeal. When all parties have been heard, the chairman shall close the hearing or, if additional time is needed, continue it to a later date. 
(d)  The chairman shall determine that the appellant has standing, that is, the right to appear as an appellant before the board. An appellant must hold title to the land, be part owner or have an option to buy or lease property and/or building, in order to have standing. 
(e)  The chairman shall determine the parties to the action. The appellant, municipal officers, planning board, abutting property owners, individuals who might be adversely affected by any decision and any member of the general public attending the meeting who has made specific statements concerning terms of the appeal, may be made party to the action. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.2B) 
Sec. 60-1153. - Decision. 
(a)  The decision of the board shall be made as soon as possible, but not later than 30 days of the public hearing, unless extended by mutual agreement of the board and appellant. Failure of the board to act within 30 days shall be deemed to be the denial of the petition sought, subject to judicial appeal. 
(b)  The board of appeals may by an affirmative vote of a majority of those members present amend or revise a decision of the building inspector, code enforcement officer or of any other municipal officer acting under the zoning ordinance. The board of appeals may permit variances from literal application of the zoning ordinance in accordance with the principles, conditions and procedures set forth in this chapter, subject to the duty of the board to promote the public health, safety, convenience and welfare and to adhere to the central intents and purposes of this chapter. Approval may be subject to conditions, modifications and restrictions as the board of appeals may deem necessary. 
(c)  The board shall keep a record of each appeal entertained, noting the date when received from the building inspector or code enforcement officer, the date of hearing, the applicant or appellant and the date of the decision. The board shall record by resolution the final disposition of every appeal. All of the foregoing shall be public records filed with the office charged with enforcement of the zoning ordinance. Notice of the decision shall be mailed within seven days to the applicant or appellant. Each notice shall specify that judicial appeals shall be made pursuant to the terms of section 60-1208. 
(d)  The right to proceed under any variance or petition granted under the terms of this chapter, voted by the board of appeals, or under change in a decision of the building inspector, code enforcement officer or other municipal official voted by the board of appeals, shall expire if such right be not exercised beginning within six months from the date of such vote. If such right is not exercised within six months of the date of the vote, the board may grant a six-month extension without having to make another finding of hardship provided that: 
(1)  Conditions upon which the appeal was granted have not changed; and 
(2)  The appellant can show just cause for the delay in beginning the project. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.2C) 
Secs. 60-1154-60-1184. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POWERS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 60-1185. - Interpretation. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the board of appeals shall interpret provisions of the zoning ordinance which are called into question. Only persons with standing may appeal the denial of a permit which was based on provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, zoning ordinance language should be given its ordinary meaning. Statements of purpose may provide a key to the intent of zoning provision. In interpreting the ordinance, the board may request the advice of the city solicitor, the planning director or qualified experts in zoning law. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.3A) 
Sec. 60-1186. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  The board of appeals may hear appeals in the administration of the zoning chapter in order to determine if the building inspector or code enforcement officer erred in granting or denying a permit. An applicant who is given no decision on a permit request, or who is denied a permit may appeal. 
(b)  If the board of appeals finds that the building inspector or code enforcement officer acted in error, it should order the error to be corrected. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.3B) 
Sec. 60-1187. - Variance. 
(a)  The board of appeals may grant a variance from the dimensional regulations and supplementary district regulations contained in the zoning chapter where the strict application of the ordinance, or a provision thereof, to the petitioner or property would cause undue hardship based on: 
(1)  The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless the variance is granted; 
(2)  The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood; 
(3)  The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and 
(4)  The hardship is not the result of action taken by the appellant or a prior owner. 
Variances granted under this subsection (a) shall be the minimum necessary to relieve hardship. The burden of proof is on the applicant to prove undue hardship. 
(b)  The board of appeals may grant a variance for the expansion, extension or enlargement of nonconforming buildings or uses provided that: 
(1)  The use being requested shall be approved by a majority of those members present (not less than a quorum being present). 
(2)  The board of appeals shall make findings that the requirements of subsection (a) of this section have been met. 
(c)  In addition to the criteria in this section, in determining whether or not to grant a variance, the board shall also take into consideration the following: 
(1)  Fire, electrical and police safety requirements; 
(2)  The adequacy of the traffic circulation system in the immediate vicinity; 
(3)  The availability of an adequate water supply; 
(4)  The availability of adequate sewerage facilities; 
(5)  Would not violate the environmental standards or criteria contained in the Overlay Zoning Districts; 
(6)  Would not adversely affect property adjoining the premises under appeal or nearby in the same neighborhood or in the same zoning district; 
(7)  Would not endanger the public health, safety or convenience; and 
(8)  Would not impair the integrity of the zoning chapter. 
(d)  Wherever necessary to meet the criteria or consideration listed in this division, the board, when granting a variance, may attach such conditions or restrictions as are in accordance with the objectives and purposes of this zoning chapter. 
(e)  The planning director, or his representative, shall be responsible for reviewing the records of hearings of the board of appeals. Such review shall be conducted on a monthly basis and shall be for the purpose of maintaining the zoning ordinance. The ordinance may be deemed to be in need of amendment when variances for identical purposes or reasons are applied for in a single zoning district or regarding a specific section of this chapter on three or more occasions within a given calendar year. In any case in which the zoning ordinances are deemed to be in need of amendment, the planning director or his representative shall prepare a report indicating whether the variances applied for suggest that the ordinance or the description of the zoning districts should be amended. Such reports shall be forwarded to the planning board for its review and recommendation. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.3C) 
Secs. 60-1188-60-1207. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - JUDICIAL APPEAL 

Sec. 60-1208. - Superior court. 
    Appeals from decisions of the city planning board or of the city zoning board of appeals or on account of the failure of any municipal official or board to comply with the order of the board of appeals shall be taken to the superior court within 30 days of such decision or action in accordance with Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691(3). Except as otherwise provided by statute, every person shall have the right to inspect and copy any record of the board's proceedings, provided that, the inspection be scheduled to occur during regular hours and at such a time as will not inconvenience the regular activities of the office having custody of the record and provided further that the cost of copying the recorded or, if necessary, the translation of mechanical or electronic date compilations into some other form, shall be paid by the person requesting the copy. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.4) 
Secs. 60-1209-60-1234. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL APPEAL 

Sec. 60-1235. - Floodplain district variances. 
    The board of appeals may grant a variance from strict compliance with requirements of division 2 of article XII of this chapter after public notice and public hearing as provided in this article, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant can show that a failure to grant a variance would result in undue hardship as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4353. 
(2)  A determination made by the board with a certification from a registered professional engineer provided by the applicant, if need be, that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights. The professional engineer shall include the following information within their certification: criteria on which the certification was based; any assumptions that were made; source of data for those assumptions; and references to the research material that was relied upon in making the certification. In addition, the board shall determine as a condition for the granting of the variance that it will not result in threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisances, causes fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  A determination by the board that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(4)  The applicant shall be notified in writing that the issuance of a variance to building a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance and such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.5A) 
Sec. 60-1236. - Shoreland zone variance. 
    When by reasons of extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to the land or building under appeal but not to other land or buildings adjoining or nearby, an owner of land would be subject to unusual difficulty or special hardships (not mere financial hardship or hardships caused by reason of the literal application and rigorous enforcement of the terms of this chapter), the board of zoning appeals may grant a variance from strict compliance with the requirements of division 2 of article XII of this chapter after notice and public hearing as provided in this article. No such variance shall be granted unless the board is satisfied that the variance applied for will not adversely affect the quality of the adjacent water body. In granting any such variance application, the board may also impose reasonable conditions upon the use of the land in question which shall be reduced to writing and made a part of the permanent records of the board. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.5B) 
Sec. 60-1237. - Lake Auburn Watershed zone variance. 
    When by reason of extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to the land or buildings under appeal but not to other land or buildings adjoining or nearby, an owner of land would be subject to unusual difficulty or special hardships (not mere financial hardship or hardships caused by rigid sewage disposal regulations) by reason of the literal application and rigorous enforcement of the terms of this chapter, the board of zoning appeals may grant a variance from strict compliance with the requirements of division 4 of article XII of this chapter after notice and public hearing as provided in this article. No such variance shall be granted unless the board is satisfied that the variance applied for will not adversely affect the quality of the Lake Auburn water supply. When an application for a variance is filed, it shall be forwarded to the city water district with a request for an informational report and a recommendation to the board regarding the disposition of the requested variance application. In any case in which a variance request is granted, despite the recommendation of the water district that it be denied, the board of appeals shall make part of its permanent records a written statement of its reasons for taking such action. In granting any such variance application, the board may also impose reasonable conditions upon the use of the land in question which shall be reduced to writing and made a part of the permanent records of the board. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 6.5C) 
Secs. 60-1238-60-1255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 60-1256-60-1275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 60-1276. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that the design and layout of certain developments permitted by special exceptions, or other developments noted herein, will constitute suitable development and will not result in a detriment to city, neighborhood or the environment. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1A) 
Sec. 60-1277. - Objective. 
    In considering a site plan, the planning board shall make findings that the development has made provisions for: 
(1)  Protection of adjacent areas against detrimental or offensive uses on the site by provision of adequate surface water drainage, buffers against artificial and reflected light, sight, sound, dust and vibration; and preservation of light and air; 
(2)  Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and in relation to adjacent areas; 
(3)  Adequacy of the methods of disposal for wastes; and 
(4)  Protection of environment features on the site and in adjacent areas. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1B) 
Sec. 60-1278. - Applicability. 
    A site plan review shall be required for the following projects: 
(1)  All uses permitted by special exception. 
(2)  Any other uses for which site plan review is required by any other provision contained in this or other ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1C) 
Secs. 60-1279-60-1299. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Procedure 

Sec. 60-1300. - File for site plan review. 
    An applicant for site plan review shall file with the department of community development and planning a completed site plan application along with an original and 20 copies of the site plan and the required processing fee. Such plans shall be filed not less than 30 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting. Plans shall be folded at a size not to exceed 81/2 inches by 11 inches. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(1)) 
Sec. 60-1301. - Scale; required information. 
    The original plan shall be drawn on reproducible Mylar at a scale of no more than 100 feet to the inch. Each site plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of owner and developer and interest of the applicant if other than the owner or developer. 
(2)  Name of development, scale and meridian arrow, with specific definition of representation, date of plan and legend. 
(3)  Names and addresses of all owners of record of all adjacent property as appear on assessor's records. 
(4)  Current zoning boundaries and 100-year floodplain boundaries including surrounding areas to a distance of 300 feet from the perimeter of the site. 
(5)  Easements; rights-of-way, existing, planned or proposed; or other reservations adjacent to or intersecting the property. 
(6)  Topographic map of the site, containing the following: 
a.  Existing contours, where the slope of existing ground surface is generally two percent or more, the topographic map shall show contours at intervals of five feet of elevation (or lesser intervals as the planning board or engineering department may prescribe). Where the slope of the existing ground surface is generally less than two percent, contour intervals of one foot shall be shown. These contours shall not be copied from the city topographic maps and shall be determined from an on-site survey certified by a registered land surveyor. 
b.  Proposed contours shall be shown at intervals to be determined by the city engineer. 
(7)  Location of watercourses, wetlands, marshes, surface water, rock outcroppings, wooded areas, single trees with a diameter of ten inches measured three feet from the base of the trunk. 
(8)  Location of buildings existing on the tract to be developed and on adjacent tracts within a distance of 100 feet from the property line, indicating whether existing buildings on the tract are to be retained, modified or removed. 
(9)  Locations of water mains, sewer mains, wells, fire hydrants, culverts, drains, pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow, existing within 200 feet of the subject property. 
(10)  Existing soil conditions and soil suitability test results. 
(11)  Locations of proposed buildings and uses thereof. 
(12)  Proposed traffic circulation system including streets, parking lots, driveways and other access and egress facilities, curblines, sidewalk lines and existing streets, including the projected traffic flow patterns into and upon the site for both vehicles and pedestrians and an estimate of the projected number of motor vehicle trips to and from the site for an average day and for peak hours. 
(13)  Location of existing and proposed public utility lines, indicating whether proposed lines will be placed underground. 
(14)  Site developments requiring stormwater permits pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-D shall include the required plan and to the extent permitted under 38 M.R.S.A. § 489-A, be reviewed under the procedures of article XVI of this chapter; and they shall meet and comply with 38 M.R.S.A. § 484(4-A) and those Rules promulgated by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Site Law and section 420-D, specifically Rules 500, 501 and 502, as last amended August 12, 2015. If a project proposes infiltration and the standards in Rule 500, appendix D are not met, then a waste discharge license may be required from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection. An infiltration system serving a development regulated under the Site Location of Development Act may be required to meet standards in addition to those in appendix D. 
(15)  Location and design of proposed off-street parking and loading areas indicating number and size of stalls. 
(16)  Proposed location and direction of and time of use of outdoor lighting. 
(17)  Existing and proposed planting, fences and walls, including all landscaping and screening and indicating existing trees to be retained and areas to be left undisturbed, including design features intended to integrate the proposed new development into the existing landscape to enhance aesthetic assets and to screen objectionable features from neighbors. 
(18)  Location, size, design and manner of illumination of signs. 
(19)  Disposal of sewage, trash, solid waste, oil waste, hazardous waste or radioactive waste showing disposal facilities, receptacles or areas. 
(20)  Perimeter boundaries of the site giving complete descriptive lot data by bearings, distances and radii of curves including the name and seal of the registered land surveyor who prepared the plan. 
(21)  Description and plan of capacity and location of means of sewage disposal together with approval of sewer district engineer or evidence of soil suitability for such disposal (test pit locations shall be shown on the plans) similarly approved by the city engineer department. 
(22)  A statement of the amount of area of land involved in the site, the percentage of the site proposed to be covered by buildings, the total number of dwelling units proposed per acre, the area proposed to be devoted to open space, the area proposed to be paved for parking, driveways, loading space and sidewalks, the total number of parking spaces required by the zoning chapter for the uses proposed, the number of employees expected per shift and the total floor area of proposed commercial or industrial uses. 
(23)  Description and plan of a phase development concept detailing the areas and sequence of phasing. 
(24)  A statement by the developer assuring that he has the financial capabilities to fully carry out the project and to comply with the conditions imposed by the planning board. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(2); Ord. No. 10-10172016, 11-7-2016) 
Sec. 60-1302. - Exemption for information. 
    Upon request, the planning board, or the planning director, acting for the board, may waive the necessity of providing any of the foregoing planning information which is not relevant to the proposed development. The planning board or the planning director, acting for the board, may waive the site plan review fee if the purpose of the site plan review is to determine the adaptive reuse of a structure of community significance. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(3); Ord. No. 05-04032017, § 3, 4-24-2017) 
Sec. 60-1303. - Approval-Time line for review. 
    The planning director shall, within five days of receipt, transmit copies of the application and site plan to the department that in his view requires such information. The agencies receiving these copies shall have up to 15 days to make recommendations to the planning board. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(4)) 
Sec. 60-1304. - Same-Public hearing; findings. 
    The planning board shall, within 30 days of receipt of a completed application, hold a public hearing. Notice of a hearing shall be given in the manner provided for in division 3 of article XVII of this chapter. The planning board will take final action on the site plan within 60 days of receiving a completed application, or within such other time limit as may be mutually agreed to. Such final action shall consist of either: 
(1)  A finding and determination that the proposed project will constitute a suitable development and will not result in a detriment to the neighborhood or the environment; or 
(2)  A written denial of the application stating the reasons for such denial, upon a finding that: 
a.  The provisions for vehicular loading, unloading and parking and for vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site and onto adjacent public streets will create hazards to safety. 
b.  The bulk, location or operation of proposed buildings and structures will be detrimental to and adversely affect the use and values of existing development in the neighborhood or the health or safety of persons residing or working therein. 
c.  The provisions for on-site landscaping are inadequate to screen neighboring properties from unsightly features of the development. 
d.  The site plan does not adequately provide for the soil and drainage problems which the development may give rise to in accordance with section 60-1301(14). 
e.  The provisions for exterior lighting create safety hazards for motorists traveling on adjacent streets, or are inadequate for the safety or occupants or users of the site, or will create a nuisance affecting adjacent properties. 
f.  The proposed development will unduly burden off-site sewer drainage or water systems. 
g.  The proposed development will create a fire hazard by failing to provide adequate access to the site, or to buildings on the site, for emergency vehicles. 
h.  The proposed development violates provisions of the zoning regulations applicable to the site or other applicable laws, regulations or ordinances. 
i.  The proposed development will unduly impact the ability to provide municipal services. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(5)) 
Sec. 60-1305. - Same-Subject to conditions, modification, restrictions, etc. 
    Approval may be made subject to conditions, modifications and restrictions as the planning board may deem necessary; and any construction, reconstruction, alteration or addition shall be carried on only in conformity to such conditions, modifications or restrictions and in conformity with the application and site plan. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(6)) 
Sec. 60-1306. - Signed copies. 
    If no action is taken within 60 days after submittal of a completed application, the site plan shall be deemed to have been approved. An original of the approved plan signed by the planning board and one signed copy shall be delivered to the applicant, the assessor's department, the engineering department and to the building inspector on which basis building permits may be issued when all other required plans have been approved. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(7)) 
Sec. 60-1307. - Findings in writing. 
    The findings of the planning board shall be in writing with a copy being forwarded to the applicant. The planning board's written report shall also include a statement as to how any deficiencies in the site plan might be resolved and what conditions, modifications and restrictions are to be complied with in executing the plan. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(8)) 
Sec. 60-1308. - Expiration of approval. 
    Approval of a site plan shall expire one year after the date of approval unless all building permits have been obtained to begin construction in accordance with the approved site plan. If a development is contested with litigation, the approval period of this section shall not commence until a final court judgment is issued or until the litigation has been dismissed with prejudice. This provision shall apply retroactively to all projects approved after January 1, 2007. Any site plan that contains a phase concept approved by the planning board shall not be required to obtain all building permits within the time sequence established for completion of each phase. No building permits or other permits shall be issued until all improvements are substantially completed for the preceding phase. A single one-year extension may be given upon a showing of good cause in writing by the applicant to the planning board not less than 30 days before the expiration of approval of his existing plan. The planning board shall approve or disapprove the requested extension at its next regular meeting. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(9); Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. D, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 60-1309. - No building permitted without approval. 
    No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building in an area included in the site plan or in any development for which a site plan is required until such site plan has been approved by the planning board and unless the construction plans and specifications presented to the building inspector with the application for the permit are consistent with the approved site plan. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(10)) 
Sec. 60-1310. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued with respect to any building until all construction called for by the site plan is completed, except by special permission of the planning board granted upon a showing of special circumstances warranted the issuance of the certificate and that the remaining construction will be completed within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(11)) 
Sec. 60-1311. - Deposit of surety. 
    The planning board may require the applicant with the submission of the site plan to tender a certified check payable to the city and issued by a surety company or secured by deposits issued by institutions authorized to issue the same by the laws of the state or the United States or irrevocable letters of credit issued by said banking institutions in an amount of money determined by the city planner, with the advice of the various city departments and agencies concerned, to be sufficient to ensure compliance with the approved site plan. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(12)) 
Sec. 60-1312. - Review of planning board needed for variance. 
    For those developments subject to site plan review (division 2 of article XVI of this chapter) the relaxation of the dimensional requirements of any use district shall be reviewed by the planning board. The modifications of the dimensional requirements shall be allowed as the planning board may deem necessary to carry out the objectives and intent of site plan review as specified in division 2 of article XVI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D(13)) 
Sec. 60-1313. - Correction of off-site deficiencies. 
    The planning board shall have the right to require the developer, at his expense, to correct any off-site deficiencies either created or aggravated by the developer's proposed project. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.1D) 
Secs. 60-1314-60-1334. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL EXCEPTION 

Sec. 60-1335. - Approval required. 
    The planning board may approve for development those land uses listed as special exceptions under the terms of the zoning ordinance. The determinations of the board shall be in harmony with the expressed intent of the zoning ordinance and with the expressed major purpose of the city master development plan. Special exceptions shall be allowed only when they will substantially serve public convenience and welfare and will not involve dangers to health or safety. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.2A) 
Sec. 60-1336. - Conditions. 
(a)  As conditions prerequisite to the granting of any special exceptions, the board shall require evidence of the following: 
(1)  That the special exception sought fulfills the specific requirements, if any, set forth in the zoning ordinance relative to such exception. 
(2)  That the special exception sought will neither create nor aggravate a traffic hazard, a fire hazard or any other safety hazard. 
(3)  That the special exception sought will not block or hamper the master development plan pattern of highway circulation or of planned major public or semipublic land acquisition. 
(4)  That the exception sought will not alter the essential characteristics of the neighborhood and will not tend to depreciate the value of property adjoining and neighboring the property under application. 
(5)  That reasonable provisions have been made for adequate land space, lot width, lot area, stormwater management in accordance with section 60-1301(14), green space, driveway layout, road access, off-street parking, landscaping, building separation, sewage disposal, water supply, fire safety, and where applicable, a plan or contract for perpetual maintenance of all the common green space and clustered off-street parking areas to ensure all such areas will be maintained in a satisfactory manner. 
(6)  That the standards imposed are, in all cases, at least as stringent as those elsewhere imposed by the city building code and by the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  That essential city services which will be required for the project are presently available or can be made available without disrupting the city's master development plan. 
(b)  As part of the granting or the denial of any such petition for a special exception, the board shall show by written statements filed in its records of such application and by a statement in the minutes of the board how the special exception sought fulfills the foregoing conditions. An applicant may request the board to make a statement as to how the special exception may be granted without danger to health and safety and without substantially derogating from the essential intents and purposes of the zoning ordinance or of the city master development plan. 
(c)  Approval of a special exception may be made subject to such conditions, modifications and restrictions on the proposed land use as the planning board may deem necessary to carry out the foregoing objectives and conditions. Any development of the land uses allowed by special exception shall be carried out only in conformity to such conditions, modifications and restrictions in addition to those that may be called for by an approved site plan for the same site and shall be enforced by the municipal officer charged with enforcement in the same manner as specified for approved site plans. Any change, addition or enlargement of a use allowed by special exception shall require approval of the planning board in the same manner as specified for the original special exception. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.2B) 
Sec. 60-1337. - Procedures. 
    Special exceptions shall be subject to the site plan review procedure specified in subdivision II of division 2 of article XVI of this chapter. The planning board shall, within 30 days of receipt of a completed application, hold a public hearing. Notice of a hearing shall be given in the manner provided for in division 3 of article XVII of this chapter. The planning board will take final action on the special exception within 60 days after its submittal or within such other time limit as may be mutually agreed to. The applicant shall accompany the application with the required fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.2C) 
Secs. 60-1338-60-1358. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUBDIVISION 

Sec. 60-1359. - Guidelines. 
    When reviewing any subdivision for approval, the planning board shall consider the following criteria, and before granting either approval or denial, shall determine that the proposed subdivision: 
(1)  Will not result in undue water, air or noise pollution. In making this determination it shall at least consider: 
a.  The elevation of land above sea level and its relation to the floodplains, the nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal; 
b.  The slope of the land and its effect on effluents; 
c.  The availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and 
d.  The applicable state and local health and water resources regulations, including stormwater management requirements in accordance with section 60-1301(14); 
(2)  Has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the subdivision; 
(3)  Will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water supply, if one is to be utilized; 
(4)  Will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the capacity of the land to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result; 
(5)  Will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed; 
(6)  Will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal; 
(7)  Will not cause an unreasonable burden on the ability of a municipality to dispose of solid waste and sewage if municipal services are to be utilized; 
(8)  Will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites or rare and irreplaceable natural areas; 
(9)  Is in conformance with a duly adopted subdivision regulation or ordinance, comprehensive plan, development plan, or land use plan, if any; 
(10)  Is funded by a subdivider has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the standards of this section; 
(11)  Will not adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood and will not tend to depreciate the value of property adjoining the neighboring property under application; 
(12)  Has provisions for on site landscaping that are adequate to screen neighboring properties from unsightly features of the development; 
(13)  Will not create a fire hazard and has provided adequate access to the site for emergency vehicles; 
(14)  Will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect the quality or quantity of groundwater; 
(15)  Does not have long-term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision will that unreasonably increase a great pond phosphorus concentration during the construction phase and life of the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3A) 
Sec. 60-1360. - Procedure-For minor subdivision. 
(a)  Generally. The planning board may require where it deems it necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare, that a minor subdivision comply with all or any of the requirements specified for major subdivision. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  The subdivider shall submit an application for approval of a minor subdivision plan at least 30 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the planning board. 
(2)  The applicant shall secure approval from the tax assessor for a lot numbering sequence to ensure compatibility with the existing tax system. The numbering system will not be construed to indicate anything more than identification of parcels for taxation purposes. 
(3)  All applications for plan approval for minor subdivision shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount per lot provided in the city fee schedule, payable by check to the city. 
(4)  The subdivider or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the planning board to discuss the plan. 
(5)  Upon receiving an application, the municipal reviewing authority shall notify by mail all abutting property owners of the proposed subdivision, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision and a general description of the project. After the municipal reviewing authority has determined that a complete application has been filed, it shall notify the applicant and begin its full evaluation of the proposed subdivision. 
(6)  The planning board shall, within 30 days of receiving the complete application, hold a public hearing on such plan. Notification shall comply with division 3 of article XVII of this chapter. 
(7)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the planning board shall take final action within 30 days or within such other time limits which may be mutually agreed to by the developer. Such final action shall consist of approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of the final plan. The planning board shall specify its reasons for any such conditions or approval by its approved minutes. The planning board shall convey in writing to the developer their final action. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3B) 
Sec. 60-1361. - Same-Major preliminary subdivision. 
(a)  The application for approval of the preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount per lot, up to 100 lots, provided in the city fee schedule, payable by check to the city. 
(b)  The applicant shall secure approval from the tax assessor for a lot numbering sequence that is compatible with the existing system. 
(c)  The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative shall attend the meeting of the planning board to discuss the preliminary plan. 
(d)  Upon receiving an application, the planning department shall issue to the applicant a dated receipt. Upon receiving an application, the planning department shall notify by mail all abutting property owners of the proposed subdivision, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision and a general description of the project. 
(e)  The planning board shall within 30 days of receiving the completed application, hold a public hearing on the preliminary plan. The city shall publish a public hearing notice in conformance with section 60-1474. Abutters shall also be specifically notified of this hearing by the municipality. Failure of any petitioner or property owner to receive such mailed notice of such a zoning hearing shall not necessitate another hearing and shall not constitute grounds for objections by such petitioner or property owner and shall not invalidate any recommendation by the planning board. 
(f)  When granting preliminary approval to the preliminary plan, the planning board shall state the conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to: 
(1)  The specific changes which it will require in the final plan; 
(2)  The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may have been requested and which in its opinion may be waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(g)  Preliminary approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the design submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan. The final plan shall be submitted for approval of the planning board and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these standards and the conditions of the preliminary approval, if any. Prior to approval of the final subdivision plan, the planning board may require additional changes as a result of new information obtained at the public hearing. The board by majority vote may determine if a public hearing is necessary at this time for final plan review. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3C) 
Sec. 60-1362. - Same-Major subdivision final plan. 
(a)  The subdivider shall, within six months after the preliminary approval of the preliminary plan, file with the planning board an application for approval of the final subdivision plan in the form described herein. If the final plan is not submitted to the planning board within six months after the approval of the preliminary plan, a single six-month extension may be given upon a showing of good cause in writing by the applicant to the planning board not less than 30 days before the expiration of approval of his existing plan. The planning board shall approve or disapprove the requested extension at its next regular meeting. The planning board may refuse without prejudice to act on the final plan and require resubmission of the preliminary plan. All applications for final plan approval for major subdivisions shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, payable by check to the city. 
(b)  The planning board shall, within 30 days after the public hearing on a final plan, conditionally approve, approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the final plan. Any such decision of the planning board shall include findings of fact, and any approval with conditions or disapproval shall be accompanied by the reasons therefor in writing. 
(c)  In reviewing a subdivision, the planning board shall consider previous subdivision of the same applicant, subdivider or principals of such application. If the developer has failed to complete the public improvements shown on an approved plan to the satisfaction of the planning board, then this shall constitute conclusive evidence of technical capabilities of the applicant or developer to comply with the terms of this chapter or to complete work required by a plan. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3D) 
Sec. 60-1363. - Final approval and filing. 
(a)  Final approval. 
(1)  One computer aided drafting disk, three reproducible Mylar copies and 20 paper prints of each diagram plan and each sheet of all accompanying information shall be submitted by the subdivider or his agent to the planning board not less than 30 days prior to a regular monthly meeting of the planning board. Any lack of required information or other deficiencies must be completed before such final plan can be reviewed by the planning board. 
(2)  The planning board, after such public hearing, may require the subdivider to incorporate in the final plan such changes as they deem advisable. The planning board may then vote final approval of such final plan. Notice of the date and substance of such vote shall be entered on the Mylar drawing of such final map, if one sheet, or on the sheet containing the index map, if more than one sheet; on the reproducible master of any subsequent sheets there shall be entered a reference to the notice on the index sheet. The reproducible master drawings, so endorsed, shall be returned to the subdivider at the time that the performance bonds have been submitted to the city engineering department. 
(3)  Such final approval of a final plan shall not be deemed the laying out or acceptance by the city of any way, easement or utility or other public area shown on such plan, nor shall such approval be deemed to constitute by itself any acceptance of liability by the city for the use or maintenance of any streets, ways or other public areas indicated on such a final plan. 
(b)  Filing. 
(1)  As promptly as may be, and not more than 30 days after the date of the vote of final approval, the subdivider at his expense shall furnish the planning board with three reproductions on Mylar of each sheet of the endorsed original Mylar drawing of the final plan as approved together with three paper prints of each sheet thereof, and each reproduction or print shall show any endorsement made on its original. 
(2)  The city clerk shall attest and seal each of the aforesaid three master reproductions and each of the aforesaid three paper prints. The city planner shall transmit one set of such paper prints, so attested, to the city engineer, one to the water district, and one set to the sewer district if the subdivision be within the sewer district limits, otherwise to the planning and permitting services department. In addition, the city planner shall send one of the three sets of attested copies to the planning board, one set to the assessor and one set to the subdivider to be recorded by him in the Androscoggin County Register of Deeds, and a CAD disk to information services. 
(c)  Plan revisions after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any final plan after approval has been given by the planning board and endorsed in writing on the plan, unless the plan is first resubmitted and planning department staff approves any modifications. In the event that a final plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, the same shall be considered null and void, and the board shall institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of the municipal officers and the registry of deeds and/or to enjoin any development attempted or commenced pursuant to said plan, and for other appropriate relief. 
(d)  Improvement completion time. All required improvements shall be completed no later than two years after approval of the final plan. Should the subdivider request an extension it shall be made in writing to the planning board. Should the planning board grant an extension it shall be for a period not to exceed six months. Only one extension shall be granted. Should the subdivider not complete the required improvements within the time specified the subdivider shall be in violation of this chapter. If a development is proposed to be phased then specific requirements for each phase shall be complete prior to issuing Building Permits for that phase. If a development is contested with litigation, the two year completion requirement shall not commence until a final court judgment is issued or until the litigation has been dismissed with prejudice. This provision shall apply retroactively to all projects approved after January 1, 2007. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3E; Ord. No. 02-04012013, att. D, 4-16-2013) 
Sec. 60-1364. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No plan of a subdivision of land within the city which would constitute a subdivision as defined herein shall hereafter be filed or recorded in the registry of deeds until a final plan thereof shall have been approved by the planning board in accordance with all of the requirements, design standards, and construction specifications set forth elsewhere in this chapter, in this Code, nor until such approval shall have been entered on such final plan by the planning board. 
(b)  No person may convey, offer or agree to convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved by the planning board and recorded in the registry of deeds. 
(c)  Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who conveys, offers or agrees to convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved as required by this section shall be punished by a fine as set forth by state law or in this Code for each such conveyance, offering or agreement. The attorney general, district attorney or the city or the appropriate municipal officers may institute proceedings to enjoin the violation of this section. 
(d)  No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind shall serve any lot in a subdivision for which a final plan has not been approved by the planning board. 
(e)  Not only is making a subdivision without planning board approval a violation of law, but so also within such a subdivision is grading or construction of roads, grading of land or lots, or construction of buildings until such time as a final plan of such subdivision shall have been duly prepared, submitted, reviewed, approved and endorsed as provided in these standards, and until the original copy of the final plan so approved and endorsed has been duly recorded in the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds. 
(f)  In the event that the subdivider shall fail to comply with the requirements of article XVI of this chapter, the city engineer may issue a stop work order directing cessation of all work in the subdivision, or the planning board, after notice and hearing, may revoke its approval of the final plan, or both such steps may be taken. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3F) 
Sec. 60-1365. - General requirements. 
    In reviewing applications for the subdivision of land, the board shall consider the following general requirements. In all instances the burden of proof shall be upon the persons proposing the subdivision. 
(1)  Subdivision plan shall conform to the comprehensive plan. Any proposed subdivision shall be in conformity with the comprehensive plan of the city and with the provisions of all pertinent state and local codes and ordinances. 
(2)  Preservation of natural and historic features. The board may require that a proposed subdivision design include a landscape plan that will show the preservation of existing trees and vegetation, graded contours, streams and the preservation of scenic, historic or environmentally desirable areas. The street and lot layout shall be adapted to the topography. Extensive grading and filling shall be avoided as far as possible. 
(3)  Lots. 
a.  The lost size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
b.  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for all purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and service facilities for vehicles required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
c.  No person shall make a subdivision within the city unless all lots of the proposed subdivision have frontage, as regulated by the zoning ordinance, upon a way granting legal access. The following ways shall constitute legal access to a lot: 
1.  A way accepted by or established as belonging to the city, provided access is not specifically prohibited. 
2.  A public way shown on a plan approved in accordance with the provision of this chapter and in this Code. 
3.  A private way (unaccepted street) existing prior to October 6, 1968, which way is shown on a plan recorded in the registry of deeds prior to such date and is deemed adequate by the planning board as evidenced by the board's endorsement on a final plan for the subdivision of land. In its approval of an existing private way, the board may make whatever requirements it feels necessary to improve the way commensurate with the projected use of same. 
4.  A person issued a permit pursuant to this subchapter in a great pond watershed shall have a copy of the permit on the site while work authorized by the permit is being conducted. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3G) 
Sec. 60-1366. - Staff approvals and waivers. 
(a)  Where plans need to be modified after planning board approval due to changes beyond the developer's control, the planning and permitting services department staff will have the authority to approve any amendments that staff feels may be approved without detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the community. If staff feels the amendments must go back to the planning board the subdivision approval process must be followed. 
(1)  A paper copy of the plan shall be submitted to the planning and permitting services department staff marked with all proposed changes in red ink. An accompanying letter shall also be attached requesting all changes. 
(2)  Staff shall circulate the plan to the proper departments for review. 
(3)  Once all review has been completed, planning and permitting services department staff shall write a letter to the developer explaining how to proceed with the proposed amendments. 
(b)  If staff determines the amendments must go back to the planning board, the subdivision approval process must be followed. 
(c)  Where planning board finds that extraordinary, unnecessary and financial hardships may result from strict compliance with the standards of a particular plan, it may vary these standards so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variations will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the official map, the comprehensive plan or the zoning ordinance. Any variances or waivers granted by the planning board must be noted on the face of the recording plat. 
(d)  Where the planning board finds that, due to special circumstances of a particular plan, provisions of certain required improvements are not requisite in the interest of public health, safety and welfare or are inappropriate because of inadequacy of lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may waive such requirements, subject to appropriate conditions. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3H) 
Sec. 60-1367. - Recreation area/open space standards. 
(a)  Every developer of a residential subdivision shall include as part of a subdivision proposal a provision for recreational and open space which is adequate to meet the reasonably foreseeable needs of the residents of the subdivision. The standard established by the city to satisfy this purpose is an area of not less than 43,560 contiguous square feet or one acre of land for the first ten lots or units. The amount of land required is increased at a rate of 5,000 square feet per unit for each unit over ten units. The standard noted in section 60-1365 shall be used as a guideline by the planning board and may be varied for low impact developments. 
(b)  In any case in which the developer chooses to develop in total or in part land area that could be used to satisfy the recreational land dedication for units/house lots of it is not feasible to dedicate rights and land to meet the requirements due to topography, location or other limiting factors or if the developer can satisfy the planning board that a dedication of land is not required for recreational and open space needs, the developer may contribute to the city, or to a condominium or homeowners' association, a fee-in-lieu amount in cash which is essentially equivalent to the value which such dedicated land rights in the area where the proposed subdivision is located would have had. This fee will be capped at and based on the average market value of similarly zoned land in the immediate area of the proposed development at the time of final subdivision approval as determined by the city tax assessor. 
(c)  In reviewing the amount of money requested, the board shall review the adequacy of existing facilities available to the inhabitants of the subdivision, improvements that may be needed by the existing facilities to make them adequate for the additional impact being created by the added units and any other factors which may influence the need for land dedication for a fee-in-lieu of. 
(d)  A developer may choose to use both the land dedication provision and fee-in-lieu of land dedication provision in conjunction with each other. Any fee-in-lieu of amount of money used with a land dedication shall be used to develop, enlarge or enhance this recreational facility. 
(e)  In determining the adequacy of land dedication and/or fee-in-lieu of land dedication, the board shall assess the projected needs of the inhabitants of the subdivision. If the planning board determines that full land dedication is necessary, then they may require such land dedication with no fee-in-lieu of land dedication. 
(f)  In the situation when a fee-in-lieu of land dedication is supplied by the developer, then the developer may choose to request what uses or equipment the money will be used for. The planning board shall request an assessment of the developer's desires from the parks and recreation advisory board and if they agree with the developer, then all monies received will be earmarked for the purposes so chosen. 
(g)  The proposal for land dedication may be in the form of a deed of a parcel of land within or contiguous to the subdivision, or contiguous to an existing public recreational facility within reasonable proximity of the subdivision. The planning board shall use the recreational/open space district map, made a part of the ordinance as a guide. Alternatively, the land dedication may be part of a condominium or homeowners' association or proposed in any other form acceptable to the planning board provided it serves the needs of the residents of the subdivision. 
(h)  The planning board may decline to accept a proposed dedication of rights in land to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the subdivision in any case in which it determines that the public expense of maintaining the same would unduly burdensome compared to the recreational benefit which would be conferred or where the planning board determined that such recreational needs can more efficiently be served by applying a cash contribution from the developer to enlarge or enhance an existing recreational facility. 
(i)  All funds contributed to the parks and recreation open space dedication will be allocated to the development of facilities located within zones as shown on the recreational/open space district map, made a part of this chapter, unless the planning board and/or developer have determined that a contribution to a facility which lies outside the zoned area would better serve the needs of the subdivision. Such funds shall be used within a five-year period. Funds not used after five years shall be returned to the developer with interest. The interest amount shall be the average of yearly interest rates established by local banks. If for unforeseen reasons monies accumulated are not used as previously agreed upon within the five-year period, the recreation advisory board may request the planning board to reallocate the funds for other recreational uses. Notice to the developer shall be given and input from the developer shall be used to determine whether or not these monies may be reallocated. 
(j)  Before making any final determination about the recreational needs of the subdivision's residents, or how they can best be met, the planning board shall solicit input from the parks and recreation advisory board and shall carefully consider any recommendations in this regard which it received in response. 
(k)  If a project is either proposed to be phased in, is a part of a unified development or is developed by the same developers on adjacent land to previously developed land, it shall be considered as one development and will be required to participate in the recreation open space dedication. 
(l)  The approval by the planning board of a residential subdivision plan shall not be deemed to constitute an acceptance by the city of any open space shown on such plan. The planning board may also require the filing of a written agreement between the developer and the city covering future deed and title, dedication and provisions for the costs of grading, developing, equipping and maintaining recreation areas. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3I) 
Sec. 60-1368. - Appeals. 
    An appeal from a decision of the planning board on any final plan may be taken to the superior court. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.3J) 
Secs. 60-1369-60-1380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - APPEALS AND APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 60-1381. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from decisions of the city planning board or of the city zoning board of appeals shall be taken to the superior court in accordance with Rule 80b of the state rules of civil procedure. Where a record of the board's proceedings has been kept, the board shall, at the request of the appealing party and at his expense, furnish him with a transcript of the record for use in connection with the appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.4A) 
Sec. 60-1382. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to any development subject to review under division 2 of article XVI of this chapter, the construction of which has not been commenced on the date on which they become effective. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.4B) 
Secs. 60-1383-60-1400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 60-1401. - Permit required. 
    No building shall be erected, altered or moved in the city without first filing an application in writing with the building inspector. Such permits shall be applied for to the building inspector and he shall not approve an application for a building permit unless the plans for such a building and the intended uses thereof in all respects fulfill the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable city ordinance provisions. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.5A) 
Sec. 60-1402. - Plan required. 
    Each application for a permit to build, enlarge, alter or move a building shall be accompanied by a plot plan in duplicate drawn to scale showing and stating the dimensions in feet of the lot on which such building is proposed to be erected, enlarged, altered or moved, also the location and ground coverage dimensions of any building already existing upon such lot, and the location thereon and ground coverage dimensions on such lot of any building or structure proposed to be erected, or moved onto it. Such plot plan shall also show each street, alley or right-of-way on or adjacent to the lot in question. Upon request, the building inspector may waive the necessity of providing any of the foregoing information which is not relevant to the proposed project. One copy of each such application and plot plan shall be kept on file in the office to the building inspector. Submission of a plot plan in connection with permits for agricultural buildings need not be submitted unless deemed necessary by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.5B) 
Sec. 60-1403. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This chapter shall be enforced by the director of land use planning and enforcement and his duly authorized agents. 
(b)  The director, building inspector, code enforcement officer or police chief, on their individual initiative, or on the request of any other municipal official or upon any well founded information in writing indicating possible violation of this chapter, shall make or cause to be made an investigation of facts and an inspection of the premises where such violation is said to exist. 
(c)  Whenever the municipal official charged with enforcement determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, he shall initiate enforcement proceedings in accordance with the citation system established in article VIII of chapter 2. Alternatively, he may initiate a land use complaint pursuant to state law in which case the penalties there provided shall apply. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 7.5C) 
Secs. 60-1404-60-1424. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - AMENDMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 60-1425-60-1444. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENT TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE OR ZONING MAP 

Sec. 60-1445. - Purpose. 
    Amendments to the zoning ordinance, including the zoning map, may be initiated by the planning board on its own initiative or upon request by the city council or by a petition signed by not less than 25 registered voters of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 8.1A) 
Sec. 60-1446. - Proposal made in writing. 
    Each proposal to change the zoning map shall be made in writing and shall explicitly state the nature, extent, location and purpose of the map change proposed and shall be accompanied by a black line print of a diagram drawn to scale showing and stating clearly the dimensions in feet, the area, metes and bounds of the land proposed for a change and a sketch or other explicit identification of the general location and relationship of such land to some major neighborhood or other recognizable geographic segment of the city. Petitions shall be filed not less than 30 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 8.1B) 
Sec. 60-1447. - Change of text. 
    Each proposal to change any zoning ordinance text (other than a change of zoning district name or zoning boundary description) shall include the wording then current, the words of change, the wording if so amended and a statement of the reasons for such change, showing how such change would affect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 8.1C) 
Sec. 60-1448. - Submittal of completed petition. 
    Within 45 days of submittal of a completed petition to amend the zoning ordinance text or map, the planning board shall hold a public hearing thereon. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 8.1D) 
Sec. 60-1449. - Notice. 
    Notice of hearings shall be given in the manner provided for in division 3 of article XVII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 8.1E) 
Secs. 60-1450-60-1472. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC HEARING 

Sec. 60-1473. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutters means owners of property within 500 feet of the land under consideration are considered to be abutters. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 8.2C) 
Sec. 60-1474. - Public notice. 
    The city shall publish in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, two public notices, the first notice at least 12 days before the hearing and the second notice at least seven days before the hearing. Each notice shall state the time, date, place and general subject to be heard. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 8.2A) 
Sec. 60-1475. - Notice to abutters. 
    Abutters, as defined in section 60-1476, shall be mailed a notice of a public hearing on an application for subdivision, site plan and/or special exception approval and amendments for this chapter at least 14 days prior to the hearing. The applicant, developer or petitioner shall be responsible for the cost associated with all mailed notices to abutters. The notice shall state the time, date, place, the general subject to be heard and a responsible party to be contacted for information. Notices shall be mailed to the address appearing on the city property tax listing. Failure of any abutter to receive such mailed notice of any such public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing and shall not constitute grounds for objections by such abutter or petitioner and shall not invalidate any action by the planning board. The applicant, developer or petitioner shall provide a list of abutters and their addresses at the time of application, plan or petition submission. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 8.2B) 
Secs. 60-1476-60-1495. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLANNING BOARD RECOMMENDATION 

Sec. 60-1496. - Report in writing. 
    The planning board shall, within 30 days of the conclusion of the public hearing, report in writing the results of the hearing and recommendations of the board on the amendment to the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2009, § 8.3) 
Chapter 61 - MORATORIA 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 61-1. - Moratorium on social clubs and retail medical marijuana caregiver storefronts. 
WHEREAS, the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, codified at 22 M.R.S. §§ 2421 to 2430-B, (the "Medical Act") authorizes the possession, cultivation, and furnishing of medical marijuana to qualifying patients by caregivers, as those terms are defined in 22 M.R.S. § 2422; and 
WHEREAS, section 401 of the Marijuana Legalization Act, codified at 28-B M.R.S. ch. 1 (the "Adult Use Act") authorizes municipalities pursuant to home rule authority to regulate adult use marijuana establishments, including cultivation facilities, products manufacturing facilities, testing facilities, and marijuana stores, as those terms are defined in 28-B M.R.S. § 102; and 
WHEREAS, neither the Medical Act nor the Adult Use Act nor any state agency rules promulgated thereunder expressly authorize the operation of retail stores by registered caregivers for the purpose of selling medical marijuana or medical marijuana products to qualifying patients (hereafter, "Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefronts") or the furnishing or sale of marijuana or marijuana products to consumers for on-premises consumption (hereafter, "Social Clubs"); and 
WHEREAS, during the first regular session, the 128th Maine Legislature considered LD 1539, "An Act to Amend Maine's Medical Marijuana Law," which, if enacted, would amend the Medical Act to expressly authorize the operation of Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefronts, and LD 238, "An Act to Amend the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act," which, if enacted, would expressly authorize municipalities to regulate registered caregiver operations; however, the ultimate disposition of LD 1539 and LD 238 is unknown at this time; and 
WHEREAS, no specific regulations governing Social Clubs or Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefronts exist under the City's Code of Ordinances; and 
WHEREAS, the City's Code of Ordinances is insufficient to prevent serious public harm that could result from the unregulated siting and operation of Social Clubs or Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefronts within the City; and 
WHEREAS, the unregulated siting and operation of Social Clubs or Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefronts within the City raises legitimate and substantial questions about the impact of such facilities and related uses and activities on the City, including questions as to compatibility of such facilities with existing and permitted land uses in the City; potential adverse health and safety effects on the community; the adequacy of the City's infrastructure to accommodate such facilities; and the possibility of unlawful sale of marijuana and marijuana products; and 
WHEREAS, as a result of the foregoing issues, the siting and operation of Social Clubs or Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefronts and related uses and activities within the City has potentially serious implications for the health, safety, and welfare of the City and its residents and visitors; and 
WHEREAS, an overburdening of public facilities and resources, including public safety resources, is a reasonably foreseeable result of unregulated Social Clubs or Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefronts and related uses and activities located and operated in the City; and 
WHEREAS, the City has established a working group charged with studying, reviewing, and making recommendations to the City Council regarding the regulation of adult and medical marijuana facilities, uses and activities, including Social Clubs and Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefronts; and 
WHEREAS, the City and the working group needs time to understand the disposition of LD 1539, LD 238, and any State department rules promulgated pursuant to the Adult Use Act or the Medical Act in relation to its own Code of Ordinances and to evaluate the effects of Social Clubs and Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefronts and related uses and activities in order to prepare reasonable ordinance provisions governing the siting, licensing, and operation of such facilities, uses, and activities; and 
WHEREAS, 30-A M.R.S. § 4356 authorizes the City to establish a moratorium on the processing or issuance of development permits or licenses; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the City Council, the foregoing findings constitute a necessity within the meaning of 30-A M.R.S. § 4356. 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Auburn, Maine, as follows: 
1.  Moratorium. The City does hereby declare a moratorium on the siting, operation, or licensing of any Social Club or Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefront within the City. For purposes of this Moratorium Ordinance, these terms shall have the following meanings: 
a. "Social Club" shall mean any premises where marijuana or marijuana products are furnished or sold to consumers for on-premises consumption, excluding the personal adult consumption of marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to 28-B M.R.S. § 1501(2) or the consumption of medical marijuana or medical marijuana products pursuant to 22 M.R.S. § 2422 et seq. 
b. "Retail Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefront" shall mean a retail store, a retail business, or an establishment that resembles a retail storefront in terms of signage, hours of operation, and accessibility to patrons (including without limitation retail use or retail space, as those terms are defined in Article I, Sec. 60-2 of the City's Code of Ordinances) where a licensed caregiver furnishes or sells marijuana or marijuana products to qualifying patients, as those terms are defined in 22 M.R.S. § 2422. 
2.  Date of Applicability. Notwithstanding 1 M.R.S. § 302 or any other law to the contrary, and regardless of the Effective Date, this Moratorium Ordinance shall govern and apply to all proceedings, licenses, and applications for a Social Club or Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefront that were or are pending before the City Clerk, Code Enforcement Officer, or the Planning Board on or any time after May 31, 2018 and, to the extent allowed by 30-A M.R.S. § 3007(6), shall nullify the issuance of any final approval of the City Clerk, Code Enforcement Officer, or the Planning Board made on or at any time after May 31, 2018 that authorizes the operation of a Social Club or Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefront (the "Date of Applicability"). 
3.  Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final passage by the City Council (the "Effective Date") and shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 180 days, unless extended, repealed, or modified in accordance with applicable law. 
4.  Conflicts; Savings Clause. Any provisions of the City's Code of Ordinances that are inconsistent with or conflict with the provisions of this Moratorium Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent applicable for the duration of this moratorium. If any section or provision of this Moratorium Ordinance is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such a declaration shall not invalidate any other section or provision. 
5.  Violations. If any Social Club or Medical Marijuana Caregiver Storefront is located or operates in the City, in violation of this Moratorium Ordinance, each day of any continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation of this Moratorium Ordinance and the City shall be entitled to all rights available to it pursuant to 30-A M.R.S. § 4452, including, but not limited to, fines and penalties, injunctive relief, and its reasonable attorney's fees and costs in prosecuting any such violations. 
(Ord. No. 03-06182018, 6-18-2018) 
Appendix A - FEES AND CHARGES[1] 
Administrative 
Notary fee ..... 10.00 
Copy fee, per page ..... 1.00 
Animals 
Dog license fees: 
Unaltered dog-annually ..... 11.00 
Spayed/neutered dog-annually ..... 6.00 
Late fee after January 31 ..... 25.00 
Impoundment fee-each ..... 50.00 
Additional per day for boarding fee ..... TBD 
Dangerous dog registration fee-annually ..... 100.00 
Buildings and Building Regulations 
Building Permit-Single family: 
New construction and additions: 
Base fee ..... 20.00 
Additional per square foot ..... 0.21 
Accessory structures: ..... TBD 
Base fee ..... 20.00 
Additional per square foot ..... 0.05 
Renovations and alterations: 
Value up to $2,500.00 ..... 20.00 
Value over $2,500.00 ..... TBD 
Base fee ..... 20.00 
Per each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of value over $2,500.00 ..... 5.00 
Building Permit-Multifamily: 
New construction and additions: 
Base fee ..... 20.00 
Additional per square foot ..... 0.25 
Building Permit-Mobile homes: 
New or used: 
Base fee ..... 20.00 
Additional per square foot ..... 0.14 
Additions: 
Base fee ..... 20.00 
Additional per square foot ..... 0.21 
Building Permit-Commercial: 
New construction: 
Base fee ..... 20.00 
Additional per square foot ..... 0.30 
Renovation or alteration: 
Base fee ..... 20.00 
Additional per each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of value ..... 7.00 
Foundation only: 
Base fee ..... 20.00 
Additional per each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof ..... 5.00 
Building Permit-Swimming pools: 
Above ground ..... 30.00 
In-ground ..... 75.00 
Building Permit-Other: 
Fences ..... 20.00 
Underground storage tanks: 
First tank ..... 32.00 
Each additional tank ..... 11.00 
Moving building ..... 100.00 
Driveways ..... 21.00 
Change of use ..... 32.00 
Certificate of occupancy (included in permit-#260 penalty) ..... NA 
Signs: 
Base fee ..... 25.00 
Additional per square foot ..... 0.50 
Banners, for seven-day period not to exceed 14 days ..... 250.00 
Demolition: 
Up to 1,000 square feet ..... TBD 
1,001 to 5,000 square feet: 
Base fee ..... 80.00 
Additional per square foot ..... 0.02 
5,001 and greater square feet: 
Base fee ..... 210.00 
Additional per square foot ..... 0.02 
Plumbing fees: 
Internal plumbing: 
Per fixture (subject to minimum below) ..... 9.00 
Minimum ..... 36.00 
Subsurface wastewater ..... TBD 
Nonengineered systems ..... 150.00 
Field only ..... 100.00 
Treatment tank only (non-engineered) ..... 75.00 
Engineered system ..... 300.00 
Treatment tank only (engineered) ..... 120.00 
Holding tank ..... 150.00 
Other system components ..... 50.00 
Separate laundry disposal field ..... 50.00 
Seasonal conversion ..... 75.00 
Variance ..... 50.00 
Primitive system (including 1 alt wc) ..... 150.00 
Alternative toilet only ..... 75.00 
Electrical inspections: 
Minimum ..... TBD 
Residential ..... 32.00 
Commercial ..... 42.00 
Single and multifamily dwellings-per unit (includes service/openings)-each ..... 58.00 
All temporary services ..... 30.00 
Services-single phase-panel and meter: 
Base fee-up to 100 amps (includes cable hookup) ..... 12.00 
Plus-per each additional 100 amps or fraction ..... 7.00 
Plus-per each additional meter ..... 7.00 
Plus-subpanels-up to 100 amps ..... 7.00 
Plus-subpanels-each additional 100 amps or fraction ..... 10.00 
Services-three phase-panels: 
Base fee-up to 100 amps (includes cable hookup) ..... 30.00 
Plus-per each additional 100 amps or fraction ..... 7.00 
Plus-per each additional meter ..... 7.00 
Plus-subpanels, up to 100 amps ..... 10.00 
Plus-subpanels-each additional 100 amps or fraction ..... 10.00 
Wiring openings (total outlets, lights and switches-120 volt): 
1-10 openings ..... 12.00 
11 to 30 openings ..... 15.00 
31 to 60 openings ..... 20.00 
61 or more openings-each over 60 ..... 0.50 
Appliances-120 volts-Compactors, dishwashers, disposals, air conditioners, etc. ..... 5.00 
Appliances-240 volts ..... TBD 
Ranges, ovens, water heaters, dryers, air conditioners, etc. ..... 10.00 
Domestic heat: 
Electric-per kilowatt ..... 3.00 
Gas, oil, central air, other ..... 12.00 
Manufactured dwellings-per unit (includes service equipment) ..... 42.00 
Swimming pools: 
Above ground ..... 40.00 
In ground ..... 50.00 
Circuses, carnivals, fairs, festivals, etc.: 
Up to 400 amps ..... 50.00 
More than 400 amps ..... 100.00 
Transformers, generators and UPS (battery backup): 
1 to 10 kW/kVA ..... 18.00 
11 to 25 kW/kVA ..... 24.00 
Over 25 kW/kVA ..... 30.00 
Alarm system (copper or fiber): 
Fire, burglar-base fee ..... 18.00 
Plus-per outlet over first 10 outlets ..... 0.50 
Other low voltage system (computer, phone, cable, satellite dish, sound, closed circuit television, etc.)-base fee ..... 18.00 
Plus-per outlet over 10 outlets ..... 0.50 
Motors: 
Fractional to 5 HP ..... 8.00 
6-10 HP ..... 12.00 
11-25 HP ..... 18.00 
Plus-for each 5 HP or fraction thereof over 25 HP ..... 2.00 
Signs: 
Portable, mobile-each sign ..... 15.00 
Permanent-each sign ..... 25.00 
Emergency lighting battery pack unit-each ..... 7.00 
Water, sewer, gas or wall pump-each ..... 10.00 
Hot tubs, spas and saunas-each ..... 37.00 
State business licensing inspections-each ..... 40.00 
Annual industrial electrical permit-does not include new structures or additions ..... 250.00 
Fire alarm box connection-annually: 
DET electronic units ..... 400.00 
Mechanical box connections ..... 425.00 
Belated electrical permit fee-within one calendar year: 
First offense ..... 100.00 
Second offense ..... 200.00 
Third offense ..... 400.00 
Fourth offense ..... 800.00 
Fifth and subsequent offenses-each ..... 1,600.00 
Inspections and department call outs after normal business hours-minimum (additional time beyond three hours shall be calculated at time plus one-half for the on call electrician) ..... 150.00 
Businesses and Business Regulations 
Boardinghouses-annually ..... 100.00 
Lodginghouse, rooming houses, hotels, motels, etc.-annually: 
Up to 10 rooms ..... 75.00 
Over 10 rooms ..... 150.00 
Nursing home-annually ..... 150.00 
Outpatient addiction treatment clinic-annually ..... 200.00 
Closeout sales (30-A M.R.S.A. § 3781)-Maximum of one per business up to 60 days ..... 20.00 
Massage licenses-annually: 
Establishment (more than one therapist)-annually ..... 150.00 
Therapist-annually, plus cost of background check) ..... 150.00 
Solicitation permit (issued by police department)-each ..... 0.00 
Mobile or itinerant vendor permit (door-to-door sales): 
30 days ..... 65.00 
90 days ..... 75.00 
One year ..... 100.00 
Mobile food distribution unit (roving diner): 
Three months ..... 100.00 
Six months ..... 125.00 
Twelve months ..... 150.00 
Vendor use of city property (each three-month period) ..... 50.00 
Peddlers: 
Per event ..... 75.00 
30-day permit ..... 100.00 
Agricultural barn sales-each (maximum of one three-day permit per month between the months of April and October) ..... 15.00 
Garage sales-each (maximum of two three-day permits within six months): 
On-line issuance ..... 10.00 
In office issuance ..... 15.00 
Secondhand dealer license-annually ..... 85.00 
Pawnbroker license-annually plus actual cost of advertising hearing ..... 100.00 
Junkyard/automobile graveyard (no on-line license)-annually plus actual cost of advertising hearing: ..... 100.00 
Taxicabs: 
Taxicab business license (police department inspection required)-annually per cab ..... 55.00 
Taxicab driver's license (Lewiston permit required)-annually ..... 25.00 
Call-out inspection fee (establishment requested outside normal hours)-each, plus inspector's overtime hourly rate ..... 100.00 
Re-inspection fee ..... 100.00 
Flea market, craft fairs, swap meets, and bazaars: 
One day event: 
Up to 25 tables ..... 50.00 
Over 25 tables ..... 100.00 
Three months: 
Per table ..... 50.00 
Maximum per location ..... 500.00 
Alcohol beverage establishments: 
Class A Lounge (liquor)-annually (plus actual cost of advertising hearing) ..... 1,000.00 
Up to 2,999 square feet ..... 1,300.00 
From 3,000 to 5,999 square feet ..... 1,500.00 
6,000 square feet and larger ..... TBD 
Tavern license-annually: 
Up to 2,999 square feet ..... 150.00 
From 3,000 to 9,999 square feet ..... 250.00 
10,000 square feet and larger ..... 300.00 
Entertainment permit-annually ..... 100.00 
Liquor service approval (off-premises catering)-per event ..... 10.00 
Food service establishments (plus actual cost of advertising hearing): 
Class I (Liquor-beer, wine and spirits, and mixed drinks)-annually: 
Up to 2,999 square feet ..... 500.00 
From 3,000 to 5,999 square feet ..... 600.00 
6,000 square feet and larger ..... 700.00 
Class III/IV (Liquor-beer and wine)-annually: 
Up to 2,999 square feet ..... 300.00 
From 3,000 to 5,999 square feet ..... 400.00 
6,000 square feet and larger ..... 500.00 
Class IV (Liquor-beer)-annually: 
Up to 2,999 square feet ..... 300.00 
From 3,000 to 5,999 square feet ..... 400.00 
6,000 square feet and larger ..... 500.00 
Class On or Off Premises (No liquor)-annually: 
Up to 2,999 square feet ..... 150.00 
From 3,000 to 5,999 square feet ..... 200.00 
6,000 square feet and larger ..... 250.00 
Bottle Club/BYOB-annually: 
Up to 2,999 square feet ..... 150.00 
From 3,000 to 5,999 square feet ..... 200.00 
6,000 square feet and larger ..... 250.00 
Temporary Food Service Establishment-per event-maximum of 30 days ..... 60.00 
Off Premises Retailer-annually: 
Up to 2,999 square feet ..... 150.00 
From 3,000 to 5,999 square feet ..... 200.00 
6,000 square feet and larger ..... 250.00 
Adult amusement devices-each device annually ..... 1,055.00 
Beano/Bingo (EnerGov-No online license): 
Per six months ..... 10.00 
Up to three-year blanket approval ..... 20.00 
Bowling alley-annually per lane ..... 85.00 
Carnival, circus, or other traveling amusement-per day ..... 150.00 
Coin-operated amusement device-annually-per device: 
Per unit up to 10 devices ..... 50.00 
Per unit for 10 or more devices ..... 30.00 
Exhibition, performance, show-per day ..... 5.00 
Jukeboxes-each device-annually ..... 30.00 
Motion picture theater-per screen-annually ..... 50.00 
Pool halls-annually per table ..... 50.00 
Roller skating rinks-annually: 
With partial kitchen ..... 60.00 
With full kitchen ..... 120.00 
Dances and dancehalls-per event ..... 35.00 
Mass gathering permit application fee-determined for each event. (EnerGov-No on-line license) ..... N/A 
Tattoo (background check required): 
Tattoo artist license fee-annually ..... 150.00 
Tattoo exhibitions or shows-per event ..... 250.00 
Tattoo artist temporary show for licensed artist-additional per event ..... 50.00 
Race track ..... N/A 
Special amusement (background check required)-annually (plus cost of advertising hearing: ..... 125.00 
Game of Chance (EnerGov-No on-line license): 
Six months ..... 10.00 
Up to three-year blanket approval ..... 20.00 
Relicensing upon late renewal by any existing licensed business: 
30-45 days late ..... 25.00 
More than 45 days late ..... 50.00 
Reoccurring ..... 100.00 
Emergency Management and Services 
Security (alarm) system permit: 
Initial issuance ..... 30.00 
Annual renewal fee, if paid on or before December 31 ..... 5.00 
Annual renewal fee, if paid after December 31 ..... 30.00 
Environment 
Fill permit-original issuance: 
Up to 7,000 square feet of fill area ..... 25.00 
7,001 to 22,500 square feet of fill area ..... 35.00 
Over 22,500 square feet of fill area ..... 50.00 
Fill permit renewal-annually-if not delinquent ..... 0.00 
Fire Prevention and Protection 
Fire department services: 
Oil, propane or gas burner permits: 
Issuance-each ..... 30.00 
Reinspection-each ..... 30.00 
Reports-per copy ..... 10.00 
Research-per hour ..... 20.00 
Old hose-per foot ..... 1.00 
Coverage of a fire/EMS event-per person ..... 45.00 
Accident or fire photos-each-unless otherwise determined by fire chief ..... 10.00 
Photos printed outside of agency-each-plus actual costs ..... 20.00 
Environmental reviews-each ..... 10.00 
Fireworks standby-per hour ..... 200.00 
Demolition burns ..... 2,500.00 
Fire investigations-per hour ..... 100.00 
Hazard material incidents: 
First hour ..... 200.00 
Per each addition hour ..... 400.00 
Illegal/unauthorized burning response-per hour ..... 200.00 
Out of control burn response-per hour ..... 200.00 
Vehicle accidents-per hour ..... 200.00 
Salvage calls-residential: 
Labor-per hour ..... 150.00 
Sump pump-each-per hour ..... 50.00 
Salvage calls-commercial-per hour ..... 500.00 
Life safety code: 
Inspection citations-per violation ..... 50.00 
Each inspection revealing continued violation ..... 100.00 
False alarms-received in one calendar year: 
First ..... 100.00 
Increase in first alarm fee for each subsequent alarm ..... 100.00 
Solid Waste 
Solid waste fees shall be as determined annually by the city council base on prior years' financial information. 
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places 
Display of goods permit-each ..... 0.00 
Excavation permits: 
Minimum charge-single continuous work area ..... 10.00 
Maximum charge-single continuous work area ..... 500.00 
Street openings-per square foot: 
Newly constructed, reconstructed or repaved street ..... 6.00 
Paved streets ..... 5.00 
Gravel streets and shoulders ..... 3.00 
Construction areas (streets scheduled for full-depth construction ..... 5.00 
Sidewalk openings-per square foot: 
Concrete ..... 1.50 
Brick ..... 1.50 
Bituminous concrete ..... 2.00 
Other openings: 
Esplanade-per square foot ..... 0.50 
Granite curbing-per linear foot ..... 1.00 
Bituminous curbing-per linear foot ..... 0.75 
Entrance permit-each ..... 20.00 
Private property ..... N/C 
Inspection of improvements in developments: 
Streets to be accepted by city-as percentage of estimated costs of required public improvements ..... 2% 
Private streets-as percentage of estimated costs of required public-type improvements ..... 2% 
Special exceptions-the greater of: 
Minimum ..... 200.00 
Percentage of public type improvements ..... 2% 
Traffic and Vehicles 
Parade or procession permit-each ..... 0.00 
Parking in city owned parking lot and Mechanics Row parking garage-monthly ..... 45.00 
Zoning 
Zoning text amendments: 
Base fee-each application ..... 400.00 
Additional for required advertising-each application ..... 300.00 
Zoning map amendments: 
Base fee-each application ..... 400.00 
Additional for required advertising-each application ..... 300.00 
Zoning board-appeals, interpretaion, variance, conditional use permit, etc.: 
Base fee-each application ..... 150.00 
Additional for required advertising-each application ..... 200.00 
Site plan review: 
Minor projects-indepartmental/staff review-each application ..... 200.00 
Major projects and subdivision of existing structures-planning board review/special exceptions: 
Base fee-each application ..... 500.00 
Additional for required advertising ..... 200.00 
Site plan amendment: 
Minor projects-staff approved amendments-each ..... 100.00 
Major projects-planning board approved-amendments: 
Base fee-each application ..... 100.00 
Additional for required advertising ..... 200.00 
Subdivision review-new lots and structures: 
First three lots ..... 750.00 
Each additional lot over three ..... 100.00 
Delegated review (in addition to site plan or subdivision fees when required)-includes one or all areas (stormwater, TMP, site law, etc.) ..... TBD 
Zoning conformance/rebuild letter-each ..... 50.00 
Independent professional review fees ..... TBD 
Engineering inspection fees ..... TBD 
Required advertising (unless otherwise specifically provided above) ..... 100.00 
(Ord. of 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 02-03052012, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 12-06152015, 7-6-2015; Ord. No. 13-06152015, 7-6-2015) 
Other General Information: 
  Applicants are responsible for the cost of all public hearing advertisements and background checks required for various licenses. Failure to list that additional expense in the fee schedule shall not eliminate that requirement from the licensing process. 
  Applicants are responsible for providing background checks, not older than 3 days prior to submission of application for all licenses that require such checks or, alternatively, applicants may pay $100.00 to the city with the application to cover the cost of the background check. 
  License fees established in this appendix include two routine or pre-operational inspections and one follow-up inspection. When additional inspections are required, the city may charge an additional $100.00 per inspection to cover the costs of each additional inspection or visit. 
  All first time applications must be made in person, unless otherwise specifically stated herein. 
  All on-line licenses will receive a 10% discount unless otherwise indicated herein. 
  No on-line renewal of liquor licenses, special amusement licenses, or tattoo or massage licenses is permitted. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- All fees in this schedule that are calculated per a unit of time, distance, or other measurement shall be construed to include any portion of such unit. The acronym "TBD" as used herein means "to be determined" and denotes an amount that has not yet been determined by the city council or that may have been determined but not yet included in a supplement to this schedule. The acronym "NA" as used herein means "not applicable" and indicates a fee that is not associated with a particular code section but with the code chapter contents generally. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1967 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1967 Code, as updated through March 1, 1998, that are included herein. Sections of the 1967 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1967 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-1.1 2-1 1-2.1 2-113 2-148 1-2.2 2-578 1-2.3 20-1 1-2.5 1-3 1-2.6, 1-2.7 1-14, 1-15 1-2.8 1-15 1-2.9 2-576, 2-577 1-2.10 2-306 1-2.12 2-307 1-2.14 1-2 1-2.15 1-12 1-2.17 2-484 1-2.18 2-483 1-3.1-1-3.7 2-52-2-58 1-3.16-1-3.23 2-59-2-66 1-4.1 2-110 1-4.2 2-109 1-4.3, 1-4.4 2-111, 2-112 1-4.5-1-4.7 2-114-2-116 1-5.1-1-5.4 2-486 1.3 12-23 1.6-1.8 12-23 2-2.1-2-2.5 2-2 2-2.6 2-3 2-3.1-2-3.3 2-406-2-408 4-1.1, 4-1.2 2-146, 2-147 4-2.1-4-2.5 2-511-2-515 5-1.1, 5-1.2 2-255 5-1.3 2-256 5-2.1-5-2.6 2-430-2-435 6-1.1-6-1.3 2-359-2-361 7-1.4 12-21 8-1.1, 8-1.2 2-222, 2-223 9-1.2 12-23 9-1.4 12-96 9-1.9 12-97 9-1.10-9-1.16 12-99-12-105 9-1.19 12-106 9-1.22 12-108 9-2.11, 9-2.12 12-109, 12-110 9-2.13 12-19 9-3.1 12-98 9-3.2 12-23 10-1.2 2-335 11-1.1, 11-1.2 20-21, 20-22 11-1.3 20-30 11-1.4 20-23 11-1.5 20-26 11-2.1-11-2.3 20-27-20-29 12-1.2 2-276 12-1.4 2-277 13-1.1, 13-1.2 2-334 13-1.3 56-19 15-1.1 26-19 15-1.3-15-1.5 26-21-26-23 15-1.8, 15-1.9 26-24, 26-25 16-1.1-16-1.3 12-20 16-2.1-16-2.4 12-22 16-2.5 12-24 17-1.1 2-180 18-1.6 34-48 18-3.1 2-454 18-3.2 2-457 18-3.3, 18-3.4 2-455, 2-456 18-92 6-12 19-1.2 2-199 21-1.1 20-53 21-1.4 20-57 21-1.7 20-58 21-1.8, 21-1.9 20-54, 20-55 21-1.12 20-56 21-1.15 20-59 22-1.1 18-1 22-3.1 44-24 22-3.3-22-3.9 44-25-44-31 24-2.32.I 6-95 24-2.32.A 6-64 24-2.32.B 6-62 24-2.32.C(1)-24-2.32.C(3) 6-87-6-89 24-2.32.D-24-2.32.H 6-90-6-94 24-2.32.J, 24-2.32.K 6-96, 6-97 24-2.32.L 6-63 24-2.32.M 6-98 24-2.34.A.1 6-125 24-2.34.A.2-24-2.34.A.5 6-129-6-132 24-2.34.A.6 6-127 24-2.34.A.7 6-126 24-2.34.B.1-24-2.34.B.3 6-163-6-166 25-2.1, 25-2.2 44-32, 44-33 25-2.3 44-84 25-2.6-25-2.8 44-85-44-87 25-2.9 44-87 25-3.2, 25-3.3 42-69, 42-70 25-3.5 42-71 25-5.7 4-60 26-2.1 52-33 26-2.2(a) 52-32 26-2.2(b)-(e) 52-61 26-2.3 52-31 26-2.4-26-2.6 52-3-52-5 26-2.7 52-35 26-3.1-26-3.3 52-62-52-64 26-4.1-26-4.8 52-168-52-175 26-4.9, 26-4.10 52-177, 52-178 26-4.11(a), 26-4.11(b) 52-205, 52-206 26-4.12 52-149 26-4.13 52-179 26-4.14 52-167 26-4.16 52-180 26-4.17 52-2 26-4.18 52-181 26-5.1-26-5.6 52-259-52-264 26-6.5 52-265 26-6.6 52-65 26-6.7, 26-6.8 52-34 26-6.10 52-34 26-6.11 52-122 26-6.12, 26-6.13 52-147, 52-148 26-6.14 52-207 26-6.15 52-123 26-6.17 52-36 26-6.18 52-124 26-6.19 52-121 26-6.20 52-66 26-6.22 52-150 26-8.1 52-31 26-8.2, 26-8.3 52-203 26-8.4 52-204 26-9.1 58-1 26-9.2-26-9.8 58-21-58-27 26-9.9(a), 26-9.9(b) 58-58, 58-59 26-9.10-26-9.16 58-60-58-66 26-9.17-26-9.22 58-91-58-96 27-1.1 46-1 27-1.4 46-23 27-1.9 46-24 27-1.11(a), (b) 46-25 27-1.11(c) 46-26 27-1.11(d), (e) 46-27 27-1.12 42-68 27-1.13 32-6 27-1.14 46-28 27-1.16 32-5 27-1.17 46-59 27-1.18, 27-1.19 46-29, 46-30 27-1.22 46-31 27-1.23 46-60 27-1.25-27-1.28 46-32-46-35 27-1.29 56-20 27-1.30 34-58 27-1.31 36-19 27-1.33 46-2 27-1.34 32-3 27-1.36 30-120 27-1.37 32-4 27-1.38 52-6 27-1.39 32-1 27-1.40 52-182 27-1.41 32-2 27-1.42 52-182 27-5.1, 27-5.2 42-40, 42-41 27-5.3-27-5.6 42-43-42-46 27-5.7 42-42 27-5.8 42-47 27-7.1-27-7.3 52-238-52-240 28-1.1-28-1.5 10-20-10-24 28-1.6 10-19 28-2.1-28-2.4 54-24-54-27 28-3.2 54-23 28-3.3 54-2 28-3.4 54-1 33-1.1 2-605 33-1.2-33-1.4 2-607-2-609 33-2.1-33-2.8 2-637-2-644 33-2.9 2-662 33-2.10 2-606 34-1.1 18-22 34-1.2 18-21 34-1.3-34-1.5 18-24-18-26 34-1.6-34-1.9 18-56-18-59 34-2.0 18-23  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1967 Code, as updated through March 1, 1998, that are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1967 Code, as supplemented. This table may contain some ordinances that precede March 1, 1998, that were never included in the 1967 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since March 1, 1998, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Date Section  Section 
this Code  6- 7-1982(Ord.) 20-59 12-16-1996(1)(Ord.) 1.1, 1.2 50-19, 50-20 1.3-1.6 50-22-50-25 1.7 50-21 1.8-1.10 50-26-50-28  4-28-1997(Ord.) 50-21  5- 5-1997(Ord.) 24-2.33.A 14-182 24-2.33.B 14-180 24-2.33.C, 
24-2.33.D 14-184, 14-185 24-2.33.E 14-209 24-2.33.G-24-2.33.O 14-210-14-250 24-2.33.P-24-2.33.W 14-245-14-252 24-2.33.X 14-181 24-2.33.Y 14-183  9-22-1997(1)(Ord.) 20-57 10-27-1997(2)(Ord.) 52-203  1-12-1998(Ord.) 2-58  3- 2-1998(Ord.) 42-44  3-16-1998(Ord.) 2-59  4- 6-1998(Ord.) 1(art. I) 24-20 1(art. II, §§ 2.1, 2.2) 24-19 1(art. III, § 3.1), 
1(art. III, § 3.2) 24-21, 24-22 1(art. IV, § 4.1)- 
1(art. IV, § 4.10) 24-50-24-59 1(art. V, § 5.1)- 
1(art. V, § 5.5) 24-78-24-82 1(art. V, § 5.6)- 
1(art. V, § 5.8) 24-84-24-86 1(art. V) 24-77 1(art. VI, § 6.1)- 
1(art. VI, § 6.7) 24-116-24-122 1(art. VI, § 6.8) 24-147-24-162 1(art. VI, § 6.9), 
1(art. VI, § 6.10) 24-123, 24-124 1(art. VII, § 7.1)- 
1(art. VII, § 7.5) 24-193-24-197 1(art. VIII, § 8.1)- 
1(art. VIII, § 8.4) 24-218-24-221 11-15-1999(Ord.) 58-21 12- 6-1999(2)(Ord.) 42-44  4-23-2001(Ord.) 6-44  7-30-2001(Ord.) 52-262 11-19-2001(1)(Ord.) 20-59 11-19-2001(2)(Ord.) 42-44  1- 9-2002(Ord.) 12-96  2-26-2002(Ord.) 1-4 46-142-46-145 5.1 46-174-46-182 5.2, 5.3 46-183, 46-184 6.1-6.6 46-207-46-212 7.1-7.4 46-233-46-236 8.1, 8.2 46-266, 46-267 9.1 46-298 9.3 46-299 10- 6-2003(Ord.) A 30-84 C 30-85, 30-86 D, E 30-87, 30-88 11- 3-2003(Ord.) A 44-1 B, C 44-21, 44-22 C 44-23  3- 1-2004(Ord.) 2.1-2.5 2-2 2.6 2-3  4-26-2004(02)(Ord.) 2.1 12-22 2.4 12-22  4-26-2004(Ord.) 1.19, 1.20 12-106, 12-107 1.22 12-108  7-12-2004(1)(Ord.) 4.18 52-181  1-24-2005(Ord.) 12-96  3-21-05(Ord.)       Added 18-121-18-128  5- 2-2005(01)(Ord.) 6-1 6-7  5- 2-2005(02)(Ord.) 42-44  1- 1-2007(02)(Ord.) 14-42 52-176  1-16-2007(Ord.) 2-59 6-164  5-21-2007(Ord.) 2-485  8-13-2007(Ord.) 20-32  9-17-2007(Ord.) 46-91 52-96 10- 1-2007(2)(Ord.) 14-1 8-1 14-2, 14-3 8-23, 8-24 14-4 8-2 14-7 8-54 14-9 8-92 14-10-14-13 8-115-8-118 14-14, 14-15 8-150, 8-151 14-16, 14-17 8-73, 8-74 14-18-14-23 8-171-8-176 14-24 8-25 14-25, 14-26 8-234, 8-235 14-27-14-30 8-264-8-267 14-31, 14-32 8-298, 8-299 14-33, 14-34 8-61, 8-62 14-36 8-56 14-37-14-41 8-68-8-72 14-43 8-67 14-44 8-57 10- 1-2007(01)(Ord.) 2.1-2.12 16-47-16-58 10- 1-2007(3)(Ord.) 6.2 30-1 6.2-6.7 30-21-30-26 11- 5-2007(01)(Ord.) 52-376  1-28-2008(01)(Ord.) 2-59  3- 3-2008(Ord.) 12-96  9-15-2008(Ord.) 52-376 12-15-2008(Ord.) 1.15 20-59 1.19 20-55  1- 5-2009(Ord.) 1.9 20-55  3-16-2009(Ord.) 3.51(A), 
3.51(B) 60-359, 60-360 3.51(C)(1) 60-381, 60-382 3.51(C)(1)-3.51(C)(4) 60-384-60-387 3.51(D) 60-361 3.51(E)(1), 3.51(E)(2) 60-419, 60-420 3.51(E)(intro. ¶) 60-418 (3.51)(C) 60-383  7-20-2009(Ord.) 1       Added 18-100-18-106  9-21-2009(Ord.) 1.1-1.4 60-3-60-6 2.1, 2.2 60-1, 60-2 3.1A 60-33 3.1B 60-34 3.1C 60-35 3.1D 60-36 3.1E 60-37 3.1F 60-38 3.1G 60-39 3.1H 60-40 3.1I 60-41 3.1J 60-42 3.1K 60-43 3.1L 60-44 3.1M 60-45 3.1N 60-46 3.1O 60-47 3.1P 60-48 3.1Q 60-49 3.1R 60-50 3.1S 60-51 3.1T 60-52 3.2A 60-78 3.2B 60-79 3.2C 60-80 3.2D 60-81 3.2E 60-82 3.2F 60-83 3.2G 60-84 3.2H 60-85 3.2I 60-86 3.31A 60-144 3.31B 60-172 3.31C 60-173 3.32A 60-200 3.32B 60-201 3.32C 60-202 3.41A 60-228 3.41B 60-229 3.41C 60-230 3.42A 60-254 3.42B 60-255 3.42C 60-256 3.43A 60-276 3.43B 60-277 3.43C 60-278 3.44A 60-305 60-333 3.44B 60-306 3.44C 60-307 3.45B 60-334 3.45C 60-335 3.51A 60-359 3.51B 60-360 3.51C 60-381-60-387 3.51D 60-361 3.51E 60-418-60-420 3.52A 60-439 3.52B 60-440 3.52C 60-441 3.52D 60-442 3.52E 60-443 3.52F 60-443 3.61A 60-470 3.61B 60-471 3.61C 60-472 3.62A 60-498 3.62B 60-499 3.62C 60-500 3.63A 60-524 3.63B 60-525 3.63C 60-526 3.69A 60-546 3.69B 60-547 3.69C 60-548 3.69D 60-549 3.71A 60-577 3.71B 60-578 3.71C 60-579 4.1A 60-607 4.1B 60-608 4.1C 60-609 4.2A 60-637 4.2B 60-638 4.3A 60-665 4.3B 60-666 4.3C 60-667 4.3D 60-668 4.3E 60-669 4.4A 60-697 4.4B 60-698 4.4C 60-699 4.4D 60-700 4.4E 60-701 4.4F 60-702 4.4G 60-703 4.5A 60-736 4.5B 60-735 4.5C 60-737 4.5D 60-738 4.5G 60-739 4.5H 60-740 4.5I 60-741 4.5J 60-742 4.5K 60-743 4.6A 60-771 4.6B 60-770 4.6C 60-772 4.6D(1)-4.6D(8) 60-799-60-806 4.6D(intro. ¶) 60-798 4.7A 60-837 4.7B 60-836 4.7C 60-838 4.7D 60-839 4.7E 60-840 4.7F 60-841 4.7G 60-842 4.7H 60-843 5.1A 60-894 5.1B 60-895 5.1C 60-896 5.1D 60-897 5.1E 60-898 5.1F 60-899 5.1G 60-900 5.1H 60-901 5.1I 60-893 5.1J 60-892 5.2A 60-921 5.2B 60-922 5.2C 60-923 5.3A 60-950 5.3B 60-951 5.3C 60-952 5.3D 60-953 5.3E 60-954 5.4A 60-982 5.4B 60-983 5.4C 60-984 5.4D 60-985 5.4E 60-986 5.4F 60-987 5.4G 60-988 5.4H 60-989 5.4I 60-990 5.5A 60-1009 5.5B 60-1010 5.5C 60-1010 5.6A 60-1034 5.6B 60-1035 5.6C 60-1036 5.6D 60-1037 5.6E 60-1038 5.6F 60-1039 5.6G 60-1040 5.7A 60-1064 5.7B 60-1065 5.7C 60-1066 5.7D 60-1067 5.7E 60-1068 5.7F 60-1069 5.7G 60-1070 5.8A 60-1094 5.8B 60-1095 5.81C 60-1096 6.1A 60-1130 6.1B 60-1131 6.1C 60-1132 6.1D 60-1133 6.1E 60-1134 6.1F 60-1135 6.2A 60-1151 6.2B 60-1152 6.2C 60-1153 6.3A 60-1185 6.3B 60-1186 6.3C 60-1187 6.4 60-1208 6.5A 60-1235 6.5B 60-1236 6.5C 60-1237 7.1A 60-1276 7.1B 60-1277 7.1C 60-1278 7.1D 60-1313 7.1D(1)-7.1D(13) 60-1300-60-1312 7.2A 60-1335 7.2B 60-1336 7.2C 60-1337 7.3A 60-1359 7.3B 60-1360 7.3C 60-1361 7.3D 60-1362 7.3E 60-1363 7.3F 60-1364 7.3G 60-1365 7.3H 60-1366 7.3I 60-1367 7.3J 60-1368 7.4A 60-1381 7.4B 60-1382 7.5A 60-1401 7.5B 60-1402 7.5C 60-1403 8.1A 60-1445 8.1B 60-1446 8.1C 60-1447 8.1D 60-1448 8.1E 60-1449 8.2A 60-1474 8.2B 60-1475 8.2C 60-1473 8.3 60-1496 9.1 60-7 10- 5-2009(Ord.) 4.4 52-171 4.4a 46-33 11-19-2009(Ord.) 52-376  2- 1-2010(Ord.) 52-320, 52-348       Rnbd 52-351       as 52-352       Added 52-351 52-443  2-16-2010(Ord.) 60-548  3-22-2010(Ord.) 60-500(4)  5- 3-2010(Ord.) 2-610, 2-641  6- 7-2010(Ord.) 2-539-2-556  6- 7-2010(Ord.) 60-638(a)  1-18-2011(Ord.) 60-43(e)  2- 7-2011(Ord.) 60-172(b)(14)  2- 7-2011(Ord.) att. § 24-1 14-1 att. § 24-2 14-3 att. § 24-3 14-4, 14-6 att. § 24-4 14-5 att. § 24-5 14-7 att. § 24-6 14-8 att. § 24-7 14-9 att. § 24-26 14-26 att. § 24-27 14-27 att. § 24-28 14-28 att. § 24-29 14-29 att. § 24-30 14-30 att. § 24-31 14-31 att. § 24-32 14-32 att. § 24-33 14-33 att. § 24-34 14-34, 14-35 att. § 24-35 14-36 att. § 24-36 14-37, 14-38 att. § 24-37 14-38, 14-39 att. § 24-38 14-40 att. § 24-39 14-41 att. § 24-40 14-42 att. § 24-41 14-43 att. § 24-43 14-44 att. § 24-44 14-45 att. § 24-45 14-46 att. § 24-46 14-47 att. § 24-47 14-48 att. § 24-48 14-49 att. § 24-72 14-72 att. § 24-73 14-73 att. § 24-74 14-74 att. § 24-75 14-100 att. § 24-76 14-101 att. § 24-77 14-120 att. § 24-123 14-140 att. § 24-124 14-141 att. § 24-125 14-142 att. § 24-147 14-160 att. § 24-148 14-161 att. § 24-149 14-162 att. § 24-150 14-163 att. § 24-152 14-153 att. § 24-153 14-165 att. § 24-154 14-166, 14-167 att. § 24-167 14-190 att. § 24-169 14-191 att. § 24-170 14-210 att. § 24-171 14-211 att. § 24-172 14-212 att. § 24-175 14-216 att. § 24-191 14-220 att. § 24-192 14-221 att. § 24-193 14-222 att. § 24-194 14-223 att. § 24-195 14-224 att. § 24-196 14-224 att. § 24-222 14-250 att. § 24-218 14-251 att. § 24-200 14-252 att. § 24-201 14-255 att. § 24-202 14-256 att. § 24-203 14-254 att. § 24-204 14-263 att. § 24-205 14-264 att. § 24-206 14-265 att. § 24-207 14-266 att. § 24-208 14-267 att. § 24-209 14-268 att. § 24-210 14-269 att. § 24-211 14-270 att. § 24-212 14-271 att. § 24-213 14-253 att. § 24-214 14-272 att. § 24-215 14-273 att. § 24-216 14-274 att. § 24-217 14-275 att. § 24-219 14-262 att. § 24-220 14-257 att. § 24-221 14-258 att. § 24-223 14-259 att. § 24-224 14-260 att. § 24-225 14-261 att. § 24-316 14-316 att. § 24-317 14-317 att. § 24-318 14-318 att. § 24-319 14-319 att. § 24-320 14-320 att. § 24-321 14-321 att. § 24-341 14-341 att. § 24-342 14-342 att. § 24-343 14-343 att. § 24-344 14-344 att. § 24-345 14-345 att. § 24-346 14-346 att. § 24-361 14-340 att. § 24-362 14-347 att. § 24-382 14-370 att. § 24-383 14-371 att. § 24-384 14-372 att. § 24-386 14-373 att. § 24-386 14-374 att. § 24-389 14-375 att. § 24-390 14-376 att. § 24-391 14-377 att. § 24-392 14-378 att. § 24-393 14-379 att. § 24-394 14-380 att. § 24-395 14-381 att. § 24-396 14-382 att. § 24-398 14-383 att. § 24-399 14-384 att. § 24-400 14-385 att. § 24-401 14-386 att. § 24-402 14-387 att. § 24-403 14-388 att. § 24-406 14-406 att. § 24-407 14-407 att. § 24-408 14-408 att. § 24-408 14-409 att. § 24-410 14-410 att. § 24-411 14-411 att. § 24-412 14-412 att. § 24-413 14-413 att. § 24-420 14-401, 14-454, 14-502 att. § 24-421 14-503 att. § 24-422 14-504 att. § 24-423 14-505 att. § 24-424 14-506 att. § 24-425 14-507 att. § 24-426 14-508 att. § 24-427 14-451 att. § 24-428 14-452 att. § 24-429 14-453 att. § 24-430 14-500 att. § 24-431 14-455 att. § 24-432 14-475 att. § 24-433 14-476 att. § 24-434 14-477 att. § 24-440 14-530 att. § 24-450 14-600 att. § 24-451 14-601 att. § 24-452 14-602 att. § 24-453 14-603 att. § 24-454 14-604 att. § 24-455 14-605 att. § 24-456 14-606 att. § 24-457 14-607 att. § 24-458 14-608 att. § 24-460 14-630 att. § 24-462 14-631 att. § 24-463 14-632 att. § 24-464 14-633  2- 7-2011(Ord.) 60-201(b)(1)  2-22-2011(Ord.) 1-7 Adopt. Ord.  3-21-2011 52-443  5- 2-2011(Ord.) App. A  8- 1-2011(Ord.) 60-201(b)(1)  8- 1-2011(Ord.) 60-172(b)(15)  9- 6-2011(Ord.) 60-2  9- -2011(Ord.) 60-578(b)(7)  9-19-2011(Ord.) 8-298, 60-2 11- 7-2011(Ord.) 24-23 12-15-2011(Ord.) 20-80-20-83  2- 6-2012(Ord.) 2-180       Rpld 2-406-2-408  3-19-2012(Ord.) 14-554  8- 6-2012(Ord.) 24-23  8- 6-2012(Ord.) 42-44  4-16-2013(Ord.) att. A       Added 2-466-2-476 att. B       Added 12-145-12-150, 12-170-12-172, 12-195-12-201, 12-225-12-234 att. C       Added 18-100-18-106 att. D. 60-1308, 60-1373 60-1363  5- 6-2013(Ord.) 2-25, 2-382  7- 1-2013(Ord.)       Rpld 60-892-60-901       Added 60-892-60-902 10-21-2013(Ord.) 24-23 11- 7-2013(Ord.) 24-36(a) 14-26 24-36(b) 14-34  9- 3-2013(Ord.)       Added 32-71-32-75 10- 7-2013(Ord.) 52-181 11-18-2013(Ord.) 14-2  2-24-2014(Ord.) 2-514  
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 02-03032014  3-17-2014 2-2 05-08042014  8-18-2014 24-21 06-08182014  9-22-2014 12-96 08-09222014 10- 6-2014 14-26 09-10202014 11- 3-2014 24-23 10-12012014 12-15-2014 2-485 01-01202015  2- 9-2015 2-466-2-476 02-01202015  2- 9-2015 2-59 04-01262015  2- 9-2015 14-275 05-02022015  2-17-2015 56-19 06-02022015  2-17-2015 2-12 56-21 07-02022015  2-17-2015 1-7       Added 2-477-2-482.1 08-02022015  2-17-2015 2 2-256(a) 09-02022015  2-17-2015 2-359 10-02172015  3- 2-2015       Added 14-251(e)(22) 11-04062015  4-21-2015 2-487 12-06152015  7- 6-2015 14-2 Ch. 14, Art. XVII(title)       Rnbd 14-632, 14-633       as 14-633, 14-634       Added 14-632 App. A 13-06152015  7- 6-2015 14-2, App. A 14-10052015 10-19-2015 24-23 01-01042016  1- 4-2016 2-58 02-02222016  3- 7-2016 12-146 12-149 12-150 12-170-12-172 12-195 12-199-12-201 12-227 12-228 12-231 04-03212016  4- 4-2016 60-607 04-03072016  5-16-2016 60-2 60-4-60-6 60-35 60-40 60-47       Rpld 60-546-60-549       Added 60-546-60-552.3       Added 60-554-60-558 05-07112016  8- 1-2016       Added 56-41-56-49 08-10032016 10-17-2016 24-23 10-10172016 11- 7-2016 60-1301 11-11072016 11-21-2016 60-2 60-499(b)(11) 60-525(b)(8) 01-02062017  2-27-2017       Added 39-1-39-8 02-03062017  3-20-2017       Added 2-482.2-2-482.6 03-03062017  3-20-2017       Added 46-3 05-04032017  4-24-2017 1 60-2 2       Added 60-145(b)(16), 60-201(b)(3), 60-229(b)(17), 60-255(b)(3), 60-277(b)(1), 60-306(b)(1), 60-334(b)(3), 60-440(b)(8), 60-471(b)(7), 60-499(b)(21), 60-525(b)(15), 60-554, 60-578(b)(36) 3 60-1302 06-06052017  6-19-2017       Added 60-145(b)(17) 011-09072010-07  9- 7-2010       Rpld 60-982-60-990       Added 60-982- 
60-1008.1 07-08072017  8-21-2017       Added 14-50 08-08072017  9-11-2017 60-2, 60-359-60-361, 60-382-60-385,       Added 60-386,       Rnbd 60-386, 60-387       as 60-387, 60-388 60-387, 60-388, 60-420 11-10162017 11- 6-2017 24-23(a)       Added 24-23(a)(4) 12-10162017 11- 6-2017 24-21(d) 24-161(8)(h) 13-11062017 11-20-2017 60-2 03-06182018  6-18-2018       Added 61-1 05-07162018  8- 6-2018       Rpld 2-454(b) 06-10152018 11- 5-2018 24-23  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Maine statutory law. 
M.R.S.A. 
Title Section Section 
this Code 1 71(2), (3) 1-2 71(7-A) 1-2 71(8) 1-12 71(9) 1-2 71(9-A) 1-2 71(10), (11) 1-3 71(12) 1-2 72(3) 1-2 72(12) 1-2 72(14), (15) 1-2 72(21) 1-2 72(28) 1-2 72(30) 1-2 91(1) 1-13 93 1-5 151 1-2 401 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 761 Ch. 16 3 1912 42-44 5 1741 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 4551 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 4581 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 4591 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 4681 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 8001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IX 9057(2) 24-193 6 1 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 171 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 241 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) Ch. 60 (note) 7 1 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 17 Ch. 8 (note) Ch. 8, Art. III 8-1 8-55 8-60-8-62 401 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. VII chs. 521-531 8-299 chs. 717-745 8-1 1011(2) 8-1 1011(12-B) 8-1 1011(17) 8-1 1011(21) 8-1 1011(23) 8-1 1011(24-A) 8-1 1031 Ch. 8 (note) Ch. 8, Art. III 8-60-8-62 1035-1037 8-55 1701 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 1751(2) 8-1 2701 et seq. 8-299 3901 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) Ch. 8, Art. III 3907(2) 8-1 3907(4)- 
3907(6) 8-1 3907(12-C), (12-D) 8-1 3907(16) 8-1 3907(18-A) 8-1 3907(21) 8-1 3907(22-B) 8-1 3907(23) 8-1 3907(24-A) 8-1 3907(25-A) 8-1 3911 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 3911 8-68 8-71 3916 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) Ch. 8, Art. IV 3916 8-115 3921 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 3921 8-93 3941 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 3947 8-24 3948 Ch. 8, Art. III 3950 Ch. 8 (note) 3950(1) 8-71 3951 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. VI 3951 Ch. 8 (note) 3961 et seq. 8-67 3971 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) Ch. 8, Art. III 3972(1)(A) 8-63 4011 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 4011 Ch. 8, Art. III 8-60-8-62 4013 8-54, 8-55 4014 8-54, 8-55 4015 8-54, 8-55 4019 8-57 4201-4209 60-1002 7-A 201 et seq. 14-50 8 227-A 20-81 364 14-2 490-A- 
490-M 60-703 9-A 8-101 et seq. 14-221 10 9701 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 9721 12-76 9721 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 9722 12-76 9724 12-76 9725 12-76 Ch. 20 (note) 20-53 12 1 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 11221 8-73 13-A 311-329 14-100 14 8101 et seq. 42-68 16 620(6) 14-375 17 ch. 42 8-1 8-58 1011 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 8-58 1011(5-A) 8-1 1011(26) 8-58 1033 8-59 2003-A(D) 14-550 2701 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 2702 Ch. 30 (note) 2741 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 2802, 2803 Ch. 30 (note) 2851 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 2911(1) 14-2 3853-C Ch. 52, Art. V 17-A 2 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 17 Ch. 2, Art. VIII 57 1-16 251 14-386 456 1-9 501-A Ch. 30, Art. III 509 16-56 806 Ch. 30, Art. II 32-5 52-64 851-855 14-382 1101 32-72 1102 32-72 1325 8-172 20-A 6805 Ch. 30, Art. II 21-A 1 et seq. 2-180 631 2-2 22 396-F(1) 24-161 451 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 8 454-A 2-276 1562 8-73 1604 14-259 2167 Ch. 14 (note) 2491 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 2491-2501 Ch. 14, Art. VII 2499 2-277 2706 24-21 4301 24-19 4301 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) Ch. 24, Art. II 24-20 4303-B 24-147 4305 Ch. 24 (note) Ch. 24, Art. II 4306 24-21, 24-22 4308 24-50 24-52-24-57 4308(2)(B) 24-58 4309 24-50 24-53 24-77 4310 24-58 4313(2) 24-21 24-161 4314 24-21 4315 24-21 24-119 4316-A 24-19 4317 24-220 4318 24-53 24-83 24-218 4319 24-221 4320 24-162 4321 24-123 4322 24-123 24-193 4305.3-B 24-122 23 59 Ch. 46 (note) 704-A(2) 46-236 704-A(4) 46-236 1001 et seq. Ch. 52, Art. IV 1003 Ch. 52, Art. IV 1005-A Ch. 52, Art. IV 1007 Ch. 52, Art. IV 1153 Ch. 42 (note) 1351 Ch. 46 (note) 1901 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 42, Art. II, 
Div. 2 1901-1925 42-45 1903 42-41 1906 Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 42, Art. II, 
Div. 2 1909 42-43 1911, 1912 42-44 1914 60-637 1914(11-A) 60-637 1917-A Ch. 42 (note) 1918 42-46 1922 Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 42, Art. II, 
Div. 2 2421-2430-B 61-1 2422 et seq. 61-1 2701 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 2802 Ch. 52, Art. V 52-168- 
52-171 52-173- 
52-175 52-177 52-179- 
52-181 3052 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 3201 Ch. 52, Art. IV 3251 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 3271 Ch. 46 (note) 3351 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 3352 Ch. 46 (note) 3360-A Ch. 46, Art. IV 46-79 25 2351 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) Ch. 20 (note) 2351-A et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 2371 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 2391 20-1 2391 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 2395 20-1 2397 20-1 2471 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 2701 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 2932 Ch. 16 (note) 26 1043 et seq. 24-82 24-84 28-A 2 14-550 14-582 161 14-211 14-580 161-A 14-211 161-B 14-581 1054 14-600 2051 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. II 28-B ch. 1 61-1 102 61-1 1501(2) 61-1 29-A 19 30-85 101 et seq. Ch. 52 (note) 52-2 101 52-1 101(42) 14-2 103 52-31 521(9-A) 52-181 1912 30-85 2051 et seq. Ch. 52, Art. III 2053 52-63 2054 52-4 52-34 2055(1) 52-5 2057 Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. II, 
Div. 2 52-62 2057(7) 52-63 2059 52-65 2060 52-124 2062 52-260 52-265 2063 Ch. 52 (note) 2067(3) 52-178 2068 Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. V 52-168- 
52-171 52-173- 
52-175 52-177 52-179- 
52-181 2069 Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. IV, 
Ch. 52, Art. V 52-149, 
52-150 52-171 52-204 2072 52-124 2078 52-33 2079-A Ch. 30, Art. III 30-86 2084 Ch. 52 (note) 52-260 2091 52-33 2101-A et seq. 52-31 2107 Ch. 52 (note) 52-64 2396 Ch. 52, Art. IV 30 3751 et seq. 14-74 30-A 56-21 56-43 1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 2001 1-2 2001(10) 1-2 2001(12) 1-2 2001(14) 1-2 2002 2-1 2003 Ch. 2, Art. IV 2004 Ch. 2 (note) 2006 2-1 2101 et seq. Char. (note) Ch. 1 (note) 2102 Char. (note) 2104 Char. (note) 2203 20-31 2501 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 2521 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 2601 Ch. 2, Art. III 2601 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 2601-A Ch. 2, Art. III 2602, 2603 Ch. 2, Art. III 2605 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 2-112 2606, 2607 Ch. 2, Art. III 2631 Ch. 2 (note) Ch. 2, Art. II 2631 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 2632-2636 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 2651 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 4 2651 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 4 2-54 2652-2655 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 4 2671-2673 Ch. 26 (note) 2673 26-25 2674, 2675 Ch. 26 (note) 2691(3) 60-1208 2801 Ch. 2, Art. VI 2801, 2802 2-60 2851 2-3 2951 et seq. Ch. 60 (note) 3001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 3001 14-50 14-600 39-3 56-21 56-42 3001-3007 60-892 3003 1-15 12-96 20-53 3004 Ch. 1 (note) 1-1 1-7 3004(1) Ch. 1 (note) 3005 Ch. 1 (note) 1-10 3006 Ch. 1 (note) 3007 Char. (note) 3007(6) 61-1 Ch. 32 (note) 32-6 3008 Ch. 50 (note) 3009 Ch. 46 (note) Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. IV, 
Ch. 52, Art. V 52-2 3009-A Ch. 26 (note) 3010 Ch. 50 (note) 50-26 3014 39-3 3102 Ch. 18 (note) 3104 8-56 8-71 8-92 Ch. 30 (note) Ch. 44 (note) Ch. 56 (note) 3151 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) Ch. 20, Art. II 3153 20-22 3154 20-21 20-26 3156 20-30 3157 20-27 3252 Ch. 56 (note) 3252 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) 3253 Ch. 34 (note) 3261-3263 2-477 3281 56-21 56-43 3281 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) Ch. 56 (note) 3282 Ch. 34 (note) Ch. 56 (note) 3283 Ch. 34 (note) Ch. 56 (note) 3284 Ch. 34 (note) Ch. 56 (note) 3291 Ch. 56 (note) 3351 Ch. 44 (note) 3352 Ch. 30 (note) Ch. 44 (note) 3401 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) 3405, 3406 Ch. 54 (note) 3406-A Ch. 54 (note) 3407 Ch. 54 (note) 3421 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) 3701 Ch. 14 (note) 3752 et seq. 14-73 3754-A 14-74 3755-A 14-74 3756 14-73 3781 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 3811 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 14-570 3931 Ch. 14, Art. VII 4101 Ch. 12 (note) 12-21 4101 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 4102, 4103 Ch. 12 (note) 4103 12-21 4151 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 12-23 4161 et seq. 12-23 4171 12-23 4201 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 4211 12-22 4221 et seq. 12-22 4221(3) 12-22 4301 et seq. Ch. 60 (note) 4321 et seq. Ch. 60 (note) 4323 60-2 4351 et seq. Ch. 60 (note) 4352 Ch. 60 (note) 60-892 4353 60-1235 4356 61-1 4358 Ch. 60 (note) 60-1009 4401 et seq. Ch. 60 (note) 4401-4407 60-892 4401 60-2 4451 et seq. Ch. 60 (note) 4451 60-893 4452 18-23 18-106 18-128 20-56 60-901 61-1 5601 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 5 5601 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 5 5603 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 5 2-199 5604 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 5 5651 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 Ch. 2, Art. VI 5651 Ch. 2, Art. VI 2-483 5701 Ch. 2, Art. VI 5721 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 5801 Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 5821 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 2-360 6111 2-484 32 59 Ch. 14 (note) 1251 et seq. 2-335 1254 2-335 1751-1854 Ch. 14, Art. VII 9403(10) 16-47 14301 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 34-A 11201 39-2 35-A 2101 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) Ch. 54 (note) 8301 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) 36 111 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 201 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 471-A Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 501 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 551 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 601 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 701 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 7 751 et seq. 2-223 Ch. 48 (note) 891 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 1751 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 1752(1) Ch. 42 (note) 37-B 701 16-23 701 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 742 Ch. 16 (note) 16-22 781 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 781 16-19 782 16-20 783 Ch. 16 (note) 16-24 784 16-23 822, 823 16-26, 16-27 828 16-28 850 Ch. 16 (note) 38 38 14-2 60-703 341 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 361-A et seq. 18-59 363-A 14-2 411 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 420-D 46-209 60-1301 435-449 60-983 440 60-892 480-A et seq. 18-59 480-C 60-992 481 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 484 Ch. 30, Art. III 484(4-A) 60-1301 489-A 60-1301 490 60-703 571 Ch. 18 (note) 581 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 597 Ch. 18 (note) 1301 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 1391 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 1726-A et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 2101 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 2133 Ch. 44 (note) 2204 Ch. 44 (note)  
