TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF CARIBOU
Article I Powers of the City 4
Article II City Council 4
Article III City Manager 12
Article IV Administrative Departments 13
Article V Financial Procedures 15
Article VI Appropriation for Public Education 19
Article VII Nominations and Elections 20
Article VIII Initiative and Referendum 20
Article IX General Provisions 23
Article X Transitional Provisions 24
THE CARIBOU CODE
Chapter
1. General Provisions 53
2. Administration 78
3. Animals and Fowl 167
Art. I Dog Ordinance 169
4. Building and Housing 219
Art. I Building Code 220
Art. III Fair Housing Ordinance 223
Art. IV Property Maintenance Code 224
v
5. Fire Prevention 289
Art. I General Provisions 293
Art. II Bowling Alleys 294
Art. III Central Heating Appliances & Solid Fuel Fired Stoves 295
Art. IV Dry Cleaning Plants 296
Art. V Explosives 299
Art. VI Fireworks 300
Art. VII Fire Protection Equipment 302
Art. VIII Flammable Liquids 302
Art. IX Garages 308
Art. X Gas Piping & Appliances 309
Art. XI Liquefied Petroleum Gases 309
Art. XII Precautions Against Fire, General 310
Art. XIII Smoking Prohibited Under Certain Conditions 313
Art. XIV Administration of Fire Prevention Code 313
Art. XV Commercial & Private Building Access Lock Boxes. 314
Art. XVI Adoption of Code 314
6. Health and Sanitation 365
Art. I Waste Disposal 367
Art. II Hauling of Garbage, Refuse & Waste 368
Art. III Outdoor Wood Fired Boilers 370
Art. IV Public Indecency Ordinance 372
7. Licenses & Permits 419
Art. I Taxicab Licenses 421
Art. II Dealers in Junk, Second Hand Articles & Pawn Brokers 423
Art. III Peddlers & Hawkers 423
Art. IV Commercial Rubbish Haulers 424
Art. VI Lunch Wagons 424
Art. VII Automobile Junkyards 424
Art. VIII Special Amusement Permits 425
Art. IX Street & Road Access Permit 427
Art. X Opening Permit 428
Art. XI Registered Nonprofit Dispensaries & Registered
Cultivation Facilities 428
Art. XII Licenses for the Sale of Liquor 430
8. Miscellaneous Offenses 479
Art. I Loitering 481
Art. II Firearms 482
Art. III Curfew 482
Art. IV False Security Alarms 483
Art. V Nuisance Property Ordinance 483
vi
9. Parks and Recreation 533
Art. I Recreation Commission 535
10. Planning and Economic and Community Development 588
Art. I Planning Board 589
Art. II Tax Increment Financing 589
11. Streets 641
Art. I Coasting and Skateboarding 643
Art. II Snow Removal 643
Art. III Horses 643
Art. IV Displaying Goods and Wares 644
Art. V Penalties 645
Art. VI Naming and Numbering Streets and Roads 645
12. Traffic 695
Art. I Definitions 697
Art. II Police Authority 697
Art. III Driving 698
Art. IV Parking 701
Art. V One Way Streets 704
Art. VI Bicycle Regulations 705
Art. VII Townway Stop and Yield Designations 706
Art. VIII Penalty and Savings Provisions 711
13. Zoning 764
Sec. 13-100 Legal Status Provisions for the Zoning, Site Design
Review and Subdivision Ordinance 767
Sec. 13-200 Zoning Ordinance 768
Sec. 13-300 Site Design Review Ordinance 787
Sec. 13-400 Subdivision Ordinance 798
Sec. 13-500 Shoreland Zoning Ordinance 818
Sec. 13-600 Flood Hazard Area Regulations 858
Sec. 13-700 General Requirements for Land Uses 868
Sec. 13-800 Administration and Enforcement 922
14. Caribou Emergency Management Agency 960
Art. I Administration and Organization 962
15. Nylander Museum 969
Art. I Generally 971
vii
16. CADET 976
Art. I CADET 978
17. General Assistance 1000
18. Caribou Municipal Airport 1001
Appendix A Rules and Regulations Governing Refuse Collection 1029
Appendix B Sale of Municipal Property 1033
viii
1
CHARTER
ARTICLE I POWERS OF THE CITY
Sections
1.01 Powers of the City
1.02 Construction
1.03 Intergovernmental Relations
ARTICLE II CITY COUNCIL
2.01 Composition, Eligibility, Election and Terms
2.02 Compensation; Expenses
2.03 Mayor – Council Chairperson
2.04 General Powers and Duties
2.05 Prohibitions
2.06 Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies
2.07 City Clerk
2.08 Investigations
2.09 Independent Audit
2.10 Procedure
2.11 Action Requiring an Ordinance
2.12 Ordinances in General
2.13 Emergency Ordinances
2.14 Authentication and Recording; Codification; Printing
2.15 General Information
2.16 Board of Assessors
2.17 Public Library Committee
2.18 General Powers and Duties of the Hospital Board
2.19 Organization of City Council and Election of Officers
2.20 Recall Provision
ARTICLE III CITY MANAGER
3.01 Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation
3.02 Removal
3.03 Acting City Manager
3.04 Powers and Duties of the City Manager
ARTICLE IV ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
4.01 General Provisions
4.02 Personnel System
4.03 Legal Officer
2
ARTICLE V FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
5.01 Fiscal Year
5.02 Money Expended
5.03 Bonds of Officials
5.04 Submission of Budget and Budget Message
5.05 Budget Message
5.06 Budget
5.07 Council Action on Expense and Capital Expense Budget
5.08 Public Records
5.09 Amendments After Adoption
5.10 Lapse of Appropriations
5.11 Administration of Budget
ARTICLE VI APPROPRIATION FOR PUBLIC EDUCATION
6.01 Council Action on Appropriation for Public Education
ARTICLE VII NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
7.01 City Elections
7.02 Nominations
7.03 Voting Machines
7.04 Availability of List of Qualified Voters
7.05 Ballots for Ordinances and Charter Amendments
ARTICLE VIII INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
8.01 General Authority
8.02 Commencement of Proceedings; Petitioners’ Committee; Affidavit
8.03 Petitions
8.04 Procedure After Filing
8.05 Referendum Petitions; Suspension of Effect of Ordinance
8.06 Action on Petitions
8.07 Results of Election
ARTICLE IX GENERAL PROVISIONS
9.01 Personal Financial Interest
9.02 Prohibitions
9.03 Charter Revisions and Amendment
9.04 Separability
9.05 Rules for Taking Action or Filing Claims Against the City
3
ARTICLE X TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
10.01 Effective date of this Revision
10.02 Effect of this Revision on Existing Law
10.03 Effect of this Revision on Existing Ordinances and Contracts
10.04 Separability Clause
10.05 Expiration of Term of Present Elected Officials
10.06 Continuance of Employees & Appointed Officials
4
AN ACT TO PROVIDE A CITY COUNCIL - MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT
FOR CARIBOU
Preamble
We the people of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, grateful for the
freedoms we enjoy, working together for our common good and in order to secure for ourselves all the
benefits of local government conferred by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Maine do hereby
enact this charter for the City of Caribou.
ARTICLE I POWERS OF THE CITY
Sec. 1.01 Powers of the City.
The City shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the constitution and laws of this
State as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter.
Sec. 1.02 Construction.
The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the City, and
the specific mention of particular powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the
general power stated in this article.
Sec. 1.03 Intergovernmental Relations.
The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in
the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation by contract or otherwise, with any one or more States or
Civil divisions or agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof.
ARTICLE II CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 2.01 Composition, Eligibility, Election and Terms.
(a) Composition. There shall be a City Council of seven (7) members elected by qualified voters
of the City at large to serve staggered three (3) year terms each.
(b) Eligibility. Only qualified voters of the City, who are current for all annual personal and real
property taxes due to the city on or before December 31st of the previous year, shall be eligible to hold
the office of Councilor.
(c) Election and terms. The regular election of municipal officials shall be held on the first
Tuesday of November after the first Monday in each year, in the manner provided in Article VII. The
terms of municipal officials shall begin the first business day of January.
(d) Officers of City. The members of the City Council shall be and constitute the municipal
officers of the City of Caribou for all purposes required by statute.
Historical Note: Sec. 2.01(c) as amended November 5, 2013.
Sec. 2.02 Compensation; Expenses.
The annual salary of Councilors shall be as follows:
Each Councilor shall receive $50.00 for each regular meeting, budget workshop meeting, or
meeting of committees to which they have been assigned, and $30.00 for each special meeting for a
maximum of $1,500.00 per year. The Mayor shall receive $500.00 and the Deputy Mayor shall receive
5
$150.00 additional pay as a result of the position. Increases are to be effective on the first council
meeting in January 2013. Councilors shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties of office. A councilor may elect to receive all of, a portion of or not to
receive compensation for a calendar year.
The annual salary of Councilors, Mayor and Deputy Mayor and any adjustments in salaries shall
be in accordance with the following procedures:
The Council may determine the annual salary of Councilors by ordinance, but no ordinance
increasing such salary shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of Councilors
elected at the next regular election, provided that such election follows the adoption of such ordinance
by at least six months.
Historical Note: Sec. 2.02 as amended November 5, 2013.
Sec. 2.03 Mayor-Council Chairperson.
The Council shall elect from among its members, officers of the City who shall have the titles of
Mayor or Council Chairperson, and Deputy Mayor or Council Vice Chairperson, each of whom shall
serve an annual term. The Mayor or Council Chairperson shall preside at meetings of the Council, shall
be recognized as head of the City Government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for
purposes of Military law, but shall have no administrative duties. The Mayor shall, subject to the
approval of the City Council, appoint all Council Committees, name the Chairperson of said Committees
and determine the duties of said Committees. The Deputy Mayor or Council Vice Chairperson shall act
as Mayor or Council Chairperson, during the absence or disability of the Mayor or Council Chairperson.
Sec. 2.04 General Powers and Duties.
All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council except as otherwise provided by law or this
Charter and the Council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and
obligations imposed on the City by law.
Councilors are expected to attend all regular meetings, budget workshop meetings, and meetings
of committees to which they have been assigned, unless excused by the council.
Sec. 2.05 Prohibitions.
(a) Holding other office. Except where authorized by law, no Councilor shall hold any other City
Office or hold a position that has its salary determined by the City Council or its designee(s).
(b) Appointments and removals. Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner
dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the Manager
or any of his/her subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the Council may express its views and
fully and freely discuss, with the Manager, anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such
officers and employees.
(c) Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigation under
Section 2.08, the Council or its members shall deal with City officers and employees who are subject to
the direction and supervision of the Manager, solely through the Manager, and neither the Council nor
its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately.
Sec. 2.06 Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies.
(a) Vacancies. The office of a Councilor shall become vacant upon death, resignation, removal
6
from office in any manner authorized by law for forfeiture of office.
(b) Forfeiture of office. A Councilor shall forfeit office if he/she:
(1) lacks at any time during term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by
this Charter or by law,
(2) violates any provisions of the Charter,
(3) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude,
(4) fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council without being
excused by the Council,
(5) or willfully discloses information discussed, observed or perused during any
executive session, properly called and voted upon by a majority vote of the Council,
(6) fails to pay all annual personal and real property taxes on or before December 31st of
the previous year,
(7) fails to attend, in a calendar year, at least 80% of budget workshop meetings and
meeting of committees to which they have been assigned, unless excused by the council.
(c) Procedure. The Council shall notify offending councilor of the alleged forfeiture offense
during open council session and in writing. A copy of the written offense shall also be delivered to the
City’s legal counsel for review.
(1) A hearing regarding the alleged forfeiture offense shall be held during open session of
the next regularly scheduled Council meeting. The Council shall be the sole judge of the qualification of
its members and of the grounds of forfeiture, but the decision of the Council shall be subject to review
by the Court.
(2) The forfeiture shall be stated for the records/journal.
(3) The offending councilor shall be given the opportunity to state his/her case.
(4) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall vote on whether or not a forfeiture
of office has occurred. If the Council vote affirms that a forfeiture of office has occurred, the offending
councilor shall have the opportunity to resign his/her office.
(5) If a resignation is not forthcoming, the Council shall call for a vote for dismissal.
(d) Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in any elected office shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term, if any, at the next regular or special municipal election or referendum held not less than
60 days from the occurrence of the vacancy, but the Council, by a majority vote of its members, shall
appoint a qualified person within 30 days of a vacancy to fill the vacancy until the person elected to
serve the remainder of the unexpired term takes office. This provision shall also apply to the position of
Mayor, Council Chairperson, (or) Deputy Mayor.
Sec. 2.07 City Clerk.
The Council shall appoint an officer of the City who shall have the title of City Clerk and the
City Clerk shall be the ex officio secretary of the Council. If the said City Clerk fails to act, the Council
can elect anyone qualified to said office. The acting secretary or the City Manager shall give notice of
Council meetings to its members. City Clerk shall appoint a Deputy Clerk with the approval of the City
Council.
Sec. 2.08 Investigations.
The Council may make investigations into the offices of the City and the conduct of any City
department, office, or agency and for this purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take
testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order
7
issued in the exercise of these powers by the Council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable
by a fine of not less than $50.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both.
Sec. 2.09 Independent Audit.
The Council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all City accounts and may provide
for such more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audits shall be made by a certified public
accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest direct or indirect, in the fiscal
affairs of the City government or any of its officers and must use accounting practices defined to be used
as national standards for municipal governments.
The Council shall require competitive bids; designate such accountant or firm annually or for a
period not exceeding three years. If the State makes such an audit, the Council may accept it as
satisfying the requirements of this section.
Sec. 2.10 Procedure.
(a)Meetings. The Council shall conduct Regular Meetings at least once in every month at such
times and places as the Council may prescribe by rule. Special Meetings or Workshop Meetings may be
held on the call of the Mayor, Council Chairperson, or a majority of the members of the Council. This
section shall not apply to the call of Council Committee Meetings having less than three Councilors
constituting the committee. Whenever practicable, all meetings shall be called with no less than twelve
(12) hours notice to each member. All Council and Committee meetings, except for personnel and
executive sessions, shall be open to the public and televised when held in Council Chambers; however,
the Council may call an executive session in accordance with the provisions of Maine State Law, as
amended from time to time. A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
i) Regular Meetings shall be those Council meetings as prescribed by rule for the normal and
anticipated business of the City at which legislative action by vote is anticipated to be necessary.
a. Agenda will be made available to the public by 12:00 p.m. on Friday, prior to regularly
scheduled meeting.
b. There shall be a time slot of at least 15 min available at the beginning of each regularly
scheduled meeting, for input from residents or tax payers of Caribou. The council will
maintain a Rule of Procedure to allow public comment on agenda and non-agendas item at
the start of each council meeting. All requests will be honored.
ii) Special Meetings shall be those called pursuant to 2.10(a) in addition to Regular Meetings due to
the necessity of time at which legislative action by vote is anticipated to be necessary.
iii) Workshop Meetings shall be those called pursuant to 2.10(a) at which legislative action by vote
will not be made and the meeting is expressly for the receipt of information or the development
of work products which may require future legislative action by vote at either a Regular or
Special Meeting.
iv) Council Committee Meetings shall be those Council appointed committees having three or more
Councilors as part of the committee constituting a public meeting and the necessity to call
pursuant to 2.10(a) as a Regular, Special or Workshop meeting. Less than three Councilors
participating in a committee shall not necessitate the call under this section.
(b) Rules and journal. The rules contained in the current edition of Roberts’ Rules of Order
Newly Revised shall govern the Council in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are
not inconsistent with this Charter and any special rules of order that the Council may adopt. The
Council shall keep a journal of its proceedings. The journal shall be a public record.
8
(c) Voting. Voting shall be by show of hands or roll call. The yeas and nays shall be recorded in
the journal. A secret ballot shall be allowed only in the selection of the Mayor and Deputy Mayor.
Sec. 2.11 Action Requiring an Ordinance.
In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provisions of this Charter to be done by
ordinance, those acts of the City Council shall be by ordinance which:
(1) Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter, or abolish any City department,
office or agency.
(2) Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine
or other penalty is imposed.
(3) Levy taxes, except as otherwise provided in Article V with respect to the property tax levied
by adoption of the budget.
(4) Grant, renew or extend a franchise.
(5) Regulate the rate charged for its services by a Municipal Public Utility.
(6) An ordinance is required to borrow money except that a resolution is sufficient in the
following circumstances:
(a) to borrow money for a project authorized by a voter referendum;
(b) for notes in anticipation of taxes;
(c) in anticipation of municipal bond revenues which have already been approved.
(7) Convey or lease any lands owned by the City of Caribou except for tax acquired property
which shall be retained, sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with any ordinance enacted by the
City for retention or disposition of tax-acquired property.
(8) Adopt with or without amendment ordinances proposed under the initiative power, and
(9) Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as otherwise provided in Article
VIII with respect to repeal of ordinances reconsidered under the referendum power. Acts other than
those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done either by ordinance or by resolution.
(10) Changes in the personnel policy.
Sec. 2.12 Ordinances in General.
(a)Adoption notice. The City Council shall pass such municipal ordinances as they think necessary
and proper, governed by the authority which cities have to enact ordinances under the State of Maine,
Title 30-A, statutes and amendments thereto; provided that any such ordinances shall be properly
adopted if a public hearing has been held thereon after not less than seven (7) days notice thereof, which
notice need only contain the title of the proposed ordinance and a brief summary of its
contents together with the time and place of said hearing.
(b)Existing ordinances. All existing ordinances of the City of Caribou shall be retained as active
ordinances under this City Charter.
(c)Procedure. An ordinance may be introduced by any member at any regular or special meeting
of the Council providing it is in writing in the form required for final adoption and contains only one
subject which is clearly expressed in its title and upon introduction of an ordinance, the City Clerk shall
distribute a copy to each Council member and to the City Manager, shall file a reasonable number of
copies in the office of City Clerk and such other public places as the Council may designate, and shall
publish the ordinance together with notice setting out the time and place for a public hearing which shall
follow the publication by at least seven days, may be held separately or in connection with a regular or
special council meeting and may be adjourned from time to time; all persons interested shall have an
opportunity to be heard. After the hearing, the Council may adopt the ordinance with or without
9
amendment or reject it, but if it is amended as to any matter of substance, the Council may not adopt it
until the ordinance or its amended sections have been subjected to all the procedures hereinbefore
required in the case of a newly introduced ordinance. As soon as practicable after adoption of any
ordinance, the City Clerk shall have it published again together with a notice of its adoption.
(d) Effective date. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, every adopted ordinance shall
become effective at the expiration of 30 days after adoption or at any later date specified therein.
(e) "Publish" defined. As used in this section, the term "publish" means to print in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the City, in addition to be posted to the City’s website and public
access station, when available: (1) the ordinance or a brief summary thereof, and (2) the places where
copies have been filed and the times when they are available for public inspection.
Sec. 2.13 Emergency Ordinances.
(a) To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the
Council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy, taxes, grant,
renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any municipal public utility for its services or
authorize the borrowing of money except as provided in subsection 5.07(b) or 5.09(b). An emergency
ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it
shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a
declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. After its
adoption the ordinance shall be published and printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. It shall
become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify.
(b) Every emergency ordinance except one made pursuant to Section 5.09(b) herein shall
automatically stand repealed as of the 61st day following the date on which it was adopted, but this
shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency
still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the
same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances.
(Amended: 11/08/94)
Sec. 2.14 Authentications and Recording; Codification; Printing.
(a) Authentication and recording. The City Clerk shall authenticate by signature and record in
full in a properly indexed book, kept for that purpose, all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the
Council.
(b)Codification. The general codification of all City ordinances and resolutions having the force
of and effect of law shall be adopted by the Council by ordinance and shall be published promptly in
electronic form and bound or loose-leaf form together with this Charter and any amendments thereto,
pertinent provisions of the Constitution and other laws of the State of Maine and such codes of technical
regulations and other rules and regulations as the Council may specify. This compilation shall be known
and cited officially as the Caribou City Code. Copies of the Code shall be furnished to City officers,
placed in libraries and public offices for free public reference and made available for purchase by the
public at a reasonable price.
Sec. 2.15 General Information.
There shall be in all: Seven (7) City Councilors; three (3) members of the Board of Managers of
the Jefferson Cary Hospital Fund; seven (7) members of the Library Committee; nine (9) appointed
directors of Cary Medical Center together with two ex-officio members, namely the City Manager and
10
the chairperson of the Board of Managers of the Jefferson Cary Hospital Fund; three (3) members of the
Board of Assessors; three (3) trustees of the Hospital District; five (5) members of the Caribou Utilities
District.
Sec. 2.16 Board of Assessors.
There shall be a three person Board of Assessors, appointed by the City Council. The Chairperson
shall be elected from among the membership. Members shall hold office for a term of three (3) years or
until their successors are appointed and qualified. The City Council shall appoint a member to the Board
of Assessors to fill the unexpired term whenever a vacancy may occur on the Board of Assessors. The
Assessors appointed as above provided shall exercise the powers as described in Title 36, M.R.S.,
Chapter 105, Section 701, et seq. “Powers and Duties of Assessor”
Sec. 2.17 Public Library Committee.
The City Council of Caribou shall appoint by a majority vote of the membership, a Public
Library Committee of not exceeding seven (7) members. As each term expires, the City Council shall
annually elect for five (5) years one or more members to fill, in the usual manner, the vacancies which
have occurred. The Committee shall organize and designate its chairperson. The Caribou Public Library
Committee shall be responsible for the management of the library and to submit reports as requested by
the City Council.
Sec. 2.18 General Powers and Duties of the Hospital Board.
(a) There shall be a Board of Directors of the Cary Medical Center, composed of nine (9) members
to be appointed by the City Council plus two additional ex-officio members, the City Manager and the
Chairperson of the Board of Managers of the Jefferson Cary Hospital Fund; no less than eight of the
eleven members of the Board of Directors of Cary Medical Center shall be residents of the City of
Caribou.
(b) The Board of Directors shall organize annually and appoint its own Chairperson. The Board
shall be charged with the responsibility of:
(1) Providing for, as a minimum standard, the delivery of patient care at a level consistent
with full licensure by the State of Maine, and accreditation as necessary or appropriate.
(2) Maintaining medical records necessary for such accreditation and licensure.
(3) Maintenance and care of all City owned hospital buildings and grounds and compliance
with maintenance obligations regarding any leased hospital building and ground.
(4) Maintaining financial records in accordance with generally accepted account principles and
the requirements of applicable governmental third-party payors.
(5) Submitting quarterly statements and periodical reports regarding capital improvements and
general business to the City Council.
(6) Appointing hospital legal counsel and auditor; and
(7) Submitting to the City Council for final decision where required by, and in accordance with,
Section 5.07, expenditures for capital improvements.
(8) Seeking to meet, to the extent reasonably possible, the basic medical needs of the
community;
(c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter, if it shall determine that doing so is in
the best interests of the inhabitants of the City, the City Council shall, by ordinance, decide not to
operate a municipal hospital, terminate any lease the City may have with the Caribou Hospital District,
11
and convey, consistent with law and on such terms and conditions as it may determine, the hospital
assets and liabilities of Caribou to appropriate others, specifically including any new, nonprofit
corporation or corporations.
Sec. 2.19 Organization of City Council and Election of Officers.
(a) The City Council shall meet on the first business day of January each year and organize
by electing by written ballot and by majority vote of the whole membership one of its members as
Mayor or Chairperson and one of its members as Deputy Mayor or Vice Chairperson, and:
(1) A City Treasurer to serve for the ensuing year that may at his/her option appoint a
Deputy City Treasurer, subject to the approval of the City Council.
(2) A City Clerk to serve for the ensuing year in accordance with Section 2.07.
(3) An auditor in accordance with Section 2.09.
(4) Tax Collector who shall serve, as provided for under the revised statutes of 1964 and
amendments thereto. The City Manager may be Tax Collector if the Council so elects.
(5) Overseer(s) of the General Assistance program.
(6) Appoint all Boards and Commissions as required by this Charter.
Sec. 2.20 Recall Provision
Any member of the Caribou City Council may be recalled and removed from elected office
by the voters of the City as herein provided.
(a) Procedure. Any five (5) qualified voters of the City may begin the recall procedure by
signing and filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners’
committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their
names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent,
containing the name(s) of the member(s) of the City Council whose removal is sought. Thereafter, the
Clerk shall, during regular business hours, for the following sixty (60) business days, keep the petition
open for signature by registered voters of the City. In addition, the City Clerk shall also cause petition
forms, together with copies of the attached affidavit, to be prepared and made available for circulation
during said sixty (60) business days by any registered voters of the City. The number of petition forms
and attached affidavit copies to be made available shall be able to accommodate signatures of at least
twenty (20) per cent of the registered voters of the City. No voter may sign the petition more than
once. At the expiration of said sixty (60) business days, the Clerk shall declare the petition closed. The
circulating of petition forms and filing of the same with the Clerk must be accomplished prior to the
expiration of said sixty (60) days. The City Clerk shall not accept any petition form circulated without
also receiving an affidavit from said circulator stating that all of the signatures were affixed in the
circulator's presence; that the circulator believes them to be genuine signatures of the persons they
purport to be; and that every signor had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the recall
petition and affidavit.
(b) Certification of said recall petition. Within ten (10) days after the closing of the
petition, the Clerk shall ascertain whether or not the number of valid signatures on the petition is equal
to at least twenty (20) percent of the registered voters of the City as of December 31st of the prior year.
The Clerk shall attach to said petition, a certificate showing the results of such examination. If the
petition is found to have insufficient signatures, the Clerk shall take no further action and the petition
will be considered to be null and void.
(c) Calling of recall election. If the petition shall be certified by the Clerk to have
12
sufficient signatures, the Clerk shall submit the petition with the Clerk's certificate to the City Council
at its next regular meeting and shall notify the member of the City Council whose recall is sought by
such petition. The City Council shall thereupon, within ten (10) days after the receipt of the City
Clerk's certificate, order an election to be held not less than forty (40) nor more than sixty (60) days
thereafter; provided that if a regular municipal election is to occur within ninety (90) days after the
receipt of said certificate, the City Council may, at its discretion, provide for the holding of a recall
election on the date of such municipal election. The recall election shall be called and held as in other
elections under this Charter except for the specific limitations of this section.
(d) Majority vote required; choosing of successor. In case a majority of those voting in the
recall election of any official shall vote in favor of recalling such official, he or she shall thereby be
removed from office. The vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Article II, Sec. 2.06 (d).
(e) Form of ballot in recall elections. Unless the official whose removal is sought shall
have resigned within ten (10) days after the receipt by the City Council of the City Clerk's certificate,
the form of the ballot shall be printed substantially as follows
Form of ballot: “Shall ________ [name of elected official] be recalled"
ARTICLE III CITY MANAGER
Sec. 3.01 Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation.
The Council by a majority vote of its total membership shall appoint a City Manager for an
indefinite term and fix his/her compensation. The Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of
executive and administrative qualifications. He/she need not be a resident of the City or State at the time
of appointment, but may reside outside the City while in office only with the approval of the Council.
Sec. 3.02 Removal.
The Council may remove, for cause, the City Manager from office in accordance with the
following procedures:
(1)The Council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary
resolution which must state the reasons for the removal and may suspend the City Manager from duty
for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the City
Manager.
(2) Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the City Manager, he/she may
file with the Council a written request for a public hearing, this hearing shall be held at a Council
meeting not earlier than fifteen days no later than 30 days after the request is filed. The City Manager
may file with the Council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing.
(3) The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective
immediately by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after five days from the
date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the City Manager, if he/she has not
requested a public hearing or at any time after the public hearing if he/she has requested one. The City
Manager shall continue to receive his/her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal.
Sec. 3.03 Acting City Manager.
By letter filed with the City Clerk the City Manager shall designate, subject to approval of the
Council, a qualified City Administrative Officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of
Manager during his/her temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the Council
13
may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the City to serve until the City
Manager shall return or his/her disability shall cease.
Sec. 3.04 Powers and Duties of the City Manager.
The City Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City. The Manager shall be
responsible to the Council for the administration of all City affairs placed in his/her charge by or under
this Charter. The Manager shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) Administrative Officers appointed by City Manager. The City Manager shall appoint the
following Administrative Officers:
(a) Chief of Police for an indefinite period
(b) Chief of Fire Department for an indefinite period
(c) All other necessary City Administrative Officers
Such Administrative Officers shall hold office for an indefinite period or until their removal by
the City Manager.
(2) Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City,
except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law.
(3) Attend all Council Meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not
vote.
(4) See that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by
him/her or by officers subject to his/her direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
(5) Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the Council.
(6) Submit to the Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and
administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year.
(7) Make such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of City
Departments, offices and agencies subject to his/her direction and supervision.
(8) Keep the Council fully advised as to the financial conditions and future needs of the City and
make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City as he/she deems desirable.
(9) Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the Council.
(10) To act as superintendent of roads, streets, bridges and buildings with the exception of those
buildings coming under the Regional School Unit, Cary Medical Center and Jefferson Cary Hospital
Fund.
(11) To act as a purchasing agent to said City and to purchase all supplies and materials for the
City and for the several departments, with the exception of the Regional School Unit, Cary Medical
Center and Jefferson Cary Hospital Fund. All accounts for the purchase of supplies and materials and
works performed for said City, with the exception of accounts for the purpose of supplies and materials
and work for Cary Medical Center, Regional School Unit and Jefferson Cary Hospital Fund, shall bear
the approval of the City Manager when presented for payment. Capital purchases must have the
approval of the City Council.
(12) Construction of this act. If any part of this act shall be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not invalidate the remainder of the act. The provisions of
this act shall supersede all laws and ordinances not consistent herewith, insofar as the City of Caribou, in
the County of Aroostook is affected thereby.
ARTICLE IV ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Sec. 4.01 General Provisions.
(a) Creation of departments. The Council may establish City Departments, offices or agencies in
14
addition to those created by this Charter, and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices, and
agencies, except that no function assigned by this Charter to a particular department, office, or agency
may be discontinued or unless this charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other.
(b) Direction by Manager. All departments, offices and agencies under the direction and
supervision of the Manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction
and supervision of the Manager. With the consent of the Council, the Manager may serve as the head of
one or more such departments, offices or agencies or may appoint one person as the head of two or more
of them.
Sec. 4.02 Personnel System.
(a) Merit principle. All appointments and promotions of City Officers and employees shall be
made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of
competence.
(b) Personnel board. There shall be a personnel board consisting of the City Council or three
members appointed by the Council for terms of three years from among the qualified voters of the City.
(c) Personnel rules. A personnel policy shall be prepared by the City Manager and submitted to
the Council for approval, and the Council shall by ordinance adopt them with or without amendment.
The existing personnel policy shall continue in force until amended or repealed. Personnel rules shall
provide for:
(1) The classification of all City positions, based on the duties, authority, and responsibility
of each position, with adequate provision for reclassification of any position whenever warranted by
changed circumstances.
(2) A pay plan for all City positions.
(3) Methods for determining the merit and fitness of candidates for appointment or
promotion.
(4) The policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and the removal of
employees.
(5) The hours of work attendance, regulations, and provisions for sickness, leave of
absence and vacation leave.
(6) The policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional appointments.
(7) The policies and procedures governing relationships with employee organizations.
(8) Policies regarding in-service training programs.
(9) Grievance procedures.
(10) Other practices and procedures necessary to the administration of the City Personnel
system.
Sec. 4.03 Legal Officer.
There shall be a legal officer of the city appointed by the City Manager subject to confirmation by
the City Council. The legal officer shall serve as chief legal advisor to the Council, the City Manager
and all city departments, offices and agencies shall represent the city in all legal proceedings and shall
perform any other duties prescribed by this charter or by ordinance.
15
ARTICLE V FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
Sec. 5.01 Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of January and end on the last day of
December.
Sec. 5.02. Money Expended.
No money shall be paid out of the City treasury except by order issued and signed by a majority of
the City Councilors, or their authorized representative and presented to the treasury for payment.
Sec. 5.03 Bonds of Officials.
The City Council shall require a bond by a reputable surety company satisfactory to said City
Council from all persons trusted with the collection, custody or disbursement of any of the monies of
said City, and may require such bond from such officials as they deem advisable; provided, however,
that the City shall pay the cost of providing said bond.
Sec. 5.04 Submission of Budget and Budget Message.
On or before the 15th of November of each year the City Manager shall submit to the City
Council a final draft of the detailed expense budget and capital expense budget for the ensuing fiscal
year and an accompanying message explaining the expense budget and the capital expense budget. In
addition, on or before the 30th of April of each year the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a
final draft of the income budget for the ensuing year and an accompanying message explaining the
income budget. On or before the 31st of May of each year the City Manager shall submit to the City
Council a final complete budget for income, expense, capital expense budget and an accompanying
message explaining the complete budget.
Sec. 5.05 Budget Message.
The City Manager’s message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the
work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year,
describe the important features of the expense and income budget, together with the reasons for such
changes, summarize the City’s debt position and include such other material as the City Manager deems
desirable.
Sec. 5.06 Budget.
The budget process shall be divided into three processes: Expense Budget, Capital Expense
Budget, and Income Budget. The final complete budget shall provide a thorough financial plan of all
City funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and shall be in such form as to provide detailed
information by each general ledger account and general ledger sub-account.
(a) Expense Budget.
(1) In organizing the expense budget, the City Manager shall provide a historical
financial expense update on or before the 15th of September each year to the general public including
16
the City Council. This update must provide the following detailed expense information for each main
general ledger account and each general ledger sub-account: three year average of actual expenditures,
previous year’s expense budget, previous year’s actual expenditure, current year expense budget, first
eight months actual expenditures, and an annualized actual expenditure based on the eight month actual
expenditure.
(2) Expense Budget Report. The City Manager will provide a series of Expense Budget
Reports to the City Council and the general public in both a printed copy, available at the City Office,
and in electronic form, available on the City’s website. Each Expense Budget Report shall at minimum
include for each City Department detailed expense information by each general ledger accounts and
corresponding detailed sub-account information which will include a three year average of actual
expenditures, previous year expense budget and actual expenditures, current year expense budget and
actual available year-to-date expenditures, annualized current year actual expenditures, and proposed
expense budget.
(3) Timeline. The City Manager will provide an Expense Budget Report on or before the
following dates:
(i) On or before October 1st: The City Manager will have each City
Department Head provide an initial written detailed Expense Budget Report for the ensuing year.
(ii) On or before November 1st: The City Manager will have each City
Department Head present a written detailed Expense Budget Report to both the City Council and the
City’s citizens in a public forum where both the City Council and Caribou’s citizens can ask questions
and provide input to the City Manager and each Department Head.
(iii) On or before November 15th: The City Manager will provide the City’s
written detailed Expense Budget Report for the ensuing year to the City Council and Caribou’s citizens
in a public hearing.
(iv) On or before December 15th: The City Council will vote on the City’s final
detailed expense budget for the ensuing year.
(v) On or before January 31st: The City Manager will provide the City’s written
detailed Expense Budget Report for the new year to Caribou’s citizens for their review updating the
report with final year end expenditures.
(b) Capital Expense Budget.
(1) In organizing the Capital Expense Budget, the City Manager shall prepare and submit
to the City Council and Caribou’s citizens a five year Capital Expense Budget on or before the 15th of
October.
(2) Capital Expense Budget Report. The City Manager will provide a series of Capital
Expense Budget Reports to the City Council and Caribou’s citizens in both a printed copy, available at
the City Office, and in electronic form, available on the City’s website. Each Capital Expense Budget
Report shall at minimum include for each City Department detailed capital expense information by each
general ledger account and corresponding detailed sub-account information which will include a three
year average of actual expenditures, previous year capital expense budget and actual capital
expenditures, current year capital expense budget and actual available year-to-date capital expenditures,
annualized current year actual capital expenditures, and proposed capital expense budget for the next
five years.
(3) Timeline. The City Manager will provide a Captial Expense Budget Report on or
before the following dates:
(i) On or before October 15th: The City Manager will have each City
Department Head provide a written detailed capital expense budget report for the next five years to the
17
Capital Improvements Committee.
(ii) On or before November 1st: The City Manager will have each City
Department Head present their written detailed Capital Expense Budget Report to both the City Council
and Caribou’s citizens in a public forum where both the City Council and Caribou’s citizens can ask
questions and provide input to the City Manager and each Department Head.
(iii) On or before November 15th: The City Manager will provide the City’s
written detailed Capital Expense Budget Report for the ensuing year to the City Council and Caribou’s
citizens in a public hearing.
(iv) On or before December 15th: The City Council will vote on the City’s final
detailed Capital Expense Budget for the ensuing year.
(4) Submissions of projects to voters. All capital improvement projects involving
$500,000 or more of municipal funds shall be submitted to the registered voters of the City of Caribou
by holding a referendum vote thereon. A project is defined as a complete list of capital expense
purchases combined together to build a building, purchase vehicles or machinery, provide a service to
the citizens of the city, or a combination thereof, and not currently part of the schedule of City assets.
(c) Income Budget.
(1) In organizing the Income Budget, the City Manager shall provide a written estimated
Income Budget for the current year to the City Council and Caribou’s citizens on or before the 15th of
February. This estimated Income Budget must provide the following detailed income information for
each main general ledger account and each general ledger sub-account: three year average of actual
income, previous year’s income budget, previous year’s actual income, proposed current year income
budget, and proposed level of taxation for municipal budget based on previous year valuation.
(2) Income Budget Report. The City Manager will provide a series of Income Budget
Reports to the City Council and Caribou’s citizens in both a printed copy, available at the City Office,
and in electronic form, available on the City’s website. Each Income Budget Report shall at minimum
include for each City Department detailed income information by each general ledger account and
corresponding detailed sub-account information which will include a three year average of actual
income, previous year income budget and actual income, proposed current year income budget, and
proposed level of taxation for municipal budget based on current year valuation.
(3) Timeline. The City Manager will provide an Income Budget Report on or before the
following dates:
(i) On or before April 30th: The City Manager will provide an estimated written
detailed Income Budget Report for current year.
(d) Complete City Budget.
The City Manager will finalize the complete City Budget for the current year including
all three elements: expense, capital expense, and income on or before the 31st of May each year. The
City Council has the opportunity to reduce the expense or capital expense budget if needed based on the
current income budget, but cannot increase the expense or capital expense budget.
(e) Set the Rate of Taxation.
The City Council will set the rate of taxation for the City based on the approved budgets
of the City, County and RSU 39 on or before the 30th of June each year.
18
Sec. 5.07 Council Action on Expense and Capital Expense Budget.
(a) Notice and Hearing.
The City Council shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
City, in addition shall post to the City’s website and public access station, when available, the detailed
expense and capital expense budgets and a notice stating:
(1) The times and places where copies of the message and budgets are available for
inspection by the public, and
(2) The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, for a public
hearing on the expense and capital expense budgets.
(b) Amendments before adoption.
After the public hearing, the City Council may adopt the expense and capital expense
budget with or without amendment. In amending the expense and capital expense budgets, it may add or
increase expense expenditures and may delete or decrease expenditures, except expenditures required by
law or for debt service.
(c) Adoption.
City Council must adopt the expense and capital expense budgets on or before the
15th of December before the ensuing year.
Sec. 5.08 Public Records.
Copies of the budget and the capital improvement program as adopted shall be public records and
shall be made available to the public on the City’s website and at suitable places in the City.
Sec. 5.09 Amendments After Adoption.
(a) Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year the Manager certifies that there are
available revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, these funds shall be used for next year’s
budget, except in situations outlined in section 5.09(b).
(b) Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the
public peace, the Council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by
emergency ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.13. To the extent that there are no
available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council may by such emergency
ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes which may be renewed from time to time, but the
emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year
next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made.
(c) Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year, it appears probable to the
Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the Manager
shall report to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial
action taken by the Manager with recommendations as to any other steps to be taken; the Council shall
then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that
purpose it may by resolution reduce one or more appropriations.
(d) Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the Manager may transfer part
or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office or
agency and, upon written request by the Manager, the Council may by resolution transfer part or all of
any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to another.
(e) Limitations; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred,
19
and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more
than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. Emergency appropriations and reduction or
transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption.
Sec. 5.10 Lapse of Appropriations.
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of
the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital
expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or
abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass
without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation.
Sec. 5.11 Administration of Budget.
(a) Work programs and allotments. At such time as the Manager shall specify, each
department, office or agency shall submit work programs for the ensuing fiscal year showing the
requested allotments of its appropriation by periods within the year. The Manager shall review and
authorize such allotments with or without revision as early as possible in the fiscal year. The Manager
may revise such allotments during the year if the Manager deems it desirable and shall revise them to
accord with any supplemental, emergency, reduced or transferred appropriations made pursuant to
Section 5.07 or 5.09.
(b) Payments and obligations prohibited. No payment shall be made or obligation incurred
against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and unless
the Manager or designee first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment
or appropriation and that sufficient funds there from are or will be available to cover the claim or meet
the obligation when it becomes due and payable unless State Law permits an overdraft of certain
accounts. Any authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this
Charter, unless permitted by State Law, shall be void and any payment so made illegal, such action shall
be cause for removal of any officers who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such
obligation unless permitted by State Law and he/she shall also be liable to the City for any amount so
paid. However, except where prohibited by law, nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prevent the
making or authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed
wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds or notes or to prevent the making of any contract or lease
providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such action is made or approved
by resolution.
ARTICLE VI APPROPRIATION FOR PUBLIC EDUCATION
Sec. 6.01 Council Action on Appropriation for Public Education
The Council shall have the power to raise moneys for the support of public schools in said
City and shall appropriate for the current year ending on the 31st day of December such sum, not less
than the amount required by the general laws of the State, as they may deem necessary for that purpose
in accordance with the Laws of the State of Maine. Such sum shall be included with and assessed like
other City taxes, and all the provisions of law relating to assessment and collection of taxes shall be
applicable to such tax.
20
ARTICLE VII NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Sec. 7.01 City Elections.
(a) Regular elections. The regular City election shall be held on the first Tuesday of
November after the first Monday in each year.
(b) Qualified voters. All citizens qualified by the constitution and laws of the State of Maine
to vote in the City and who satisfy the requirements for registration prescribed by law shall be qualified
voters of the City within the meaning of this Charter.
(c) Conduct of elections. Except as otherwise provided by the Charter, the provisions of the
general election laws of the State of Maine shall apply to elections held under this Charter. All elections
provided for by this Charter shall be conducted by the elections authorities established by law. For the
conduct of City elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in
cases of doubt or fraud, the Council may adopt by ordinance all regulations which it considers desirable,
consistent with law and this Charter, and the election authorities may adopt, and if they adopt shall
publicize, further regulations consistent with law and this Charter and the regulations of the Council.
Sec. 7.02 Nominations.
Candidates for elective offices shall obtain nomination papers from the City Clerk, in accordance
with the Laws of the State of Maine and as Amended from time to time.
Sec. 7.03 Voting Machines.
The Council may provide for the use of mechanical or other devices for voting or counting the
votes not inconsistent with law.
Sec. 7.04 Availability of List of Qualified Voters.
If for any purpose relating to a general or City election or to candidates or issues involved in
such an election, any organization, group or person requests a list of qualified voters of the City, the
department, office, or agency which has custody of that list shall either permit the organization group or
person to copy the voters names and addresses from the list, or furnish a copy of the list, as referenced in
M.R.S.A., Title 21-A, section 196A.
ARTICLE VIII ORDINANCE INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
This article applies only to citizen initiatives and referendum for new or amended ordinances.
Sec. 8.01 General Authority.
(a) Initiative. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the Council
and, if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or
reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or
any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of City officers or employees.
(b) Referendum. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the
Council of any adopted ordinance and, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to
approve or reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital
program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes or
salaries of city officers or employees.
21
Sec. 8.02 Commencement of Proceedings; Petitioners’ Committee; Affidavit.
Any five qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the
City Clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for
circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the
address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative
ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners’ committee is filed the clerk shall issue the
appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners’ committee.
Sec. 8.03 Petitions.
(a) Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified
voters of the City equal in number to at least 10 percent of the total number of votes cast in Caribou at
the last gubernatorial election.
(b) Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be
assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and
shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto
throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
(c) Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an
affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he/she personally circulated the paper, the
number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his/her presence, that he/she
believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each
signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be
reconsidered.
(d) Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed within 30 days after
adoption by the Council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
Sec. 8.04 Procedure After Filing.
(a) Certificate of clerk; amendment. Within twenty days after the petition is filed, the City
Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying if it is insufficient, and the particulars
wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by
registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may
be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the Clerk
within two days after receiving the copy of their certificate and files a supplementary petition upon
additional papers within ten days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary
petition shall comply with the requirements of subscription (a) and (c) of Section 8.03 and within five
days after it is filed, the Clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended
and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the
case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or
amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or
request Council review under subsection (a) of this section within the time required, the Clerk shall
promptly present his/her certificate to the Council and the certificate shall then be a final determination
as to the sufficiency of the petition.
(b) Council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee
does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient,
the committee may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be
22
reviewed by the Council. The Council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing
of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the Council's determination shall then be a final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
(c) Court review; new petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be
subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall
not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
Sec. 8.05 Referendum Petitions; Suspension of Effect of Ordinance.
When a referendum petition is filed with the City Clerk, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered
shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when:
(1) There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or
(2) The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition, or
(3) The Council repeals the ordinance, or
(4) Thirty days have elapsed after a vote of the qualified voters of the City on the ordinance.
Sec. 8.06 Action on Petitions.
(a)Action by council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined
sufficient, the Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided
in Article II or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Council fails to adopt a
proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within 60 days or fails to repeal the
referred ordinance within 30 days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall
submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the City.
(b) Ballots for ordinances. An ordinance to be voted on by the City shall be presented for voting
by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise
statement describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title
shall appear the following question:
“Shall the above described ordinance be adopted?”
Immediately below such question shall appear, in the following order, the words “yes” and “no”.
(c) Submission to voters. The vote of the City on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held not
less than 30 days and not later than one year from the date of the final Council vote thereon. If no
regular City election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the Council shall
provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election,
except that the Council may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the
prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls.
(d) Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time
prior to the fifteenth day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the City by filing with the City Clerk
a request for withdrawal signed by at least four members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing
of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be
terminated.
Sec. 8.07 Results of Election.
(a) Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote
in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in
all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Council. If conflicting
ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes
shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
23
(b) Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against
it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results.
ARTICLE IX GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 9.01 Personal Financial Interest.
Any City officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect or by
reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the City or in the sale of any land,
material, supplies or services to the City or to a contractor supplying the City shall make known that
interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his/her capacity as a City officer
or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract.
Any City officer or employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or
willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and
shall forfeit his/her office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of
the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract of sale
voidable by the City Manager or the City Council.
Sec. 9.02 Prohibitions.
(a) Activities prohibited.
(1) No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated
against with respect to any City position or appointive City administrative office
because of race, sex, political or religious opinions or affiliations.
(2) No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in
regard to any test, certification or appointment under the personnel provisions of this charter or the rules
and regulations made there under, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing
the impartial execution of such provisions, rules and regulations.
(3) No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any City position or
appointive City administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service
or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his/her test, appointment, proposed
appointment, promotion or proposed promotion.
(4) No person shall orally, by letter or otherwise solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment,
subscription or contribution for any political party or political purpose whatever from any person
holding any compensated appointive City position.
(5) No city employee shall knowingly or willfully make, solicit or receive any contribution
to the campaign funds of any political party or committee to be used in a city election or to campaign
funds to be used in support of or opposition to any candidate for election to city office or city ballot
issued. Further, no city employee shall knowingly or willfully participate in any aspect of any political
campaign on behalf of or opposition to any candidate for city office. This section shall not be construed
to limit any person’s right to exercise rights as a citizen to express opinions or to cast a vote nor shall it
be construed to prohibit any person from active participation in political campaigns at any other level of
government.
(b) Penalties. The Council shall enact an ordinance prescribing the civil penalties for a violation
of the provisions set forth in Section 9.02.
Sec. 9.03 Charter Revisions and Amendments.
Revisions and amendments to this Charter may be framed and proposed in the manner
24
provided by Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 2101 Et Seq., as amended from time to time. It shall be the
determination of the City Council, with the advice of an attorney, if a petition or initiative to change the
Charter shall be framed as an amendment or as a revision. In all cases, times will be framed pursuant to
30-A M.R.S.A. § 2101 Et. Seq.
a) An amendment to the City Charter implies a continuance of the general plan and purpose of
the existing Charter, with corrections to better accomplish its purpose, but does not reframe the form of
governance nor detract from the original intent of the Charter. If an action is determined to be an
amendment, then actions will be framed in the manner provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2104 Et. Seq.
b) A revision to the Charter implies a reexamination of the whole charter and/or a redraft
without obligation to maintain the form, scheme, or structure of the existing. A revision suggests a
convention to examine the whole subject and to prepare and submit a new instrument whether the
desired changes from the old are few or many, without regard to retaining the current form of
governance. If an action is determined to be a revision, then actions will be framed in the manner
provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2104 Et. Seq.
Sec. 9.04 Separability.
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be
affected thereby. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall
not be affected thereby.
Sec. 9.05 Rules for Taking Action or Filing Claims Against the City.
No action shall be maintained against the City on account of any injuries or damages to persons or
property, except under the conditions set forth in Title 14 M.R.S.A. Section 8101 et seq., as revised from
time to time.
ARTICLE X. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 10.01 Effective date of this Revision.
The provisions of this Revision shall go into effect on the first day of the municipal year following
approval of this Revision, unless otherwise noted.
Sec. 10.02 Effect of this Revision on Existing Law.
In the event that this revision is approved in the manner herein provided, all acts and parts of acts
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter are hereby repealed and superseded. Insofar as the
provisions of this Charter are the same in terms or in substance and effect as provisions of law in force
when this revision shall take effect, the provisions of the revision are intended to be not a new enactment
but in continuation of such provisions of law, and this revision shall be so construed and applied.
Sec. 10.03 Effect of this Revision on Existing Ordinances and Contracts.
25
All ordinances in force at the time when this revision takes effect not inconsistent with the
provisions of this revision shall continue in force until amended or repealed. All rights, actions,
proceedings, prosecutions and contracts of the City pending or executed when this Charter goes into
effect and not inconsistent therewith, shall be enforced, continued or completed in all respects as though
begun or executed hereunder.
Sec. 10.04 Separability Clause.
If any section or part of a section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter, it being the intention that the
remaining portions of this Charter shall stand, notwithstanding the unconstitutionality and invalidity of
any such section, sentence, clause or phrase.
10.05 Expiration of Term of Present Elected Officials
All elected officials holding office on the effective date of this Charter shall continue to hold
office until the expiration of their terms and shall remain in office until their successors are elected and
qualified.
10.06 Continuance of Employees & Appointed Officials
Nothing in this Charter, except as specifically stated, shall affect or impair the rights or
privileges of persons who are municipal employees at the time of its adoption. All persons serving on
any board or committee on the effective date of this Charter shall continue to hold said position until the
expiration of their terms and shall remain in office until their successors are elected and qualified.
Chapter 1 General Provisions
Section
1-101 Adoption of Code
1-102 General Definitions and Rules of Construction
1-103 Official Copies Kept by City Clerk
1-104 Additions or Amendments
1-105 References Include Amendments; Construction
1-106 Catch Lines of Sections
1-107 Provisions Considered as Continuations of Existing Ordinances
1-108 Conflicting Provisions
1-109 Repeal of Prior Inconsistent Ordinances
1-110 Effect of Repeal of Ordinances
1-111 Severability of Parts of Code
1-112 General Penalty
1-113 Prohibited Acts Include Causing, Permitting, Concealing
1-114 Same Offense Punishable by Different Sections of the Code; City Attorney’s Option
53
Chapter 1 General Provisions (Adopting Ordinance)
An Ordinance to revise and codify the ordinances of the City of Caribou.
The City of Caribou ordains:
Section 1-101 Adoption of Code
The Caribou Code, as compiles and published by the Maine Municipal Association, May, 1980, is
hereby adopted to the City Council of the City of Caribou, Maine. This adopting ordinance shall be integrated
into said Code as Chapter 1, General Provisions and the entire Code shall be viewed as one ordinance known
and cited as the Caribou Code. All references in these adopting provisions to “this Code” refer to the Caribou
Code. Copies of the Caribou Code are on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection.
State Law Reference: 30 M.R.S.A. §2156
Charter Reference: Article II, sec. 2.15
Sec. 1-102 General Definitions and Rules of Construction
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions of the City, the following rules
shall be observed, unless otherwise specifically provided or unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the City Council.
And; or. “And” may be read “or” and “or” may be read “and”, if the sense requires it.
City means the City of Caribou.
Code or this Code means the Caribou Code.
Council means the Caribou City Council.
County means Aroostook County, Maine.
Definitions given within a chapter or article apply only to words or phrases used in such chapter or article
unless otherwise provided.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
May; shall. The word “may” is permissive, and the word “shall” is mandatory.
Month means a calendar month.
M.R.S.A. means Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
Municipal Officers means the Municipal Officers of the City of Caribou, Maine.
Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
Owner applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such property.
Person shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies, politic and corporate
as well as to individuals.
Whenever the word “person” is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine as applied
to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and such word as applied
to corporations shall include the officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for any violation of
said section.
55
Preceding; following mean next before and next after, respectively.
State means the State of Maine.
Statutes or Revised Statutes mean the latest published edition of the Statutes or Revised Statutes of
Maine.
Street shall include public avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the
approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between
abutting property lines; it shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council.
Tenant means any person occupying the premises, building or land of another in subordination to such
other person’s title and with his express or implied assent, whether he occupies the whole or a part of those
premises, building or land, whether alone or with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, past and present where applicable
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Time means an hour of the day according to the official time of the City.
Week means seven (7) days.
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and others that have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall
be construed and understood according to such meaning.
Writing and Written mean any representation or words, letters or figures, whether by printing or
otherwise, capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means.
Year means a calendar year.
Sec. 1-103 Official Copies Kept by City Clerk
The City Clerk shall keep in his office a copy of this Code in loose leaf form. It shall be the express duty
of the City Clerk or someone authorized by him to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances
which indicate the intention of the City’s legislative body to make the same a part of this Code when the same
have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions which may from time to
time be repealed by the City’s legislative body.
Sec. 1-104 Additions or Amendments
Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the
legislative body of the City of Caribou to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
this Code so that reference to the “Caribou Code” to make the same a part hereof, shall be understood as
including them.
Sec. 1-105 References Include Amendments; Construction
Any reference in this Code to an ordinance or provision of this Code shall mean such ordinance or
provision as may now exist or is hereafter amended.
Any references in this Code to chapters, articles, division or section shall be to the chapters, articles,
divisions and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.
56
Sec. 1-106 Catch Lines of Sections
The catch lines of the sections appearing in this Code are only intended as guide words or phrases to
indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed to be a part of or effect the application or substance
of such sections unless expressly so provided.
Sec. 1-107 Provisions Considered as Continuations of Existing Ordinances
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are in substance the same as the provisions of
ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and
not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-108 Conflicting Provisions
1. If the provisions of different chapters, articles, divisions or sections of this Code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter, article, division or section shall prevail as to all
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of that chapter, article, division or section.
2. If clearly conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the
section last enacted shall prevail unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of that Chapter.
3. Where any conflict exists between a provision of this Code and any provision of the City Charter or
Maine Revised Statutes, the latter shall prevail.
Sec. 1-109 Repeal of Prior Inconsistent Ordinances
This Code shall effect a repeal or all ordinances, orders and resolutions in effect prior to its adoption
which are in conflict with its provisions.
Sec. 1-110 Effect of Repeal of Ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance
repealed took effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took
effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.
Sec. 1-111 Severability of Parts of Code
If any section, paragraph, sentence or clause contained in this Code shall for any reason be adjudged by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of the rules, regulations and ordinances contained in this Code, but shall be confined in
its operation to the section, paragraph, sentence, clause or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which such judgment shall have been rendered.
Sec. 1-112 General Penalty
Whenever in this Code or in material adopted by reference by this Code any act is prohibited, made, or
declared to be unlawful, or whenever in this Code or in material adopted by reference by this Code the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful and where no specific penalty is
provided thereof, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus costs. This penalty shall not be deemed to be exclusive of any other appropriate legal or
equitable action. Each day any violation of this Code occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
57
Sec. 1-113 Prohibited Acts Include Causing, Permitting, Concealing
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing,
permitting, aiding, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission.
Sec. 1-114 Same Offense Punishable by Different Sections of the Code; City Attorney’s Option
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different sections of this Code,
the City attorney may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense.
58
Chapter 2 – Administration
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 80
FORM OF GOVERNMENT ............................................................................................... 80
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION ................................................................................................... 81
GENERAL LABOR POLICIES .......................................................................................... 81
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY....................................................................... 81
PROBATIONARY PERIOD ............................................................................................... 82
RE-EMPLOYMENT ........................................................................................................... 82
ANTI-NEPOTISM ............................................................................................................... 83
EMPLOYEE CONDUCT .................................................................................................... 83
CONFIDENTIALITY POLICY .......................................................................................... 83
ABSENTEEISM AND TARDINESS ................................................................................. 83
EMPLOYMENT CLASSIFICATIONS .............................................................................. 83
EVALUATIONS ................................................................................................................. 84
CONFIDENTIAL PERSONNEL RECORDS ..................................................................... 85
PROMOTION AND TRANSFERS..................................................................................... 85
WAGES AND SALARIES .................................................................................................. 85
HOURS OF WORK ............................................................................................................. 87
TERMINATION .................................................................................................................. 87
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE ...................................................................................... 87
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE .............................................................................................. 88
HEALTH INSURANCE ...................................................................................................... 89
DENTAL INSURANCE ...................................................................................................... 89
LIFE INSURANCE ............................................................................................................. 89
FLEXIBLE REIMBURSEMENT BENEFITS ACCOUNTS ............................................. 89
GRATUITIES ...................................................................................................................... 89
REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES ................................................................................ 90
USE OF CITY PROPERTY ................................................................................................ 90
INTERNET AND ACCEPTABLE USE ............................................................................. 90
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION ...................................................... 90
POLITICAL ACTIVITY ..................................................................................................... 91
RETIREMENT .................................................................................................................... 91
HOLIDAYS ......................................................................................................................... 91
VACATIONS....................................................................................................................... 92
SICK LEAVE ...................................................................................................................... 93
DIRECT DEPOSIT .............................................................................................................. 94
78
79
UNPAID FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE (FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT OF
1993) .................................................................................................................................... 94
WORKER’S COMPENSATION ........................................................................................ 96
NON FMLA LEAVE OF ABSENCE ................................................................................. 97
CATASTROPHIC LEAVE PROGRAM............................................................................. 98
A. Introduction ............................................................................................................. 98
B. Authority and Responsibility ................................................................................... 98
C. Definition ................................................................................................................. 98
D. Eligibility ................................................................................................................. 98
E. Procedures................................................................................................................ 98
F. Limitations ............................................................................................................... 99
G. Frequently asked questions ..................................................................................... 99
JURY DUTY........................................................................................................................ 99
MILITARY LEAVE ............................................................................................................ 99
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ................................................................................................ 100
PERSONAL BUSINESS ................................................................................................... 101
ACCIDENTS TO EMPLOYEES ...................................................................................... 101
HEALTH AND SAFETY .................................................................................................. 101
HEALTH AND WELLNESS PROGRAM ....................................................................... 102
CHANGE OF PERSONAL STATUS ............................................................................... 102
SOLICITATION ................................................................................................................ 102
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE POLICY ............................................................................ 102
WORKPLACE SMOKING POLICY ................................................................................ 103
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ........................................................................ 103
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY ................................................................................ 105
INFECTIOUS DISEASE POLICY ................................................................................... 108
WHISTLEBLOWER'S PROTECTION………………………………………………… 111
80
INTRODUCTION
The Caribou City Council believes that it is important to work together harmoniously in a
spirit of friendliness and cooperation to maintain a comfortable working atmosphere. The
City Council strives for excellence, and the best and most qualified persons seeking
employment with the City will be selected to serve the City of Caribou.
The people of Caribou are the center of the City’s activities. The reason for local
government is to meet the needs of the people and its community. Municipal
government’s defining role in the success of the community is to provide the most cost
efficient delivery of services while creating and maintaining the infrastructure necessary to
facilitate the future economic and social well being of the community within the
governmental structure so empowered by the will of the people. To provide this service,
the most qualified City employees may be ultimately involved with health, safety, welfare,
education and the convenience of the people.
This handbook is designed to inform the employee about the City’s personnel policies and
procedures and to help them understand their benefits and responsibilities as an employee
of the City. Failure to follow this policy will result in disciplinary actions as outlined in this
policy. It is the responsibility of the employee to become familiar with and gain an
understanding of this handbook. Employees who may need any part of this handbook
clarified should direct their questions to the Human Resources Director. All employees are
required to sign a receipt of this handbook containing the City’s policies and procedures.
A copy of this receipt will be placed in the employees’ personnel file.
While the City of Caribou has developed the plans, policies and procedures described in
this handbook, the policies are provided for general information only and are not a
statement of contractual obligation guaranteeing employment for any specific duration.
The employee may end employment “at will”, absent any contractual agreement, without
cause or advance notice. The City of Caribou may end employment “at will”; absent any
contractual agreement, for cause. Advanced notice of termination should be made in all
possible situations. This Personnel Policy is not to be interpreted as creating contractual
rights in any employment. Conflicting changes in state, or federal laws take precedents
over this Personnel Policy.
The municipality specifically reserves the right to repeal, modify or deviate from these
policies as necessary. These policies are intended as informational guidance and are not to
be interpreted as promises of specific treatment or as creating contractual rights in any
employee. In addition, conflicting changes in local, state or federal laws take precedence
over the contents of personnel policies, whether or not those changes were incorporated
into the policy.
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
The City of Caribou operates under the Council-Manager form of government by a Charter
so created in March of 1967. The Council is comprised of seven members elected at large
who determine policies, make laws and ordinances, adopt budgets and determine the tax
rate.
Councilors are elected each year on a rotating basis with 2 councilors one year, 2 the next
81
and 3 the following year on a nonpartisan ballot. Each year, the Council elects a Mayor
from among its members.
The Council appoints the City Manager, who is responsible for all administrative matters,
such as, enforcing the law in accordance with the City Charter and ordinances and policies
adopted by the Council, and appointing department heads, except those positions appointed
by the City Council as specified in the City Charter. Employment of all personnel is the
responsibility of the City Manager.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
The purpose for an affirmative action program is to continue to create an equitable
environment among the employees. The City of Caribou’s affirmative action program
contains the following objectives:
? To examine all employment policies and procedures systematically to ensure that no
employee or applicant is discriminated against on the basis of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sex, religion, sexual orientation or other protected class.
? To develop and implement affirmative action plans which will be followed in
recruiting, employing and promoting qualified individuals without regard to race, color,
national origin, age, disability, sex, religion, sexual orientation or other protected class.
? To foster a non-threatening environment in which employees are assured that
discrimination is neither condoned nor tolerated.
GENERAL LABOR POLICIES
Each employee is encouraged to seek information or advice from the Human Resources
Director or Department Heads on any matter affecting his/her employment.
Rules and regulations adopted from time to time by Supervisory or Administrative
Personnel within the chartered authority will be followed at all times.
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
In order to provide equal employment and advancement opportunities to all individuals,
employment decisions at the City of Caribou will be based on merit, qualifications, and
abilities. Except where required or permitted by law, employment practices will not be
influenced or affected by an applicant’s or employee’s race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, age, disability, or any other characteristic protected by the law.
The City of Caribou will make reasonable accommodations for qualified individuals with
known disabilities unless doing so would result in an undue hardship. This policy governs
all aspects of employment, including selection, job assignment, compensation, discipline,
termination, and access to benefits and training.
In addition to a commitment to provide equal employment opportunities to all qualified
individuals, the City of Caribou has established an affirmative action program to promote
opportunities for individuals in certain employment classifications throughout the
organization.
82
Employees with questions or concerns about any type of discrimination in the workplace
are encouraged to bring these issues to the attention of their immediate supervisor or the
Human Resources Director. Employees can raise concerns and make reports without fear
of reprisal. Anyone found to be engaging in any type of unlawful discrimination will be
subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment.
The City of Caribou is an Equal Opportunity Employer.. The City of Caribou will
continue to recruit, hire, train, and promote into all job levels the most qualified persons
without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap or any other protected
class under state or federal law. With the same respect, all other personnel matters such as
compensation, benefits, transfers, layoffs, City sponsored training, education, and social
and recreational programs will continue to be administered in accordance with the equal
opportunity policy of the City of Caribou.
The City of Caribou complies with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 and
requires all employees to complete the Employment Eligibility Verification Form.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD
In order to provide new employees and the City time in which to evaluate work
performance newly hired employees will be subject to a probationary period of six (6)
months. If the employee is deemed unable to be a successful employee during the
probationary period, employment can be terminated without cause, notice or hearing.
If the employee has transferred to a new position from another department, the hire date
will default back to the original hire date for benefit purposes.
The probationary period is intended to give Department Heads an opportunity to review the
ability of the new employee to perform all aspects of the position. If a concern/s should
arise involving performance, attendance or conduct during the probationary period, the
Department Head will meet with the new employee in a timely manner to discuss these
concerns.
If a probationary employee continues to have problems after receiving feedback, the
probationary period may be extended, or the employee may be released, depending upon
the concern(s) at the discretion of the City Manager.
Time spent on leave without pay will not count toward completion of the probationary
period. A probationary employee must complete the probationary period upon return from
the leave without pay. Time spent, as a temporary employee is not counted toward the
probationary period.
An employee may be released at any time without cause, hearing or notice during the
probationary period. An employee who has successfully completed the probationary
period may be terminated in accordance with the City policies.
RE-EMPLOYMENT
Former employees who left the City with good records may be given preference over new
applicants, providing their qualifications are equal to the other applicants. However, when
83
computing seniority and employment benefits they will be considered as new employees.
ANTI-NEPOTISM
Relatives are defined as follows: spouses, parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren,
brothers, sisters, brothers and sisters-in-law, fathers and mothers-in-law, stepparents,
stepbrothers, stepsisters, stepchildren, sons and daughters-in-law.
Relatives of persons currently employed by the City may not be eligible for employment
within the same department of the City. If the relative relationship is established after
employment, the individuals concerned will meet with the City Manager. The Manager -
may then make any reassignment or adjustments necessary so that the employees will not
be working directly for or supervising a relative or will not be working directly above the
relative’s immediate superior or directly for the relatives immediate subordinate.
In cases where a conflict or the potential conflict arises due to personal relationships, the
parties may be separated by reassignment and/or be subject to corrective action or in some
cases termination.
EMPLOYEE CONDUCT
All employees are expected and required to treat the public and their coworkers with
promptness, patience, courtesy, and respect. Employees are expected to conduct
themselves at all times in a manner that will bring no discredit to their department or to the
City of Caribou.
CONFIDENTIALITY POLICY
During the course of their duties, employees of the City of Caribou often are privy to
information about individuals which is sensitive and must be kept confidential. Employees
are expected to respect the confidential nature of any information not subject to public
knowledge.
ABSENTEEISM AND TARDINESS
Employees shall be at their respective places of work in accordance with the general or
departmental regulations. In the event of necessary absence because of illness or any other
cause, it is the responsibility of the employee to see that his/her department head is advised
of the reason for absence prior to the start of the work day and on each subsequent day so
he/she may adjust the daily schedule of work as necessary. Similarly, if an employee is
going to be unavoidably late for work for some reason, notification must be given to the
respective department head within 2 hours of the employee’s scheduled start time..
Excessive tardiness and/or unapproved absences may be cause for disciplinary action
and/or termination.
EMPLOYMENT CLASSIFICATIONS
It is the intent of this section to clarify the definitions of employment classifications so that
84
employees understand their employment status and benefit eligibility.
The following describes employment categories that classify employees according to their
employment status and benefit eligibility.
REGULAR FULL-TIME (Non-exempt) employees are those who are paid hourly, not in a
temporary or probationary period status and who are regularly scheduled to work at least
30 hours per week. They are eligible for the complete City benefit package, subject to the
terms, conditions, and limitations of each benefit package.
REGULAR FULL-TIME (Exempt) employees are those who are paid with a salary based
on a regular 40 hour week and are not eligible for overtime benefits as provided by Section
13(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act as defined by Regulations, 29 CFR Part 541.
They are eligible for the complete City benefit package, subject to the terms, conditions,
and limitations of each benefit package.
REGULAR PART-TIME employees are those who are not assigned to a temporary or
probationary status and who are regularly scheduled to work less than the full-time work
schedule, but at least 15 hours per week, but less than 30 hours per week and over a 52
week period. Regular part-time employees are eligible, on a pro rata basis, for vacation
and retirement benefits, subject to the terms, conditions and limitations of each benefit
program.
PART-TIME/SEASONAL employees are those who are not assigned to a temporary or
orientation status and who are scheduled to work on an irregular basis. Part-time/seasonal
employees are not eligible for City benefits.
PROBATIONARY employees are those whose performance is being evaluated to
determine whether further employment in a specific position is appropriate. Employees
who satisfactorily complete the probationary period will be notified at their six (6) month
evaluation of their new employment classification.
TEMPORARY employees are those who are hired as interim replacements, to temporarily
supplement the work force, or to assist in the completion of a specific project.
Employment assignments in this category are of a limited duration. Employment beyond
any initially stated period does not in any way imply a change in employment status.
Temporary employees retain that status until they are notified of a change. Temporary
employees are ineligible for City benefits.(Amended 10/07)
EVALUATIONS
All employees will be given a written performance evaluation annually. This evaluation
will be reviewed by the employee with the evaluator. A new employee will be evaluated
after six (6) months of employment. Department Heads shall complete evaluation reports
on subordinates and return to the Human Resources Director. All evaluations will be kept
in the employee’s personnel file.
The City Manager (and appropriate board if applicable) will complete evaluation reports
on Department Heads. The Council Personnel Committee jointly with the Mayor shall
complete the evaluation on the City Manager. This evaluation shall be approved by the
85
City Council, with the final vote taken in public session. The evaluation report will be
signed by the Mayor and/or Chairman of the Personnel Committee and maintained in a
confidential file by the Human Resources Director for the Personnel Committee. All other
personnel records will be confidential and filed with the Human Resources Director and
available for review by the employee, the department head or the City Manager.
CONFIDENTIAL PERSONNEL RECORDS
Personnel records are maintained for each employee of the City and are kept in a locked
file cabinet. Any employee may review his/her files in the presence of the Human
Resources Director or the City Manager between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. So as not to cause disruption the employee shall set up an
appointment with the Human Resources Director for such a review in advance.
PROMOTION AND TRANSFERS
The City of Caribou may fill a vacancy internally through promotion of existing personnel
at the discretion of the appropriate hiring authority with approval from the City Manager
Transfers are permissible between departments if the move is acceptable to the employee,
both Department Heads concerned, and with the approval of the City Manager.
Employees wishing to transfer departments must consult the Human Resources Director.
Department heads wishing to transfer employees must consult the Human Resources
Director and receive approval from the City Manager.
Transfers to a vacant position of the same classification or like classification, even if it is a
different department, will not affect the employee’s standing relative to City benefits
accrued. However, the transferred employee will begin establishing seniority based on the
transfer date, if the transfer is to a new department.
WAGES AND SALARIES
The City of Caribou attempts to keep its wages and salaries comparable with other similar
communities, agencies and firms. The City of Caribou maintains a salary schedule for all
positions, if not covered by specific contract, in order to keep positional salaries at a
comparable rate.
New employees are paid at a rate within the City’s Wage and Classification for the position
for which they were hired. Individual compensation concerns are to be discussed only with
the respective Department Head, the Human Resources Director, or the City Manager.
The City of Caribou’s Wage and Classification Program has been created to develop a
clear understanding of each different position in the organization, to insure each position is
measured on the same basis to determine its relative value, and to insure that each
individual is equitably and competitively compensated for the type of work performed.
This program has been developed and adopted to serve as a guideline for the City of
Caribou exclusively. The program utilizes eight factors as the basis of measurements:
86
1) Knowledge/Education – This factor measures the requirement for
knowledge and skill in administration, professional, technical and human
relations areas. This knowledge requirement may be specialized, diverse or
broad in scope. Knowledge may be obtained through formal schooling,
specialized training or self-education. Minimum knowledge requirement is
considered for satisfactory performance of the job.
2) Mental Activity/Complexity of Decisions - The requirement for original and
independent creation, analysis reasoning, evaluating, judgment, and
choosing among alternatives.
3) Job Experience – This factor measures the minimum time necessary to
acquire, through experience, the practical knowledge, skill, and technique to
perform the work. It is the total of time necessary in related work on-the-job
training in which the experiences are directly applicable.
4) Responsibility/Accountability – The requirement of independent
responsibility for what happens. The exercise of judgment is mental
activity, but the results of judgment are accountability. Accountability may
be observable, or it may be remote, as in making long-range policy.
5) Management Control – This factor measures the responsibility for training,
guiding or directing the effort of others, either personally or through
subordinates. It measures to what extent the job requires organizing work,
making plans and schedules, and leading others toward organization goals.
6) Relationships – This factor measures the effect of internal or external
contacts upon costs or reputation and prestige of the organization. It is that
factor which deals most importantly with human relations skills. The nature
and level of such contacts, their frequency, whether information is furnished
or obtained, or whether it is necessary to influence others are considered.
7) Analysis and Research – This factor measures the fact-finding and
interpretation, investigation, research, and analysis required for the
satisfactory performance of the position. Research may be required with
respect to financial, economic and social trends, the effect of technological
developments, new industries, and other matters.
8) Working Conditions – This factor measures the physical surroundings under
which the job must be performed and includes the potential for occupational
injury.
Each of these factors is scored to determine a classification number. Once a classification
number has been determined for each individual, that individual is placed into a range.
Once a classification number has been assigned to a position, the position will fall within
one of the twelve ranges that are established.
87
HOURS OF WORK
The City Manager and the Department Heads shall endeavor to establish schedules of
working hours for department heads and subordinate employees, not in excess of those
stipulated by general law of the business and industry for related positions. The City
recognizes however, that there are some governmental jobs that require unique working
schedules. It is the responsibility of the City Manager or Department Head to establish the
work schedule that provides the necessary staffing to serve the needs of the citizens of
Caribou. Over the course of a year, needs of different departments come to a peak
resulting in overtime work. All persons on hourly wage rates required to work outside of
their regular work schedule or over forty (40) hours, whichever is the greater, shall be paid
time and one half. For example: If an employee is hourly non-exempt and the normal work
schedule is Monday through Friday – 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. with one hour allowed daily
for lunch; and the employee works beyond 5:00 p.m. or on Saturday or Sunday, then the
employee qualifies for the time worked outside of the work schedule at time and one half.
In lieu of overtime pay, compensating time may be allowed at a rate of time and one half
by mutual agreement between the employee and his/her immediate Department Head.
(Amended 10/07)
TERMINATION
RESIGNATION - All hourly employees resigning from the service of the City are required
to give a two (2) week notice. Failure to comply with this agreement or a termination not
in good standing will result in loss of accumulated vacation or any other accumulated
benefit.
Department Heads shall be required to give a minimum 30 days notice.
REFERENCES - The City Manager or Department Head may give letters of
recommendation to individuals and furnish references on inquiry by prospective
employers.
EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATIONS – All employment verifications should be submitted
in writing by facsimile or mail to the Human Resources Director.
EXIT INTERVIEW - Each employee before completing severance of his/her employment
will have an exit interview with the, Human Resources Director and/or the City Manager
or his/her designated official. (Amended 08/07)
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE
DISCIPLINARY ACTION - Demotion and suspension may be used by a department head
with the approval of the City Manager for inefficiency, insubordination, substance abuse
on duty, absenteeism, tardiness, or continued poor performance after evaluation and any
behavior which is not conducive for working conditions. Disciplinary action must be taken
within one (1) week of the Department Head’s notification of the incident. One week
constitutes five (5) working days. Documentation of disciplinary action will be retained in
the employee's personnel file indefinitely. (Amended 10/07)
Procedure for disciplinary action is as follows:
88
First Offense – Counseling/Verbal warning (to be documented in the employee file)
Second Offense - Written notice (to be documented in the employee personnel file)
Third Offense – Termination
The Department Head and/or the Human Resources Director in conjunction with the City
Manager; has the authority to enter the disciplinary action procedure at any of the levels
outlined in this section.
TERMINATION - If a regular employee is to be terminated from employment, the Human
Resources Director will issue a notice to the employee on the day of discharge. In addition,
the employee can request arrangements to be made for a hearing with the City Manager,
the Department Head, the Human Resources Director and the employee to determine
whether discharge is appropriate. If any employee is discharged for such reasons as listed
under disciplinary action, he/she is not entitled to remuneration for accrued/banked sick
leave but will be eligible for accrued/banked vacation pay upon separation. Should the
result of a hearing be discharge, the employee will be provided with a written statement
from the City within 24 hours of said hearing. Termination may be effective immediately
should the seriousness of the violation warrant such action.
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
The City of Caribou for the purposes of this Grievance Procedure will define a grievance
as the following: A dispute between any employee and the City concerning the
interpretation or application of the terms of these Personnel Rules and Regulations.
Excluded are those matters pertaining to management’s judgments of qualification and or
performance relating to: hiring, promotions of personnel, work conditions, employment
supervision, safety, compensation adjustments, etc.
The City Council shall serve as the Grievance Board for hearings. Employees must fulfill
all steps of the process in sequence order prior to submitting in writing that the City
Manager notify the Council of a potential hearing.
(a) The grievance shall first be discussed with the immediate supervisor.
(b) The grievance may then be submitted in writing to the Department Head who
shall give a written reply within one (1) week. (One week constitutes five (5)
working days).
(c) The grievance may then be submitted in writing to the Human Resources
Director who shall give a written reply within one (1) week. (One week
constitutes five (5) working days).
(d) The City Manager may be requested in writing to bring the matter before the
Personnel Committee of the City Council; only after the completion of steps
(a) through (c).
These steps shall be followed in sequence. However, the requirements of a written
presentation and reply in steps (b) and (c) is not intended to preclude the use of frank and
89
informal conference as a means of reaching settlement.
BENEFITS
HEALTH INSURANCE
The City is engaged in a group hospital and surgical plan.
Group health insurance is available to all full-time employees and their families or
dependents. The City Council annually determines the share of the premium that the City
will pay.
This health insurance also includes major medical benefits. (Amended 08/07)
Included in this health insurance at no cost to the employee is a term life insurance valued
at one (1) times the employee’s annual salary.
Health Insurance Stipend – The City of Caribou offers an incentive/stipend to the
employees to opt out of taking the standard offer of the health insurance plan of choice.
This is an option for employees NOT TO TAKE the standard offer of insurance in which
the employee must provide proof of other insurance plan. The incentive will be comprised
of a cash incentive to be paid directly to the employee in each payroll period.
DENTAL INSURANCE
Regular employees working 15 hours or more may purchase Dental Insurance coverage at
employee expense from the Maine Municipal Employees Health Trust.
LIFE INSURANCE
Regular employees working 15 hours or more may purchase Basic, Supplemental, and/or
Dependent Life Insurance coverage at their expense from the Maine Municipal Employees
Health Trust.
FLEXIBLE REIMBURSEMENT BENEFITS ACCOUNTS
The City offers a flexible benefits program to regular full-time employees. Employees
who voluntarily choose to participate may elect to make weekly deductions into their
accounts to reimburse them for up to $5,000 in annual Dependent Care expenses and for up
to $2,500 in annual medical expenses on a tax-free basis.
Employees who are interested should obtain more information and carefully evaluate the
details before deciding whether to participate.
GRATUITIES
A City employee is prohibited from soliciting or accepting any gift, gratuity, favor,
90
entertainment, loans, or any other item of monetary value from any person, within or
outside City employment, whose interests may be affected by the employee’s performance
or nonperformance of his/her official duties.
Acceptance of nominal gifts, such as food and refreshments in the ordinary course of
business meetings, or unsolicited advertising or promotional materials such as pens, note
pads, calendars, etc., is permitted.
REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES
Employees shall be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred while
carrying out approved, official City business. Such reimbursement shall be made in
accordance with current, approved rates upon submission of a standard expense sheet,
signed by the employee’s immediate supervisor. Such reimbursement shall not apply to
travel between employee’s home and the place of work, unless more than 1 trip is required
per day. Requests for reimbursement of meals, parking fees, lodging and registration fees
must be accompanied by receipts of same whenever possible. All reimbursements are to
be submitted within 14 calendar days of the date the receipt for purchase is issued or the
reimbursable cost is incurred, or within 14 calendar days of an employee’s return to work
after travel approved by the City Manager for City business.
USE OF CITY PROPERTY
Employees may not, directly or indirectly, use or allow the use of City property of any kind
for other than official activities.
INTERNET AND ACCEPTABLE USE
The City of Caribou’s internal network is connected to the Internet. Everyone with
computer access to the internal network has the ability to access the Internet.. While the
Internet is a great resource for our organization, it is the responsibility of each employee to
use this resource responsibly and respectfully. It is assumed that the predominant use of
these resources will be for work use, and that any personal use of e-mail and the internet
will be limited; never a priority over work matters. Employees shall not spend excessive
amounts of time on personal uses of these resources.
Electronic mail sent from the City should be treated the same as any other communication
that is sent. All communications represent the City of Caribou’s name as a whole, and as
such, should be written in a professional and appropriate manner. This also applies to any
material that is published on the City of Caribou’s Website.
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION
A City employee may engage in outside employment. However, no employees may
engage in outside employment which in any manner interferes with the proper and
effective performance of the duties of their position, results in a conflict of
interest. Employees must inform their Department Head of their outside employment. If
the City Manager determines that such outside employment is disadvantageous to the City,
91
he shall notify the employee in writing that the outside employment must be terminated.
Any employee who engages in employment outside their regular working hours shall be
subject to perform their regular duties first.
The City shall in no respect be liable or grant sick leave or disability leave in cases where
an employee is injured or contracts an occupational illness or develops occupational
disability while engaged in outside employment.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY
While working for the City, all employees shall refrain from using their influence publicly
in any way for or against any candidate for elective office in the City government. City
employees shall not circulate petitions or campaign literature for elective City officials, or
be in any way concerned with soliciting or receiving subscriptions, contributions, or
political service for any person for any political purpose pertaining to the City government.
This rule is not to be construed to prevent City employees from beginning, or continuing
to be, members of any political organization, from attending political meetings, from
expressing their views of political matters, from voting with complete freedom in any local
state or national election, or exclude them from forming a union or joining one. City
employees who accept any official position within the City’s municipal organization are
expected to resign from positions where there may be a conflict of interest or an
incompatibility of offices.
RETIREMENT
The City offers a qualified pension plan designed to supplement Social Security benefits
that will help attain a measure of security and financial independence after you have left
active employment with the City due to retirement.
ELIGIBILITY - In order to be eligible you must be a regular full-time or regular part-time
employee and make a weekly contribution to the qualified plan. The City will make a
weekly contribution after the completion of six (6) months of employment. The maximum
amount that the City will contribute is $1.00 on every $1.00 up to 3 1/2% of the
employee’s gross weekly earnings. (Amended 10/07)
Fire and Police are eligible to join the Maine State Retirement System. The City of Caribou
will only contribute to one qualified plan per employee. (Amended 2/96)
HOLIDAYS
Eleven (11) holidays are observed throughout the calendar year. They are:
1. New Years Day
2. Martin Luther King Jr. Day
3. Presidents Day
4. Patriot’s Day
5. Memorial Day
6. Independence Day
7. Labor Day
92
8. Columbus Day
9. Veteran’s Day
10. Thanksgiving
11. Christmas
Since some governmental departments must be open every day due to the necessity of their
operation, it is not possible for all employees to be scheduled off duty on the day the
holiday occurs. When this happens and the employee is unable to take a day off to make
up for it, he/she will receive pay at time and a half (1 ½ ) for the holiday worked.
Holidays falling on Saturday will be observed on Friday and all holidays falling on Sunday
will be observed on Monday. Any employee not working the day prior and the day
following a holiday when scheduled to do so, will relinquish eligibility for holiday pay
unless there is a legitimate reason for the employees action. Paid holidays will be provided
to regular part time employees on a pro-rata basis. (Amended 2/96 and 2/01)
VACATIONS
An employee is eligible to take annual vacation time with pay after completing six (6)
continuous months of service with the City. For employees completing six months of
service, all vacations will be taken by January 1 or within three (3) months of their
employment anniversary date.
All subsequent annual vacations are calculated by January 1. Vacations cannot be
accumulated from year to year. All vacation time should be taken during the established
vacation period for each department.
Vacation will be accumulated as follows:
After six months of service the employee will receive 1 workweek.
After 1 year of service the employee will receive 1 additional workweek.
After 2 years of service the employee will receive 2 workweeks vacation.
After 5 years of service the employee will receive 3 workweeks.
After 15 years of service the employee will receive 4 workweeks.
After 20 years of service the employee will receive 5 workweeks.
(Amended 10/07) (Amended 6/14)
Regular part time employees are eligible to accumulate vacation based on the average
number of hours worked in the past year. The average number of hours is calculated at the
number of years of service. (Amended 8/07)
Vacation pay is determined by the pay rate of the employee at the time they are actually on
vacation. Employees may take vacations in any increments of their choosing, at the
discretion of the Department Head. If payday falls during the annual vacation of any
employees, he/she is entitled to his/her pay in the payroll prior to the start of their vacation.
(Amended 10/07)
It is the City policy that each employee shall take at least one (1) week vacation a year.
Department Heads are in charge of scheduling vacations. They will do their best to plan
their schedules according to requests made by employees and employee’s seniority.
93
(Amended 2/96)
An employee is not allowed to work and be paid double his/her wage during his/her
vacation period. (Amended 2/96 and 2/16)
The employer encourages employees to use all of their annual accrued vacation however;
under some circumstances an employee may not be able to use their full allotted vacation.
With the approval of the Department Head and the City Manager, an employee may bank
unused vacation time up a maximum of what the employee has in their bank as of
December 31, 2014, to be paid only upon separation or retirement. (Amended 2/01)
Banked Vacation hours beyond 400 hours will not be paid out. (Amended 6/14)
An employee may request to receive the entire amount of banked vacation pay prior to
their retirement or resignation from the City’s employment. It shall be solely up to the
discretion of the City Manager to allow the banked vacation time to be paid out after
receiving the request. If the request is granted the employee shall not be eligible to bank
hours. (Amended 2/16)
Each year an employee may roll over unused vacation to be used by the last day of
February of the following year. (Amended 6/14)
Upon retirement or resignation from the City’s employment, or upon death, the employee
or his/her estate can collect unused vacation pay. (Amended 2/96)
SICK LEAVE
If you are a full time employee, you will be eligible for paid sick leave after completing six
(6) months of continuous service from date of employment, at which time you will have
accumulated 48 hours. Sick leave is accumulated at the rate of eight hours per month up to
960 hours or its equivalent.
Should any employee become ill, he/she will make an attempt to contact their supervisor or
Department Head prior to their regularly scheduled start time. Failure to do this may
jeopardize eligibility for sick leave for the period.
Employees may be required to present a doctor’s certificate to justify absence and to
qualify for payment for time lost during sick leave. (Amended 2/01)
Any sickness occurring during a regularly scheduled vacation may not be counted as sick
leave.
For employees hired on or before December 31, 2013: Upon retiring and discontinuance
from the City’s employment or upon death, the employee or his/her estate shall be paid
unused sick leave benefits up to the amount in the employees sick bank as of December 31,
2014. (Amended 2/01) Upon termination of employment in good standing with the City,
the employee will be compensated for unused banked sick leave, up to the number of hours
in their bank as of December 31, 2014, according to the following schedule:
After 5 years - 25%
After 10 years - 50%
After 15 years - 75%
After 20 years - 100%
(Amended 6/14)
For employees hired on or after January 1, 2014 there shall be no pay out of unused banked
sick leave. (Amended 6/14)
94
For employees hired on or before December 31, 2013: The City wishes to encourage
employees to build up their accrued sick leave to provide security for those instances when
the employee is unable to perform duties because of sickness. Upon accruing the
maximum number of hours, the employer will permit the employee to bank additional
unused hours for additional security, to be used only when a long term illness of the
employee occurs, which can be documented by the employee’s physician. The employer
will also permit the employee to cash in any accrued sick leave, beyond nine hundred sixty
(960) hours at the rate of $6.25 per hour. The determination to bank or cash in these sick
leave hours will be done during the month of January each year and will be paid out to the
employee or credited to the sick leave bank in February of each year.
For Employees hired on or after January 1, 2014 there shall be no payout of sick time
accumulated beyond the nine hundred sixty (960) hours. (Amended 6/14)
DIRECT DEPOSIT
All employees are required to enroll in the City’s Direct Deposit Program.
UNPAID FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE (FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT
OF 1993)
FMLA requires covered employers to provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected
leave to "eligible" employees for certain family and medical reasons. Employees are
eligible if they have worked for a covered employer for at least one year, for 1,250 hours
over the previous 12 months
Reasons For Taking Leave
Unpaid leave must be granted for any of the following reasons:
• To care for the employee's child after birth or placement for adoption or foster
care;
• To care for the employee's spouse, son or daughter or parent, who has a serious
health condition; or
• For a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform his or
her job.
Advance Notice and Medical Certification
The employee may be required to provide advance leave notice and medical
certification. Taking of leave may be denied if requirements are not met.
• The employee ordinarily must provide 30 days advance notice when the leave is
"foreseeable."
• An employer may require medical certification to support a request for leave
because of a serious health condition and may require second or third opinions (at
the employer's expense) and a fitness for duty report to return to work.
Job Benefits and Protection
• For the duration of FMLA leave, the employer must maintain the employee's
health coverage under any "group health plan."
95
• Upon return from FMLA leave, most employees must be restored to their
original or equivalent positions with equivalent pay, benefits and other
employment terms.
• The use of FMLA leave cannot result in the loss of any employment benefit that
accrued prior to the start of an employee's leave.
Unlawful Acts by Employers
FMLA makes it unlawful for any employer to:
• Interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of any right provided under FMLA.
• Discharge or discriminate against any person for opposing any practice made
unlawful by FMLA or for involvement in any proceeding under or relating to
FMLA.
Enforcement
• The U.S. Department of Labor is authorized to investigate and resolve
complaints of violations.
• An eligible employee may bring a civil action against an employer for violation.
FMLA does not affect any federal or state law prohibiting discrimination or supersede
any state or local law or collective bargaining agreement which provides greater family
or medical leave rights.
In accordance with the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 and the State of
Maine Family and Medical Leave Act, the City provides medical and family leaves of
absence without pay to an employee who has been employed by the City of Caribou for 12
consecutive months and who has worked at least 1,250 hours during the year preceding the
start of the leave is entitled to a family medical leave of up to twelve (12) weeks in any
twelve (12) consecutive months for the birth, adoption of a child 16 years of age or less, or
serious illness of the employee, child, spouse, or parent. Serious illness means an accident
or disease or condition that: (1) poses imminent danger of death; (2) requires
hospitalization involving an organ transplant, limb amputation or other procedure of
similar severity; or (3) any mental or physical condition that requires constant in-home
care. Please refer to the Human Resource Director’s office for further details or
clarification.
A. To be eligible for a family medical leave, the employee must give notice of the
intended date upon which family medical leave will commence and terminate, unless the
employee is prevented from giving notice because of a medical emergency. The employee
requesting family medical leave must do so on a preprinted form available in the Human
Resource Director’s office.
B. The City will require certification from a physician to verify the amount of leave
requested by the employee for medical leaves.
C. Family medical leave is without pay. The employee must use accrued sick leave in
accordance with the policies concerning such leaves, to cover absences related to family
medical leave; however, the total amount of family medical leave may not exceed twelve
(12) weeks. Sick leave runs concurrently with (12) weeks of family medical leave.
D. If the employee is enrolled in group medical insurance prior to utilizing unpaid leave,
the City of Caribou will pay for the employer’s share of the medical insurance premium for
96
the period of the unpaid family medical leave; said period not to exceed twelve (12)
weeks. The employee’s share of medical insurance, life insurance, income protection,
union dues, union insurance and retirement benefits will continue during the period of
unpaid leave at the cost of the employee. When all sick leave has been utilized by an
employee, salary payments to the employee shall cease immediately. The City will no
longer pay any amount toward employees’ benefits after twelve (12) weeks. The employee
will then have the opportunity to continue the benefits by paying the cost themselves. In
the event that the employee fails to return to work after the expiration of the leave, the
employee will be expected to reimburse the City for its share of the Health Insurance
premiums. The employee will not be required to reimburse the City if he/she is precluded
from returning to work by a serious health condition. The employee will be required to
provide the City with medical certification of the serious health condition provided by the
Medical Doctor that originally certified the serious health condition.
E. Sick and vacation leave do not accrue during an unpaid leave period.
F. Upon the end of the family medical leave, and/or upon submission of a qualified return
to work report, an employee will be restored to the position occupied by the employee
immediately prior to the commencement of the leave or to an equivalent position with the
same employee benefits and pay as existed immediately prior to the commencement of the
leave, except in the event of conditions unrelated to the employee’s taking of a family
medical leave which prevent the restoration to the same or equivalent position.
G. An employee should return to work from the family medical leave no later than the first
working day following the expiration of the leave, unless statutes prevail.
H. An employee may take leave on an intermittent basis or by working a reduced
schedule with prior written approval by a primary care physician and the City Manager.
WORKER’S COMPENSATION
The City of Caribou provides Worker’s Compensation Insurance coverage for all
employees. When an on-the-job accident occurs the affected employee is to report it
immediately to his or her direct supervisor or Department Head. The Department Head
shall notify the Human Resources office within 24 hours of the injury or on the next
following work day of the accident.
A. Preferred Provider Program
The City of Caribou encourages safety in our work environment. We are concerned about
each employee’s well being and take an active role to assist the employee with a proper
recovery.
Because of our interest in employees, we have coordinated a preferred provider program
for work-related medical services. For information on which the City’s preferred provider
is, please see either your Department Head or the Human Resource Director.
It is required that all employees, unless it is an emergency situation, seek medical treatment
through the City’s preferred provider. Initial medical treatment is to be obtained from the
97
City’s preferred provider and is authorized by law under the Maine Workers'
Compensation Act of 1992, Title 39-A, M.R.S.A., Section 206.
All initial medical treatment is to be obtained from the City’s preferred provider and will
be scheduled through the Department Head who in turn will notify the Human Resource
Director.
The personal safety and health of each City Employee are of primary importance. The
prevention of occupationally induced injuries and illnesses is of such consequence that it
will be given precedence whenever necessary.
In the event that an occupational injury does occur, immediately notify your Department
Head or direct supervisor. Each Department Head is responsible for completing a 1st
Report of Injury form and turning it into the Human Resource Department.
IF THE INJURY APPEARS TO BE LIFE-THREATENING...
(Examples: unconsciousness, inability to move, potential spinal injuries, broken bones, uncontrollable
bleeding, heart attack, stroke, inability to breathe, etc)
1. You or a sponsor on your behalf may call 911
2. You may report to a nearby emergency room.
3. Send someone to meet emergency personnel at building entrance and guide them to
the emergency location.
4. Get names of witnesses and information necessary for an accident report
We look forward to working together to maintain a safe, healthy work environment, as
well as provide opportunities for a proper recovery.
B. Medical Bills
Medical bills, when received either by the department or the employee, are to be forwarded
immediately to the Human Resource Director’s office. Medical bills are paid without any
waiting period. For employee compensation there is a seven day waiting period. The City
remains responsible for employee compensation for the first seven days of the absence, this
will be charged to employee sick leave, between eight and thirteen days the insurance
carrier provides compensation; fourteen days and over all compensation is retroactive to
day one by the insurance carrier and the employee’s sick leave shall be credited back to the
City upon payment by the employee to the City for the seven days.
In some instances worker’s compensation payments may be held up. If this occurs, the
City will continue to pay the employee by charging his/her time to sick leave, of which the
employee must buy back from the compensation paid by the insurance carrier.
If a worker is receiving worker’s compensation he/she must continue to pay his/her share
of life and medical insurances.
NON FMLA LEAVE OF ABSENCE
An employee of regular standing may be granted a leave of absence without pay by the
City Manager on recommendation of the department head, with such leave not to exceed
90 days in length. The granting of the leave shall protect the employee’s existing
98
continuous service for the leave period but shall not count as service time for Maine State
Retirement, nor shall vacation or sick leave accrue during the absence, nor will the City
continue to pay their portion of the Health insurance, nor will the employee receive pay for
municipal holidays. (Amended 08/07)
CATASTROPHIC LEAVE PROGRAM
A. Introduction
The Catastrophic Leave Donation Program permits salary and benefits continuation for
regular full-time employee’s that work for the City of Caribou who have exhausted all paid
leave due to their own serious illness or injury, or due to the need to care for a seriously ill
member of the employee's family or household. Subject to the stated eligibility
requirements, salary and benefits continuation is achieved through donation of
vacation/sick hours from other City of Caribou employees.
B. Authority and Responsibility
1. Administration of the program will be handled by the Human Resources Director
2. Human Resources will determine on a case-by-case basis whether a request to draw
from the pool qualifies for Catastrophic Leave usage. An employee may appeal a
Human Resources determination to the City Manager for a final decision.
C. Definition
A catastrophic illness or injury is a serious, debilitating illness or injury that incapacitates
the employee or a member of the employee's family or household, and creates a financial
hardship because the employee has exhausted all eligible vacation/sick hours.
D. Eligibility
Recipients must meet each of the following conditions to be eligible to receive donated
leave hours:
1. A leave of absence is approved by the Department Head and then Human
Resources in relation to a catastrophic illness or injury.
2. Recipient has exhausted all paid leave accruals and is not receiving short term
disability or Workers' Compensation payments.
E. Procedures
1. Donor and recipient requests are submitted in confidence to Human Resources
using the Request/Donation for Catastrophic Banked Leave form.
2. Donors donate vacation/sick hours to a general pool without specifying a recipient.
3. A request to receive donated vacation/sick leave must be accompanied by a
physician's written verification of the illness or injury.
4. All donations are processed anonymously.
5. Donations are not tax deductible.
6. Participation in the program, for donors and recipients, is entirely voluntary.
99
F. Limitations
1. Prior to receiving donated leave through this program an employee must first
exhaust all paid accruals, including sick leave and vacation leave.
2. A recipient is required to use any leave accrued during the previous pay period(s)
prior to use of donated leave hours.
3. In any pay period, recipients may use donated hours only up to their regular weekly
hours.
4. Donations must be a minimum of eight hours with any additional hours in wholehour
increments.
G. Frequently asked questions
1. What is the effect of short-term disability benefits in relation to the program?
Once time is donated to an eligible employee, that employee is placed on active pay
status. When an employee is on pay status, they are not eligible for short-term disability.
Donated time may be used during the employee's disability waiting period, but disability
benefits will not be payable until the waiting period is over and the employee is no
longer on active pay status.
2. May donations be made at any time?
Yes.
3. Where do the donated hours go?
When an employee donates vacation/sick hours, the hours go into a general leave bank
for future use by eligible employees.
4. Must donations be made anonymously?
Generally, it will be assumed that donations are being made anonymously. Anonymity
prevents pressure from being placed on, or perceived by, employees who do not choose
to donate hours, regardless of the reason for their decision. However, as a matter of
personal discretion, donors may choose to inform recipients of their action.
5. What happens to left-over donated hours that are not needed by the recipient?
Since donations are irrevocable, hours not needed by the recipient are transferred back to
the bank.
JURY DUTY
As a City employee, you are expected to carry out your citizen responsibilities. An
employee will be granted special leave, as required, for jury duty or performance of other
civic duty requiring appearance in court or before another public body. The employee
shall be paid the difference (if any) in compensation between the amount received from the
rendering of such service and his or her regular rate of pay, if the service occurs during a
work day. Time paid for jury service shall not be counted as time worked for purposes of
overtime computation.
MILITARY LEAVE
Any permanent employee in a regular full time position who is a member of the National
Guard or any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States, and is required to undergo
100
field training or Active Duty, shall be allowed a leave of absence. Any City employee that
is required to undergo this duty will be granted reserve service leave, in addition to normal
vacation leave, per fiscal year. For any such period of reserve service leave, the City will
pay the difference (if any) between service pay, and the employee’s regular pay.
Any permanent employee in a regular full time position that returns to their position from
active duty service and suffers post traumatic syndrome will have counseling provided to
them per the Military Leave Act of 1994.
The main law governing the employment rights of employees on military duty is the
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA),
found in Title 38 of the United States Code starting at Section 4301. The law does several
things:
? Employers must hold open the jobs of employees on military duty and may not
otherwise discriminate against them because of their military service.
? The law gives that protection to every type and variety of employee.
? Upon return from military duty, a veteran or employee who is still in the military
is entitled to whatever position he or she would have attained with reasonable
certainty if the military service had not occurred. In narrowly-defined situations, a
veteran may be given a comparable position as long as the seniority, pay, and
status remain the same.
? A veteran may not be discharged or subjected to adverse employment action for
one year after the date of reinstatement, except for cause; the same rule applies to
service in the Reserves or National Guard.
? Employers must provide up to eighteen months of health plan coverage to
employees when they are absent on military leave. When the veteran returns, the
employer must immediately cover the veteran under the employer's health plan,
assuming the veteran was covered prior to the leave.
? Seniority under an employer's pension plan must continue to accrue while the
employee is on military duty. To the extent that the employer funds the plan, the
employer must continue to fund the employee's participation in the plan.
? In general, if a benefit having to do with length of service would have accrued
with reasonable certainty, had the veteran been continuously employed by the
employer, the employer must award the benefit as if the veteran had been
continuously employed.
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
In the event of a death in the immediate family, absence from work with pay may be
granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days. Other circumstances may be granted with
special permission of the Department Head and or the City Manager.
For the purpose of this policy, immediate relatives are defined to include spouses, parents,
grandparents, children, grandchildren, brothers, sisters, brothers and sisters in-law, fathers
and mothers in-law, stepparents, stepbrothers, stepsisters, stepchildren, sons-in-law,
daughters-in-law, and individuals residing with an employee. (Amended 2/96)
101
PERSONAL BUSINESS
The City realizes that medical appointments and other necessary engagements may occur
during regular scheduled working hours. When this happens, you must receive permission
from your supervisor or Department Head for leave. Time lost will be deducted from sick
time or vacation time for non salaried personnel. (Amended 10/07)
ACCIDENTS TO EMPLOYEES
All injuries to personnel, no matter how minor, during the work schedule, must be reported
immediately to the Department Head and a written report shall be made.
Employees suffering from an on the job injury may be sent to a doctor for examination.
Time lost because of an injury incurred while on duty will not be deducted for any reason
when computing length of service.
HEALTH AND SAFETY
The personal safety and health of each City employee are of primary importance. The
prevention of occupationally induced injuries and illnesses is of such consequence that it
will be given precedence whenever necessary. To the greatest degree possible, the City
will provide all facilities and equipment required for personal safety and health in keeping
with highest standards.
To assist in providing a safe and healthful work environment for employees, customers,
and visitors, the City of Caribou has established a workplace safety program. This
program is a top priority for the City. The Safety Officer has responsibility for
implementing, administering, monitoring, and evaluating the safety program. Its success
depends on the alertness and personal commitment of all.
The City provides information to employees about workplace safety and health issues
through regular internal communication channels such as supervisor-employee meetings,
bulletin board postings, memos, or other written communications.
Employees and supervisors receive periodic workplace safety training. The training covers
potential safety and health hazards and safe work practices and procedures to eliminate or
minimize hazards. A safety advisory group has been established to assist in these activities
and to facilitate effective communication between employees and management about
workplace safety and health issues.
Some of the best safety improvement ideas come from employees. Those with ideas,
concerns, or suggestions for improved safety in the workplace are encouraged to raise them
with their supervisor, or bring them to the attention of the Safety Officer.
Each employee is expected to obey safety rules and to exercise caution in all work
activities. Employees must immediately report any unsafe condition to the appropriate
supervisor. Employees who violate safety standards, who cause hazardous or dangerous
situations, or who fail to report or, where appropriate, remedy such situations, may be
subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment.
102
In the case of accidents that result in injury, regardless of how insignificant the injury may
appear, employees should immediately notify their immediate supervisor. Such reports are
necessary to comply with laws and initiate insurance and workers' compensation benefits
procedures. Please see the City of Caribou Safety Handbook for complete details.
HEALTH AND WELLNESS PROGRAM
In addition to the workplace safety program, the City has established a Health and
Wellness program. This program has been established to evaluate the Cities workforce.
Group health needs and risks are presented through a Personal Wellness Profile that is
administered confidentially and annually through the Human Resources office. Through
this confidential profile, the City can evaluate the health needs and risks of employees.
Recommendations for initiating risk reduction and health enhancement are a vital key to
maintaining a healthy workforce. Not only does this program maintain a healthy
workforce, but the program also helps with keeping healthcare costs at a minimum. For
more information, contact the Human Resources Director.
CHANGE OF PERSONAL STATUS
It is imperative that every employee report any change of information contained in their
original application to the head of their department. Changes to be reported include change
of address, telephone number, marital status change in number of dependents, etc. At that
time, the Department Head will turn in all paperwork to Human Resources in order to
make the change effective.
SOLICITATION
As public employees, we are restricted from some activities which private organizations
sometimes allow. We are not allowed to solicit for any political purpose on City property
during working hours.
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE POLICY
It is the desire of the City of Caribou to provide its employees with a drug-free, healthful
and safe workplace. To promote this goal, employees are required to report to work in
appropriate mental and physical condition to perform their jobs in a satisfactory manner.
While on City owned property and while conducting business related activities off City
owned property, no employee may use, possess, distribute, sell, or be under the influence
of alcohol or engage in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or
use of illegal drugs. Violations of this policy may lead to disciplinary action, up to and
including immediate termination of employment, and/or required participation in a
substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment program. Such violations may also have legal
consequences.
The legal use of prescribed drugs is permitted on the job only if it does not impair an
employee’s ability to perform the essential functions of the job effectively and in a safe
manner that does not endanger other individuals in the workplace.
103
To inform employees about important provisions of this policy, the City has established a
drug-free awareness program. The program provides information on the dangers and
effects of substance abuse in the workplace, resources available to employees, and
consequences for violations of this policy.
Employees with questions or concerns about substance dependency or abuse are
encouraged to discuss these matters with their supervisor, the Human Resource Director or
the City Manager to receive assistance or referrals to appropriate resources in the
community.
Employees with drug or alcohol problems that have not resulted in, and are not the
immediate subject of, disciplinary action, may request approval to take time off to
participate in a rehabilitation or treatment program. Leave may be granted if the employee
agrees to abstain from use of the problem substance; abides by all City employment
policies, rules and prohibitions relating to conduct in the workplace; and if granting the
leave will not cause the City department any undue hardship.
Employees with questions on the policy or issues related to drug or alcohol use in the
workplace should raise their concerns with their supervisor, the Human Resource Director
or the City Manager without fear of reprisal.
WORKPLACE SMOKING POLICY
In accordance with the provisions of the Workplace Smoking Act of 1985, the City has
adopted a smoking policy. Pursuant to this Act, smoking shall be prohibited within any
municipal building. We ask employees who smoke to please cooperate with this policy
and to only smoke at designated smoking areas.
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
A. The City of Caribou recognizes that alcohol and drug problems are problems for which
there is effective treatment and rehabilitation in the majority of cases. Employee assistance
is designed as a means of helping employees seek the necessary treatment to alleviate
problems affecting job performance. Therefore, the City of Caribou has established an
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) to service employees in dealing with drug or alcohol
problems.
B. Employees may receive assistance from the EAP through self-referral or supervisory
referral.
1. Self-referral is a referral in which an employee initiates contact with the EAP directly.
2. Supervisory referral is a referral in which the supervisor strongly suggests to the
employee that he/she seek consultation with the EAP. Supervisors may refer employees to
the EAP when deteriorating skills or job performances do not respond to normal
supervisory action.
C. Employees who seek help through the EAP or who are referred to the EAP by a
supervisor will be referred for diagnosis and/or evaluation by an Employee Assistance
104
Counselor. The Employee Assistance Counselor is a person who has a Master’s Degree
(or similar certification) in counseling, human services or social work that will provide
counseling or refer the employee to appropriate diagnosis, evaluation and/or treatment.
The Employee Assistance Counselor will be designated by the Human Resource Director.
D. An employee who refuses help or demonstrates little or no effort to perform
satisfactorily is subject to normal disciplinary actions. Employees participating in the EAP
are expected to meet existing job performance standards and established work rules.
E. All EAP records are confidential and maintained separately from other personnel
records. These records will be protected from disclosure to the fullest extent possible and
in accordance with existing State and Federal regulations.
F. In the case of a supervisory referral, the Employee Assistance Counselor will ask the
employee to sign appropriate release forms so that the Counselor can have contact with the
supervisor and the referral agent, if applicable.
G. The Counselor will be responsible for keeping a record of the diagnostic evaluation and
the treatment recommendation which will be kept confidential.
H. The Counselor will inform the supervisor as to whether the employee kept the
appointment with the Counselor and whether the employee was willing to follow through
with the treatment plan. The Counselor will follow-up with the employee as treatment
progresses.
I. If the employee’s performance or attendance shows no improvement within a reasonable
time frame (mutually agreed upon if possible), the employee will be subject to appropriate
disciplinary action.
RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEES UTILIZING THE EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM
A. Employees using the EAP have the right to confidential services. EAP records do not
become part of any personnel records and release of EAP records can only be made with
the written permission of the employee.
B. EAP information cannot be shared with supervisors without the employee’s written
consent.
C. If the employee is using the EAP as a result of a supervisory referral, the Counselor
will only provide the following information to a supervisor, unless the employee signs a
written consent agreeing to the release of additional information:
1. Whether the employee made and kept the appointment;
2. Whether the Counselor assesses there is a problem (specifics will not be discussed); and
3. Whether the employee is open to recommendations made by the Counselor.
D. Employees have the right to have access to their records, the right to review relevant
information regarding their treatment and referrals, and the right to any and all information
regarding benefits.
105
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
It is the intent of the City of Caribou to provide a work environment that is free from
discrimination or harassment. Therefore, it is the policy of the City that any form of sexual
harassment, including both verbal and physical, is unacceptable conduct in the workplace
and will not be tolerated from any source, including supervisors, co-workers and nonemployees.
Employees are encouraged to assist the City with its goal of maintaining a
workplace free of sexual harassment and with its commitment to deal seriously with
allegations of sexual harassment when they arise.
Sexual Harassment Is Illegal under State and Federal Law Per State Law MRSA; Title 26.
It is illegal for any employee to sexually harass another employee, and for any supervisory
employee to permit any act of sexual harassment in the workplace by anyone, whether or
not an employee.
Definition of Sexual Harassment under State and Federal Law Per State Law MRSA; Title
26. .
Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when:
1. this conduct explicitly or implicitly affects an individual’s employment;
2. submission to, or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
employment decisions affecting such individual; or
3. such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an
individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working
environment.
Description of Sexual Harassment1.
A. Physical assaults of a sexual nature such as:
1. Rape, sexual battery, molestation or attempts to commit these assaults; and
2. Intentional physical conduct which is sexual in nature, such as touching,
pinching, patting, grabbing, brushing against another’s body, or poking another
employee’s body.
B. Unwanted sexual advances, propositions or other sexual comments, such as:
1. Sexually-oriented gestures, noises, remarks, jokes or comments about a
person’s sexuality or sexual experience directed at or made in the presence of
any employee who indicates or has indicated in any way that such conduct in
his/her presence is unwelcome;
1 The descriptions in this Section are not meant to be exhaustive.
106
2. Preferential treatment or promise of preferential treatment to an employee for
submitting or attempting to solicit any employee to engage in sexual activity for
compensation or reward; and
3. Subjecting or threatening to subject, an employee to unwelcome sexual
attention or conduct or making performance of an employee’s job more difficult
because of that employee’s sex.
C. Sexual or discriminatory displays or publications anywhere in the organization by
employees such as:
1. Displaying pictures, posters, calendars, graffiti, objects, promotional materials,
reading materials, or other materials that are sexually suggestive, sexually
demeaning, or pornographic, or bringing into the work environment or
possessing any such material to read, display or view at work.
2. Reading or otherwise publicizing in the work environment material that are in
any way sexually demeaning or pornographic; and
3. Displaying signs or other material purporting to segregate an employee by sex
in any area of the workplace (other than restrooms and similar semi-private
lockers/ changing rooms.)
D. Sexual harassment can occur in a variety of circumstances, including but not
limited to the following:
1. The victim as well as the harasser may be a woman or a man. The victim does
not have to be of the opposite sex.
2. The harasser can be the victim’s supervisor, an agent of the employer, a
supervisor in another area, a co-worker, or a non-employee.
3. The victim does not have to be the person harassed but could be anyone
affected by the offensive conduct.
4. Unlawful sexual harassment may occur without economic injury to or discharge
of the victim.
5. The harasser’s conduct must be unwelcome.
Resolving Harassment.
Any employee who believes he or she has been harassed should take the following steps to
resolve the problem:
1. If an employee finds someone’s behavior offensive, they may attempt to resolve the
behavior by calmly but firmly informing the individual that they find the behavior
offensive and requesting that the behavior cease. However, an employee who believes he
or she has been subjected to offensive behavior is not required to confront the offending
individual before registering a complaint.
107
2. They may register a complaint, orally or in writing with any supervisor, the Equal
Employment Opportunity Officer (EEO Officer), or with the City Manager.
Any supervisory or management level employee, including the City Manager, who
receives an oral or written complaint of sexual harassment from an employee must report
the complaint to the City’s EEO Officer within five (5) business days of receiving such a
complaint. Any supervisory employees who fail to meet this requirement may be subject to
discipline.
Any supervisory or management level employee, including the City Manager, with actual
knowledge of what he or she believes is conduct that has or may contribute to a sexually
hostile work environment must report his or her knowledge of this conduct to the City’s
EEO Officer within five (5) business days of obtaining such knowledge. Any supervisory
or management level employees who fail to meet this requirement will be subject to
discipline.
Within twenty (20) days of the EEO Officer’s receipt of a complaint of sexual harassment
or receipt of information from a supervisor about sexual harassment, the EEO Officer shall
inform the alleged victim of harassment that the allegations of sexual harassment will be
promptly investigated.
An independent investigator who does not work for the City and who has expertise in
investigating harassment complaints will investigate all complaints of sexual harassment
promptly and objectively.
During the course of a sexual harassment investigation, the person who is the alleged
victim of sexual harassment is not required to meet with the alleged sexual harasser, work
with the alleged sexual harasser, or discuss the allegations of harassment in the presence of
the alleged sexual harasser.
The City will provide the results of sexual harassment investigations to the alleged victim
of harassment in writing as soon as possible, but in no event later than thirty (30) workdays
after the commencement of the investigation, unless a written explanation is provided to
the alleged victim as to the reason(s) that the investigation could not be completed within
thirty (30) workdays.
Confirmed instances of sexual harassment will be dealt with by utilizing whatever
disciplinary action the City deems appropriate, up to and including termination.
For this harassment policy “supervisory employee,” “supervisor” and “management level
employee” are defined to include: (a) any employee who possesses the authority to direct
the work activities of at least one other employee and (b) any employee who has the
authority to hire, fire, promote, transfer, or discipline another employee.
Legal Recourse through the Maine Human Rights Commission or the U.S. Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission.
With regard to a sexual harassment complaint, if the employee does not want to make the
report internally, the employee may make the complaint to the Maine Human Rights
Commission (MHRC) or the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).
Contact information for the MHRC and EEOC is as follows:
108
Maine Human Rights Commission
51 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0051
Ph. 207-624-6290
www.maine.gov/mhrc
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
John F. Kennedy Federal Building
475 Government Center
Boston, MA 02203
Ph. 1-800-669-4000
www.eeoc.gov
Any complaint must be filed with the MHRC or EEOC within 300 days of the last act of
harassment. Once a signed charge form has been received by the MHRC or EEOC, an
investigation will be conducted and a determination will be made by the MHRC or EEOC
of whether or not there are reasonable grounds to believe sexual harassment occurred.
If the MHRC or EEOC determined that sexual harassment did occur, it will attempt to
resolve the situation between you and your employer through informal means. If informal
means of resolution are unsuccessful, the MHRC or U.S. Department of Justice may file a
civil action in court seeking appropriate relief for you. Regardless of whether the MHRC or
EEOC determine that sexual harassment occurred, the employee who believes he or she
was the victim of sexual harassment may file a civil action in court.
Maine Human Rights Act Protection against Retaliation for Complaining about Sexual
Harassment.
Any employee who opposes conduct he or she believes in good faith violates Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §2000e, et seq., as amended which includes but is
not limited to reporting, complaining about or filing a claim concerning sexual harassment
with the City, filing an EEOC or MHRC charge, and/or participating in any manner in an
investigation or proceeding or hearing under Title VII, shall not be subjected to retaliation.
This notice is provided to all employees in compliance with 26 M.R.S.A. 807(2). If
anyone has any questions regarding this notification, please ask your supervisor, the EEO
Officer or contact the City Manager.
Historical Note: Sexual Harassment Policy was amended by City Council on May 11, 2015 and on June 22,
2015.
INFECTIOUS DISEASE POLICY
I. Purpose
This is to establish the policy of the City of Caribou for managing infectious disease issues
as they relate to employees and/or prospective employees including but not limited to the
following diseases: AIDS, Chickenpox, Hepatitis A, Hepatitis B, Impetigo, Measles,
Mumps, Pertussis, and Parasitic Infestations.
109
II. Policy
1. It is the policy of the City to assure to the extent possible a safe and healthful work
environment.
2. It is also the policy of the City to ensure full compliance with state, federal, and local
requirements dealing with infectious diseases.
3. It is the obligation of all City employees to take all reasonable precautions to protect
themselves, co-workers, clients and the public from infectious diseases.
4. The City of Caribou shall make available to all employees and volunteers who have
occupational exposure the Hepatitis B vaccination series and post exposure evaluation and
follow-up.
III. Procedures
1. The City will not discriminate against employees and/or prospective employees with
infectious diseases who are otherwise qualified to perform their job functions with
reasonable accommodation. Employees with infectious diseases will be treated under
existing policies, state, federal, and local requirements, and collective bargaining
agreements.
2. Where allowed by law, the City retains the right to test employees for infectious
diseases.
3. The City must maintain confidentiality regarding an employee’s health status, and does
not have a duty to inform other individual or organizations unless required by law.
4. Upon medical confirmation of an infectious disease that may be a threat to the public
health, the affected employee has the responsibility to notify the City’s Human Resources
Director, and to carry out his or her assigned duties if reasonable accommodations can be
made.
5. Upon notification by an employee that an infectious disease diagnosis has been
confirmed and is a threat to the public health, the Human Resources Director will:
a. Secure, if possible, all appropriate releases for information from the employee and
notify those individuals for whom those releases have been acquired.
b. Assist in the identification of reasonable accommodations to be made, if any.
c. Assist individual departments, if necessary, in complying with this policy.
6. The City will treat all occupational infectious disease injuries or illnesses according to
state law.
7. The City will provide appropriate educational opportunities and current informational
material on infectious disease issues, including prevention, protection, control measures,
and treatment practices.
110
8. Individual departments have the right to develop protocols regarding infectious disease
control provided that those protocols conform to this policy.
9. An employee cannot refuse to carry out his or her assigned duties when dealing with a
co-worker or the public with an infectious disease unless that individual makes a threat of
harm to the employee. Failure to adhere to this procedure will result in disciplinary action.
IV. Accidental Needle Stick Procedure
Police, fire, and rescue personnel have the highest risk of exposure to needles and syringes.
Exposure to a used, contaminated needle places an employee at risk for contracting an
infectious disease. In the event of an accidental puncture with a contaminated needle, the
procedure is as follows:
1. Wash the puncture site thoroughly with soap/disinfectant and water.
2. Report the incident to your supervisor.
3. Police, fire or rescue personnel must notify the medical facility receiving the patient of
the incident.
4. Complete Incident and/or Workers Compensation forms.
5. Establish your potential exposure risk to infectious diseases.
6. Notify your Department Head to establish your: (1) tetanus status, (2) Hepatitis B
status, and (3) HIV exposure.
7. Seek further medical attention if necessary.
V. Procedure for Exposure to AIDS Infection
If a City employee is exposed to the blood or body-fluid of a known or highly suspected
AIDS infected person:
1. Wash the exposed areas thoroughly with soap and water. Clean any spills with a one
(1) part bleach to ten (10) parts water solution.
2. Report the incident to your supervisor.
3. Complete the Incident and Workers Compensation forms.
4. Notify your department head as soon as possible to schedule an appointment for a
voluntary blood test.
5. The blood test will be drawn within two weeks of the incident, six months later, and
nine months later. The blood test is sent to the Maine Public Health Division in Augusta.
Results are received approximately one week later. You will be notified of the test results.
6. If all three specimens are negative, you are considered not to be infected.
111
7. Counseling occurs with each visit or when requested, and is also available to family
members and co-workers.
8. Emotional counseling is available through a counselor of the employee’s choice and to
be provided by the City of Caribou.
9. Strict confidence will be maintained in all incidences unless appropriate medical and/or
information releases have been obtained.
Historical Note: As adopted by the City Council on June 23, 2014.
WHISTLEBLOWER’S PROTECTION
This notice is provided to all employees in compliance with 26 M.R.S.A 839 and for the
protection of employees who report or refuse to commit illegal acts.
It is illegal for your boss to fire you, threaten you, retaliate against you or treat you
differently because:
1. You reported a violation of the law;
2. You are a healthcare worker and you reported a medical error;
3. You reported something that risks someone’s health or safety;
4. You have refused to do something that will endanger your life or someone else’s life and
you have asked your employer to correct it; or
5. You have been involved in an investigation or hearing held by the government.
You are protected by this law ONLY if:
1. You tell your employer about the problem and allow a reasonable time for it to be
corrected; or
2. You do not have to report to your employer if you have good reason to believe that your
employer will not correct the problem.
If anyone has any questions regarding this notification, please ask your supervisor, the
EEO Officer, or contact the City Manager.
For more information or to file a complaint under this law, the following should occur:
Resolving retaliation under the whistleblower’s protection:
Any employee who believes he or she has been retaliated against should take the following
steps to resolve the problem:
1. They may register a complaint orally or in writing with any supervisor, the Equal
Employment Opportunity Officer (EEO Officer), or with the City Manager.
2. Any supervisory or management level employee, including the City Manager, who
receives an oral or written complaint of retaliation from an employee must report the
complaint to the City’s EEO Officer within five (5) business days of receiving such a
112
complaint. Any supervisory employees who fail to meet this requirement may be subject to
discipline.
3. Any supervisory or management level employee, including the City Manager, with
actual knowledge of what he or she believes is conduct that has or may contribute to a
hostile work environment must report his or her knowledge of this conduct to the City’s
EEO Officer within five (5) business days of obtaining such knowledge. Any supervisory
or management level employees who fail to meet this requirement will be subject to
discipline.
4. Within twenty (20) days of the EEO Officer’s receipt of a complaint of retaliation or
receipt of information from a supervisor about retaliation, the EEO Officer shall inform the
alleged victim of retaliation that the allegations of retaliation will be promptly investigated.
5. An independent investigator who does not work for the City and who has expertise in
investigating retaliation complaints will investigate all complaints of retaliation promptly
and objectively.
During the course of a retaliation investigation, the person who is the alleged victim of
retaliation is not required to meet with the alleged retaliator, work with the alleged
retaliator, or discuss the allegations of retaliation in the presence of the alleged retaliator.
6. The City will provide the results of the retaliation investigations to the alleged victim of
retaliation in writing as soon as possible, but in no event later than thirty (30) workdays
after the commencement of the investigation, unless a written explanation is provided to
the alleged victim as to the reason(s) that the investigation could not be completed within
thirty (30) workdays.
7. Confirmed instances of retaliation will be dealt with by utilizing whatever disciplinary
action the City deems appropriate, up to and including termination.
For this retaliation policy “supervisory employee,” “supervisor” and “management level
employee” are defined to include: (a) any employee who possesses the authority to direct
the work activities of at least one other employee and (b) any employee who has the
authority to hire, fire, promote, transfer, or discipline another employee.
Legal Recourse through the Maine Human Rights Commission or the U.S. Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission.
With regard to a retaliation complaint, if the employee does not want to make the report
internally, the employee may make the complaint to the Maine Human Rights Commission
(MHRC) or the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). Contact
information for the MHRC and EEOC is as follows:
The Maine Human Rights Commission
51 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Tel:(207)624-6290
TTY users call Maine Relay 711
www.Maine.gov/mhrc
113
The following agencies may provide useful information on workplace safety and labor
laws:
U.S. Department of Labor Maine Department of Labor
Wage and Hour Division Bureau of Labor Standards
P.O. Box 554 45 State House Station
Portland, ME 04112 Augusta, Maine 04333-0045
Tel:(207)780-3344 Tel:(207)623-7900
www.dol.gov TTY users call Maine Relay 711
www.maine.gov/labor/bls
Email: mdol@maine.gov
U.S. Department of Labor/OSHA
40 Western Avenue
Augusta, ME 04330
Tel:(207)626-9160
www.osha.gov
Section II. Severability
If any part of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall,
for any reason, be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair of invalidate the remainder of this ordinance
or the application thereof to other persons and circumstances, but shall be confined to its
operation to the section, subdivision, sentence or part of the section and the persons and
circumstances directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council that this section would
have been adopted if such invalid section, provisions, subdivision, sentence or part of a
section or application had not been included.
Historical Note: Adopted by City Council November 12, 2019.
Chapter 3 – Animals and Fowl
ARTICLE I DOG ORDINANCE
Section
3-101 “Owner” and/or “Keeper” Defined
3-102 Disturbance
3-103 Dogs Running at Large
3-104 Impounding Dogs Found Running at Large
3-104-B Removal & Disposal of Feces
3-105 Dogs Presenting an Immediate Threat
3-106 Violation
167
Chapter 3 Animal and Fowl
ARTICLE I DOG ORDINANCE
Sec. 3-101 “Owner” and/or “Keeper” Defined
The word “owner” when applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall include every person having
a right of property in such dog, and every person who keeps or harbors such dog or has it in their care,
and every person who permits such dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by them. The
word “keeper” means a person in possession or control of a dog. A person becomes a “keeper” of a
stray dog if the person feeds that animal for at least 10 consecutive days.
Sec. 3-102 Disturbance
On complaint being made to the Dog Constable that any dog within the City has unreasonably
disturbed the quiet of any persons whosoever by continued barking or howling, or in any manner, the
Dog Constable shall issue notice to the “owner” and/or “keeper” of such dog ordering that such dog be
kept under proper control.
Sec. 3-103 Dogs Running At Large
No person who is an “owner” and/or “keeper” of a dog, as defined by Section 3-101 of this
Article, shall cause or permit any dog to run at large within the City, as herein defined. Dogs, while on
any public way or public place shall be under restraint. The word “restraint” shall mean that a dog shall
be controlled by a leash; or, at “heel”, beside the competent person and obedient to that person’s
commands; or, on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on any public way. A leash shall not be
more than eight (8) feet long. Nothing, within this Article shall be held to require the leashing of any
dog while on the property of its “owner” and/or “keeper”.
Sec. 3-104 Impounding Dogs Found Running At Large
Any Constable or Police Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to go upon any premises
and enter any building other than a dwelling to seize and impound any dog or dogs which have been
found running at large or which are in violation of any of the provisions of this Article or of any order
issued hereunder when such Constable or Police Officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs.
Upon seizing and impounding such a dog, the Constable or Police Officer shall collect a fee of $25.00
from the “owner” and/or “keeper” upon releasing the dog. In the alternative the Constable or Police
Officer may prosecute the “owner” and/or “keeper” of the dog.
Sec. 3-104-B Removal & Disposal of Feces
It is a violation of this Section for any person who possesses or controls a dog, except guide dogs
who fails to properly remove, dispose of any feces left by his or her dog on any publicly owned property
or upon the premises of any person other than the owner without that person’s permission.
169
Sec. 3-105 Dogs Presenting an Immediate Threat
After filing of complaint to the Dog Constable and/or Police Officer, if the dog poses an
immediate threat to the public, the dog shall, at the discretion of the officer, be subject to muzzling,
restraint and/or transported to the animal shelter for quarantine purposes at the “owner’s” and/or
“keeper’s” expense for a period of ten (10) days.
Sec. 3-106 Violation
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any order issued
hereunder, shall be liable to punishment by fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) but not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00); and each day during which such violation continues shall constitute a new
offense. Said fine to be payable to the City of Caribou.
__________________
Historical Note: Chapter 3, Section 110 of Caribou City Ordinances, as amended December 12, 1968 and June 4, 1980;
Amended February 23, 1998, July 13, 1998 & May 12, 1999; Section 3-104 as amended by City Council April 8, 2013.
State Law Reference: 7 M.R.S.A. §3913; 7 M.R.S.A. §3915.
170
Chapter 4 Building and Housing
ARTICLE 1 BUILDING CODE
Sections
4-101 Adoption of Building Code
4-101.1 Electrical Generating Windmills
4-102 Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed
4-103 Deletions, Additions, Insertions
4-103.1 Building Permit Fees
4-103.2 Building Demolition
4-104 Saving Clause
4-105 Date of Effect
ARTICLE II FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE
4-201 Statement of Purpose
4-202 Decent Housing
4-203 Unlawful Housing Discrimination
4-204 Application
4-205 Reporting Violations
4-206 Penalty
ARTICLE III PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
4-301 Property Maintenance Code
4-302 Amendments
219
Chapter 4 Building and Housing
ARTICLE 1 BUILDING CODE
Sec. 4-101 Administration and Enforcement of Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code
Effective December 1, 2010, the City of Caribou applies and enforces the Maine Uniform Building and
Energy Code (M.U.B.E.C.), as required by 10 M.R.S.A. § 9724. The Code Enforcement Officer of the City of
Caribou shall serve as the building official as defined in 25 M.R.S.A. § 2371 and shall be responsible for issuing
building permits and certificates of occupancy. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for inspecting all
permitted construction for compliance with all components of M.U.B.E.C., as such components may be revised from
time to time by the Technical Building Codes and Standards Board. Administration and enforcement of M.U.B.E.C.,
including permits, fees, violations, penalties and appeals, shall be in accordance with the City of Caribou, Code of
Ordinances.
Sec. 4-101.1 Electrical Generating Windmills
1. The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure that privately owned electrical generating windmills are
operated in a manner that limits noise and does not create a nuisance to neighbors or the community. It is the
purpose of this section to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of small wind-energy systems installed to
reduce the on-site consumption of utility-supplied electricity.
2. Definition: Any equipment, device or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed or situated for
the primary purpose of generating electricity from the use of wind power.
Sec. 4-101.1a Installation Standards and Limitations
Height: 1. No electrical generating windmill shall be installed within a lot line setback distance equal to the total
height of the windmill. Nothing herein shall be construed to preempt any height limitations imposed by FAA
regulations. Compliance with FAA regulations; Small wind-energy systems must comply with applicable FAA
regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports.
Noise: 2. The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous, regular, or frequent source of sound
produced by any electrical generating windmill shall be limited by the time period and land use District listed in the
following chart. Sound levels shall be measured at least 4 feet above ground at the property boundary.
Sound Pressure Level Limits (Measured in dB (a) scale)
7 AM - 10 PM 10 PM - 7 AM
Residential Districts 55 45
Commercial Districts 60 50
Industrial Districts 65 50
3. The levels specified may be exceeded by 10 dBA for a single 15 minute period per day. Noise shall be
measured by a meter set on the A-weighted response scale, slow response. The meter shall meet the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1961) "American Standard Specification for General Purpose Sound Level
Meters".
Shadow Flutter: 1. No installation of an electrical generating windmill shall be so positioned that the windmill
rotor casts its shadow on neighboring residential structures or the curtilage area of a residential structure.
General Requirements: 1. All electrical generating windmills shall meet all federal, state, and local codes.
2. Compliance with the 2009 International Building Code. Building permit applications for small windenergy
systems shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base,
and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the International Building Code and
certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
220
3. Compliance with the 2008 National Electric Code. Building permit applications for small wind-energy
systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code.
4. No small wind-energy system shall be installed until evidence has been given that the local utility
company (Maine Public Service Co.) has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
Sec. 4-101.1b Permit required.
1. No installation shall be allowed without first obtaining a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
Application for such permit shall be made to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided. All installations
must comply with state and federal regulations and manufacturer's installation instructions. All permit applications
must include a copy of the manufacturer's installation instructions.
2. The permit fee shall be based on the building permit fee schedule.
Sec. 4-101.1c Existing electrical generating windmills
1. Any electrical generating windmill in existence, installed, and operating or operable on the effective
date of this ordinance shall be allowed to remain provided that the owner registers the electrical generating windmill
within 60 days of the effective date of this ordinance with the Code Enforcement Officer. There is no fee to register
an existing electrical generating windmill.
2. Any electrical generating windmill found to be located within Caribou after the 60 day registration
period that is not registered may be ordered to be removed from Caribou by the City Council.
Sec. 4-101.1d Penalty
1. Any person, owner, or operator of an electrical generating windmill found to be in violation of this
ordinance may be charged, and a civil action may be brought against them. Anyone violating this ordinance may be
prosecuted pursuant to MRSA, Title 30-A, §4452. A minimum fine of $100.00 up to $2,500.00 for each offense per
day plus legal fees and court costs will be requested by the City of Caribou.
Sec. 4-101.1e Severability
1. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional
or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 4-102 Inconsistent Ordinance Repealed
The Building Code of the City of Caribou entitled National Building Code 1996 and all other ordinances or
parts of ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Sec. 4-103 Additions, Insertions and Changes
The following sections are hereby revised as follows to the 1996 BOCA National Building Code:
Page 1, Section 101.1 & probably Caribou, Maine.
Page 6, Section 116.4 line 6, “As per 30-A, M.R.S.A. §4452, Fines from $100.00-$2,500.00 per violation
per day for first time violators and higher penalties for subsequent violations”.
Delete Sections 123.1 through 124.8
Delete Article 19.
Sec. 4-103.1 Building Permit Fees
Fee Schedule: The fee for each plan examination, building permit and inspection shall be $50.
Failure to get a permit before building construction begins shall cause the permit fee to double.
Demolition Permits shall be free.
Historical Note: Sec. 4-103.1 as amended March 27, 2017.
221
Sec. 4-103.2 Building Demolition
a. Any building or structure to be demolished within the City of Caribou, (urban or suburban) requires a
Demolition Permit issued by the Code Enforcement Office. Any property owner wishing to obtain a demolition
permit must provide the CEO with proof of ownership or a copy of the deed, a completed Demolition Permit
Application and schedule of demolition activity. All demolition, clean up and at least one foot of gravel cover with
loam and mulch must be completed within one year from the date the permit is issued.
Any contractor applying for a Demolition Permit on behalf of the property owner must also provide a copy
of a signed contract by the owner. Any person wishing to demolish a building must provide written proof that all
utility providers have removed service from the building to be razed.
b. The Caribou Fire Department must be notified at least 5 business days in advance of the
commencement of demolition. At the discretion of the Caribou Fire Chief or their designee, the Fire Department
may choose to burn the building as a training exercise provided the property owner initially request such action for
consideration.
c. Prior to the commencement of demolition, on the day the building is to be razed, the site must be
inspected by the Caribou Building Inspector. The inspection must be scheduled with at least a 24 hour notice in
advance.
d. No demolition debris may be buried on site within the Urban Compact Zone.
Demolition debris may be buried on site if located outside of the Urban Compact Zone with the following
provisions:
1.) No debris may be buried within 100 feet of any property line.
2.) No debris may be buried within 100 feet of an existing water well.
3.) Biodegradable and inert demolition debris may be buried on site.
4.) Inert materials such as brick, concrete or stone may be buried on site, hauled to an off site gravel pit or
delivered to a Licensed Disposal Facility.
5.) All non biodegradable debris such as asphalt shingles, asbestos, carpeting, sheetrock, vinyl or metal
siding, painted materials or similar materials must be delivered to the Tri Community Landfill or another
Licensed Disposal Facility. If materials are to be delivered to a Licensed Disposal Facility, a copy of the
contract with the Disposal Facility must accompany the Demolition Permit Application.
6.) The burial site must be covered with sufficient loam and seeding to prevent erosion of the site unless
established as impervious surface pursuant to the redevelopment of the site.
e. A final inspection is required. The owner or contractor must notify the Code Enforcement Officer at
the completion of site recovery.
Note: Maine State Law requires demolition notification to the Department of Environmental Protection for certain
buildings and buildings with asbestos to be made by the owner.
A record of any demolished building buried on site must be recorded at the Registry of Deeds for
Aroostook County in Houlton.
Sec. 4-104 Saving Clause
Nothing in this Ordinance or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 2 of this Ordinance; nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this Ordinance.
Sec. 4-105 Date of Effect
The City Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this Ordinance and cause the same to be published as
required by law; and the Ordinance shall take full force and effect September 1, 1997, adopted July 14, 1997.
222
Historical Note: adopted June 4, 1980, replacing Chapter 1 of the 1956 Caribou Code. Amended July 14, 1997;
Section 4-103 as amended February 27, 2006; Section 4-103.1 & 4-103.2 was added February 27, 2006; Section 4-
101.1 was added November 28, 2006; Section 4-103.1 was amended August 17, 2009; Section 4-103.3 was adopted
August 17, 2009; Section 4-103.1 was amended March 22, 2010; Section 4-101.2 was adopted April 12, 2010;
Section 4-101, the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (M.U.B.E.C.) was adopted by the City Council
February 14, 2011; Sections 4-103.1 & 4-103.2 were amended February 14, 2011.
State Law Reference: 30 MRSA §2156; 5 MRSA §1742(6-A); 25 MRSA §§2351-2360; 30 MRSA §2151(4);
District Court Civil Rule 80F.
Cross Reference: Chapter 13, Article 1, Section 13-106.
ARTICLE II FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE
Sec 4-201 Statement of Purpose
To protect the public welfare, it is declared to be the policy of the City to keep continually in review all
practices infringing on the basic human right to decent housing; and to prevent discrimination in housing on account
of race, color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin; and to prevent discrimination
in the extension of credit on account of age, race, color, sex, marital status, religion, ancestry or national origin.
Sec. 4-202 Decent Housing
The opportunity for an individual to secure decent housing in accordance with his or her ability to pay, and
without discrimination because of race, color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin
is hereby recognized as and declared to be a civil right.
Sec. 4-203 Unlawful Housing Discrimination
It shall be unlawful housing discrimination, in violation of this Article:
1. Owner, Lessee, Managing Agent. For any owner, lessee, sublessee, managing agent, or other person
having the right to sell, rent, lease or manage a housing accommodation, or any agent of these to make or cause to be
made any written or oral inquiry concerning the race or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or
national origin of any prospective purchaser, occupant, or tenant of such housing accommodation; or to refuse to
show or refuse to sell, rent, lease, let or otherwise deny to or withhold from any individual such housing
accommodation because of the race or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin
of such individual; or to issue any advertisement relating to the sale, rental or lease of such housing accommodation
which indicates any preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based upon race or color, sex, physical or
mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin; or to discriminate against any individual because of race or
color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin in the price, terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any such housing accommodations or in the furnishing of facilities or
services in connection therewith, or to convict or attempt to evict any tenant of any housing accommodation because
of the race or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin of such tenant;
2.Realtors. For any real estate broker or real estate sales person, or agent of one of them, to fall or refuse to
show any applicant for a housing accommodation any such accommodation listed for sale, lease or rental, because of
the race or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin or such applicant or of any
intended occupant of such accommodation, or to misrepresent, for the purpose of discriminating on account of the
race or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin of such applicant or intended
occupant, the availability or asking price of a housing accommodation listed for sale, lease, or rental; or for such a
reason fail to communicate to the person having the right to sell or lease such housing accommodation any offer for
the same made by any applicant thereof; or in any other manner to discriminate against any applicant for housing
because of race or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin of such applicant or
of any intended occupant of the housing accommodation, or to make or cause to be made any written or oral inquiry
or record concerning the race or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or nation origin of any
such applicant or intended occupant, or to accept for listing any housing accommodation when the person having the
right to sell or lease the same has directly or indirectly indicated an intention of discriminating among prospective
tenants or purchasers on the ground of their race or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or
national origin, or when he knows or has reason to know that the person having the right to sell or lease such
housing accommodation has made a practice of such discrimination since July 1, 1972;
223
3.People Providing Financial Assistance. For any person to whom application is made for a loan or other
form of financial assistance for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing
accommodation, whether secured or unsecured, or agent of such person, to make or cause to be made any oral or
written inquiry concerning the race or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin of
any individual seeking such financial assistance, or of existing or prospective occupants or tenants of such housing
accommodations; or to discriminate in the granting of such financial assistance, or in the terms, conditions or
privileges relating to the obtaining or use of any such financial assistance against any applicant because of the race
or color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion, ancestry or national origin of such applicant or of the existing or
prospective occupants or tenants.
4.Tenants Receiving Public Assistance. For any person furnishing rental premises to refuse to rent or
impose different terms of tenancy to any individual who is a recipient of federal, state or local public assistance,
including medical assistance and housing subsidies solely because of such individual’s status as such recipient.
Sec. 4-204 Application
Nothing in this Article shall be construed in any manner to prohibit or limit the exercise of the privilege of
every person and the agent of any person having the right to sell, rent, lease or manage a housing accommodation to
set up and enforce specifications in the selling, renting, leasing or letting thereof or in the furnishings of facilities or
services in connection therewith which are not based on the race, color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion or
country of ancestral origin, the receipt of public assistance payments of any prospective or actual purchaser, lessee,
tenant or occupant thereof. Nothing in this Article contained shall be construed in any manner to prohibit or limit
the exercise or the privilege of every person and the agent of any person making loans for or offering financial
assistance in the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance or housing accommodations, to set
standards and preferences, terms, conditions, imitations or specifications for the granting of such loans or financial
assistance which are not based on the race, color, sex, physical or mental handicap, religion or country of ancestral
origin, the receipt of public assistance payments of the applicant for such loan or financial assistance or, of any
existing or prospective owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of such housing accommodation.
Sec. 4-205 Reporting Violations
Any person, who has been discriminated against, in violation of this Article, may call the City Office at
493-3324 between the hours of 8:00 am and 5:00 pm, Monday through Friday.
Sec 4-206 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article, shall be liable to a penalty of up to $50.00.
Historical Note: Fair Housing Ordinance was adopted September 3, 1980;
State Law Reference: 5 M.R.S.A. §4581 et seq.
ARTICLE III PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sec. 4-301 Property Maintenance Code
The City of Caribou adopted the 2015 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, regulating
and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards
for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are
safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the City of Caribou; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor.
Sec. 4-302 Amendments
The City Council of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, pursuant to the
requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Section 2.11(1) does ordain the following:
224
Section 1. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as adopted by the Caribou City
Council in Ordinance 2013-12 is hereby repealed.
Section 2. That the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Caribou, in
the State of Maine for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City Clerk City of
Caribou are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance.
Section 3. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Caribou
Section 103.5. Insert: The minimum penalty for a specific violation is $50 payable to the City. The fees for
activities and services performed to correct or abate a violation shall be at a cost plus a 10% administrative fee
payable to the City.
Section 112.4. Insert: $25 and $2,500
Section 302.4. Insert: 7 inches within the Urban Compact Zone
Section 304.14. Insert: May 1 and October 1
Section 602.2. Strike 68° F (20° C) and insert 65° F (18.4° C)
Section 602.3. Insert: October 1 and May 1
Section 602.4. Insert: October 1 and May 1
Section 4. If another ordinance, or portion of ordinance, is found to conflict with the ordinances herewith
that this ordinance shall supersede any other ordinance.
Section 5. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this legislation is, for any reason,
held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this law, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be
declared unconstitutional.
225
Section 6. That nothing in this legislation or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 3 of
this law; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this legislation.
Historical Note: Housing Code was deleted July 14, 1997; Property Maintenance Code was adopted October 15,
2013; Electrical Code was deleted June 9, 2014; International Property Maintenance Code 2015 edition was adopted
January 23, 2017.
226
Caribou, Maine
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING & ENERGY CODE SUPPLEMENT
This is not the complete Building Code
All APPLICABLE STATE LAW, CARIBOU ZONING ORDINANCES, ASTM 1465-06 RADON CODE AND CERTAIN
SECTIONS OF THE 2009 IBC, IRC, IECC & IEBC BUILDING CODES APPLY TO ALL BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED. THE
FOLLOWING IS INTENDED TO HELP THE BUILDER COMPLY WITH MINIMIM BUILDING STANDARDS AND TO HELP
PREVENT COMMON COSTLY MISTAKES AND CONSTRUCTION DELAYS. Additional code information can be found at
www.maine.gov/dps/bbcs.
PLANS: Section R-106, All work shall conform to the approved application and construction documents. A dimensional floor plan
showing all room uses, doors, windows, decks, porches and steps is required. Detailed structural plans are required for foundations
and framing. A Radon Control Plan is required. If you vary from plans provided, the Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued until
the plans in the property file, at the City Office, represents the actual construction. IECC Section 103 requires plan detail of walls,
ceilings, floors, basement and window energy efficiency. Foundation, framing and insulation detail are required to show that the
construction will be in compliance with the 2009 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code as adopted by the State of
Maine. Please provide 2 sets of all plans for review. When approved 1 set will be returned to you with the Building Permit.
SET BACK REQUIREMENTS: You must comply with the required set backs for your zone. If there is any question as to the
location of your building, a letter from a surveyor will be required stating compliance.
FOUNDATIONS: Chapter 4, Footings will be sized according to Section R-403. Plain concrete 8” thick & reinforced concrete 6”
thick both with a shelf extension of 4” inside and out of foundation wall. Footings will be protected from frost. Foundation walls
enclosing interior space will be thoroughly waterproofed and damp proofed to grade elevation. Exterior drain tile will be connected to
interior drain tile and drained to daylight or an internal sump. Drain tile will be lower than the top of the footing & buried in crushed
stone then covered with approved filter membrane. Foundation walls will have anchor bolts within 1’ of each corner and every 6’
thereafter. The Radon Control System must comply with ASTM E-1465 and pass inspection prior to the basement slab being placed.
DO NOT backfill the foundation prior to inspection of the drain tile and damp proofing.
WOOD FRAME CONSTRUCTION: Joist hangers or 2” ledger required at carrier; Toe nailing is not allowed. A 2” clearance from
combustible framing is required at interior chimney with 26 gauge galvanized steel fire stop at each level including unfinished 2nd
floor ceiling. Headers required at all support wall openings. Span calculations must comply with AF&PA Tables or be engineered.
DO NOT close-in prior to inspection of framing, electrical, plumbing and insulation.
CHIMNEYS: NFPA 211: Cleanout required 16” above floor. Flue outlet must be at least 2’ above the 10’ horizontal line to roof.
And extend at least 3’ above the upslope side of the roof. Fire stops are required at each change in floor elevation.
EGRESS WINDOWS: Section R-310: Emergency escape and rescue: Every sleeping room in occupancies in Use Group R shall
have at least one operable window or exterior door leading directly to the outside. Each egress window shall have a minimum net
clear opening of 5.7 square feet “Plus” the net clear opening shall be at least 24 inches in height and at least 20 inches in width. The
net clear opening dimensions shall be obtained by the normal operation of the window without additional assistance from the operator.
Where windows are provided for emergency escape and rescue, the windows shall have the bottom of the clear opening not more than
44 inches above the floor. If single or double hung with a clear opening height of 24”, the clear opening width must be at least 34 ¼”
wide.
ALL STAIRS INSIDE OR OUTSIDE: Section R311, 80” of headroom is required throughout stairwells. R311.7.4, Treads and
Risers: Maximum riser height shall be 7 ¾” and minimum riser height be 4”. Minimum tread depth shall be 10”measured horizontally
from nosing to nosing and at a right angle to the tread’s leading edge. Nosing must be at least ¾” and can not exceed 1¼ ”. Risers
can not have an open dimension of 4” or more. R-312, Stairway Guardrails shall be provided where the walking surface is more than
30” above the adjacent surface. Guards shall be at least 36” high, measured from the walking surface. R311.7.7 Stairway Handrails
shall have continuous handrails returned to the wall or newel. The handgrip portion of the handrail shall not be less than 1-¼ inches or
more than 2 inches and shall be graspable. Stairways with 4 or more risers require a graspable handrail.
PLUMBING: Maine plumbing code requires a test of 5 PSI for 15 minutes on the drain, waste and vent lines and 50 PSI for 15
minutes on the hot and cold distribution lines. This means every part of the system at the time of rough in, not just the stack. Test
Equipment & Gauges are the Responsibility of the plumber. Do not close-in the walls or ceilings prior to passing the 5# & 50#
tests.
ELECTRICAL: All electrical work will be done in compliance with NFPA # 70 (National Electrical Code.) All work “MUST” be
inspected and approved prior to close in. Smoke Detectors are required in each bedroom, the area adjacent to the bedroom and on
each level of a residential structure excluding attics and crawl spaces. Carbon Monoxide Detectors are required adjacent to sleeping
room. Arc Fault protection is required for all circuits excluding the smoke detector branch that are not protected by Ground Fault
Circuit Interruption. Ground Fault protection is required at all locations listed as per Art.210-8 of the NEC. Do not close-in the walls
or ceilings prior to the electrical inspection.
ATTACHED GARAGES TO RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES: Table R302.6 Not less than ½” gypsum board to separate the
garage from adjacent habitable space. Not less than 5/8” Type X gypsum from habitable rooms above the garage. Doors leading from
an attached garage to the dwelling shall comply with R302.5.1
DO NOT BACKFILL OR CLOSE IN WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION FROM THE BUILDING
OFFICIAL.
If you have any questions call the Code Enforcement Office @ 493-4234 X 214
Chapter 5 Fire Prevention
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
5-101 Application to New and Existing Conditions
5-102 Authority to Enter Premises
5-103 Inspections of Buildings and Premises
5-104 Orders to Eliminate Fire Hazards
5-105 Service of Orders
5-106 Permits
5-107 Definitions
5-108 Conformity to Nationally Recognized Standard Practice
ARTICLE II BOWLING ALLEYS
5-201 Alley Resurfacing Operations
5-202 Pin Refinishing
ARTICLE III CENTRAL HEATING APPLIANCES AND SOLID FUEL FIRED STOVES
5-301 Purpose and Authority
5-302 Sprinkler Head Requirement
ARTICLE IV DRY CLEANING PLANTS
5-401 Definitions
5-402 Classification of Systems
5-403 Permit Required
5-404 Construction of Buildings Housing Class II Systems
5-405 Construction of Buildings Housing Class III Systems
5-406 Class IV Systems
5-407 Drying Rooms
5-408 Heating Equipment
5-409 Electrical Equipment
5-410 Ventilation
5-411 Storage and Handling of Cleaning Solvents
5-412 Grounding Equipment
5-413 Scouring, Brushing and Spotting
5-414 Fire Extinguishing Equipment
5-415 Smoking Prohibited
ARTICLE V EXPLOSIVES
5-501 Application
5-502 Permit Required
5-503 Storage
5-504 Transportation of Explosives
5-505 Use of Explosives
ARTICLE VI FIREWORKS
5-601 Storage and Sales of Consumer Fireworks
5-602 Use of Consumer Fireworks
5-603 Definitions
289
ARTICLE VII FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT
5-701 Fire Chief to Survey Premises and Specify Equipment to be provided
5-702 Maintenance of Equipment
ARTICLE VIII FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
5-801 Scope
5-802 Definition
5-803 Permits
5-804 Outside Aboveground Tanks
5-805 Control of Spills
5-806 Underground Tanks
5-807 Tanks Inside of Buildings, Class I or II Liquids
5-808 Tanks Inside of Buildings, Class III Liquids
5-809 Design and Construction of Tanks
5-810 Vents on Outside Aboveground Tanks
5-811 Vents on Tanks Underground or in Buildings
5-812 Fill and Gauge Openings and Drainage on Tanks Underground or in Buildings
5-813 Piping, Valves and Fittings
5-814 Dispensing Devices at Service Stations
5-815 Ventilation
5-816 Commercial and Industrial Establishments
5-817 Sources of Ignition
5-818 Fire Extinguishers
5-819 Oil Burners
5-820 Tank Vehicles for Flammable Liquids
ARTICLE IX GARAGES
5-901 General
5-902 Permit Required
5-903 Repair Work
5-904 Cleaning with Flammable Liquids
5-905 Handling of Gasoline and Oils
ARTICLE X GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES
5-1001 Installations to Conform to Standard Safe Practices
5-1002 Pressure Regulation
5-1003 Pipe Entrance to Buildings
5-1004 Outside Valves
ARTICLE XI LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
5-1101 Definitions
5-1102 Permits and Reports of Installations
5-1103 Standards for Liquefied Petroleum Gas Equipment and Its Installation
5-1104 Location of Containers
5-1105 Container Protection
290
ARTICLE XII PRECAUTIONS AGAINST FIRE, GENERAL
5-1201 Outdoor Fires and Permits
5-1202 Burning Permit Sample
5-1203 Hot Ashes and Other Dangerous Materials
5-1204 Accumulations of Waste Materials
5-1205 Handling Readily Combustible Materials
5-1206 Storage of Readily Combustible Materials
5-1207 Flammable Decorative Materials in Stores
5-1208 Chimneys and Heating Appliances to be Maintained in Safe Condition
5-1209 Use of Torches or Flame-producing Devices for Removing Paint
ARTICLE XIII SMOKING PROHIBITIED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS
5-1301 Definitions
5-1302 Chief to Designate Areas Where Smoking Shall be Prohibited
5-1303 No Smoking Signs
5-1304 Smoking and Removal of No Smoking Signs Prohibited
ARTICLE XIV ADMINISTRATION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE
5-1401 Enforcement
5-1402 Definition
5-1403 Appeals
5-1404 Penalties
5-1405 Validity
ARTICLE XV COMMERCIAL & PRIVATE BUILDING ACCESS LOCK BOXES
5-1501 Lock Box System
ARTICLE XVI
5-1601 Adoption of Code
5-1602 Deletions, Additions, Insertions
291
Chapter 5 Fire Prevention
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 5101 Application to New and Existing Conditions
The City of Caribou has designated NFPA Life Safety Code 101, 2006 edition and NFPA 1, 2003 edition. This
code will be the authority for this chapter 5, of the Caribou City Codes. (See Article XVI, this chapter) The provisions of
this chapter shall apply equally to new and existing conditions except that existing conditions not in strict compliance with
the terms of this Chapter shall be permitted to continue where the exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or
adjoining property.
Sec. 5-102 Authority to Enter Premises
The Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Chief or designee, may at all reasonable hours enter any non-residential or
multi-family residential building or premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection, or
investigation which, under the provisions of this Chapter, he may deem necessary to be made..
Sec. 5-103 Inspections of Buildings and Premises
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Chief or Designee, to inspect all buildings and
premises, except the interiors of private dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and to
cause to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of this Chapter and of
any other Chapter affecting fire hazard, and to insure compliance in all places of assembly with all laws, regulations, and
orders dealing with overcrowding, use of decorative materials, maintenance of exit way, and maintenance of fire alarm
and fire detecting systems, and fire extinguishing systems and appliances.
Sec. 5-104 Orders to Eliminate Fire Hazards
1. Dangerous Conditions. Whenever the Code Enforcement officer, Fire Chief or Designee as provided in
Section 5-103 shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions as follows,
he shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in such manner as he may
specify.
A. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive matter;
B. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using
combustible or explosive matter;
C. Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly flammable materials;
D. Accumulations of dust or waste materials in air conditioning systems or of grease in kitchen exhaust
ducts;
E. Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the
operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case of fire;
F. Any building or other structure which, for the want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes or other exit
facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus of fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or
dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, creates a fire hazard.
Sec. 5-105 Service Orders
The service of such orders as mentioned in Section 5-104 may be made upon the owner, occupant or other person
responsible for the conditions, either by delivering a copy of same personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it
with any person in charge of the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of
the said premises.
Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises such order may be served either
by delivering to and leaving with the said person a copy of said order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of
the officer making the order, by mailing such copy to the owner’s last known post office address.
293
Sec. 5-106 Permits
1. Requirements. Permits required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be obtained in writing from the Fire
Chief or Designee, except as provided hereafter. Permits shall be for such period as the Fire Chief or
Designee may specify but not exceed one year. They shall be kept on the premises designated therein as shall
be subject to inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer, any officer of the fire or police departments.
2. No Burning Zone – The Caribou Urban Compact Area is a no-burn zone. Exceptions to that are Campfires
and other special permissions by the Fire Chief.
3. Inspections. Before permits are issued, the Fire Chief or Designee may make such inspections or tests as are
necessary to assure that the provisions of this Chapter are complied with.
4. Fees. The fee for permits under this section shall be at a rate the Council may determine from time to time.
Sec. 5-107 Definitions
1. “Approved” shall mean accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Chief or Designee, , as a result of
investigation and experience, or by reason of test, listing of approval by Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., the
National Bureau of Standards, the American Gas Association Laboratories or other nationally recognized
testing authorities.
2. “Person” shall mean and include person, persons, firm, corporation or co-partnership.
Sec. 5-108 Conformity to Nationally Recognized Standard Practice
The storage, handling and use of flammable or explosive substances and the use or occupancy of buildings or
premises shall be in conformity with nationally recognized standard practice for the safeguarding to a reasonable degree
of life, property from the hazards of fire or explosion. Compliance with the provisions of the; Fire Prevention Ordnance
Latest Edition and Amendments thereto recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters’, NFPA Life Safety
Code 101. 2006 Edition, and NFPA 1, 2003 Edition shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of compliance with such
nationally recognized standard practice for all matters not covered by this Chapter.
_________________
Historical Note: Articles I-XIV originally Chapter 2, 1956 Caribou Code; Section 5-106 as amended November 25,
2013.
State Law References: 25 MRSA §§2351-2360; 25 MRSA §2391; District Court Civil Rule 80E.
ARTICLE II BOWLING ALLEYS
Sec. 5-201 Alley Resurfacing Operations
Resurfacing operations shall not be carried on while the establishment is open for business. The Code
Enforcement Officer and Fire Chief shall be notified when alleys are to be resurfaced. Proper ventilation shall be
provided. Heating, ventilating, or cooling systems employing recirculation of air shall not be operated during resurfacing
operations or within one hour following the application of flammable finishes. All electric motors or other equipment in
the area, which might be a source of ignition, shall be shut down, all smoking and the use of open flames prohibited
during the application of flammable finishes and for one hour thereafter.
Sec. 5-202 Pin Refinishing
Pin refinishing involving the application of flammable finishes shall be done only on a special room meeting the
requirements for a Type B inside storage or mixing room (for details see the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Section 5-
108); such room shall not be located below grade nor shall it have communication with any pits, well, pockets or
basements.
Storage of flammable liquids in such rooms shall not exceed a combined aggregate of 60 gallons in original metal
containers, or approved safety containers not exceeding 5 gallons individual capacity. A metal waste can with self-closing
cover will be provided for all waste materials and rags; contents shall be removed daily. Smoking shall be prohibited at
all times in refinishing rooms.
_____________
State Law Reference: 8 MRSA §1 et seq.
294
ARTICLE III CENTRAL HEATING APPLIANCES AND SOLID FUEL FIRED STOVES
Sec. 5-301 Purpose and Authority
To reduce the threat of structure fire caused by the improper installation of central heating appliances and solid fuel fired
stoves. To reduce the threat of injury to the residents of the City of Caribou from fire. This ordinance is enacted pursuant
to Municipal Home Rule Authority, MRSA Title 30A, 3001 and NFPA 31, 54 & 211, 2006 edition.
All new installations of central heating appliances and solid fuel fired stoves shall require a permit issued from the Code
Enforcement Office and require passing inspection before a new structure is issued a Certificate of Occupancy.
Permits and inspections are required for installations in new construction and the replacement of equipment in existing
structures. All installations shall meet the requirements of the 2006 Editions of the National Fire Protection Association:
NFPA-31, 54 & 211.
Permits will be issued to Maine Licensed Master Tradesmen licensed for the respective fuel.
Permits will be issued to the owner of a single-family structure only when the structure is the primary residence of the
applicant and the applicant states that they will be doing the installation.
All permits must be obtained prior to the installation of the equipment or the inspection fee may be doubled.
Inspection Fees:
Free standing solid fuel fired stove $20.00/ stove
(wood, pellet, corn, etc)
Single family boiler or furnace replacement $20.00/ inspection
Multi-family residence boiler or furnace $20.00/ inspection
Commercial boiler or furnace $20.00/ inspection
Mini Split Heat Pumps $20.00/inspection
There shall be no inspection fee for central heating appliances in new single-family residential construction when a valid
Building Permit has been issued.
Equipment requiring emergency replacement during the heating season may be replaced prior to obtaining the permit. All
work must pass inspection as soon as possible and meet current code requirements. The permit must be obtained within 4
working days of the installation or the inspection fees are doubled.
Preventive Maintenance, service or repair of existing equipment does not require a permit or inspection.
Sec 5-302 Sprinkler Head Requirement
Purpose and authority: To reduce the threat of structure fire caused by the improper installation or failure of central
heating appliances. To reduce the threat of injury to the residents of the City of Caribou from fire, this ordinance is
enacted pursuant to municipal home rule authority, MRSA Title 30-A, 3001.
All new installations of central heating appliances shall be protected by no less than 1 (one) automatic sprinkler head
connected to the domestic water system of the building or be part of an engineered automatic sprinkler system in
compliance with NFPA-13.
Central heating appliances consist of stationary oil, gas and solid fuel fired: steam boilers, hydronic hot water heating
boilers, hot air furnaces and oil fired domestic hot water heaters.
The sprinkler shall be located over the central heating appliance and installed as per the manufacturer’s instructions.
295
Plumbing Permits shall not be required for the installation of a single sprinkler head located over the central heating
appliance of 1 & 2 family residential structures. (Per Local City Code Enforcement Authority)
Plumbing permits shall be required for multiple sprinkler head installations or engineered sprinkler systems in all other
structures. Sprinkler heads or systems requiring a permit shall be considered a fixture per the Maine Plumbing Code.
Historical Note: Section 5-301 as amended by City Council April 14, 2014.
ARTICLE IV DRY CLEANING PLANTS
Sec. 5-401 Definitions
1. Dry cleaning shall mean the process of removing dirt, grease, paints and other stains from wearing apparel,
textiles, fabrics, rugs, etc., by the use of nonaqueous liquid solvents, flammable or nonflammable, and it shall
include the process of dyeing clothes or other fabrics or textiles in a solution of dye colors and nonaqueous
liquid solvents.
2. Rates as applied to solvents shall mean classified as to fire hazard in accordance with Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc.’s Standard Classification.
Sec. 5-402 Classification of Systems
Dry cleaning systems shall be classified as follows:
1. Class I System shall be those utilizing solvents rated above 40. (Example – 50oF. Flashpoint Naphtha.)
2. Class II Systems shall be those utilizing solvents rated 40 or below, but which do not comply with Class III
or Class IV requirements. (Example – Stoddard Solvent.)
3. Class III Systems shall be those employing equipment listed by Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., utilizing
solvents having specified characteristics and rated at 25 or below. (Example – 140oF. Flashpoint Solvent.)
Class IV Systems shall be those utilizing solvents rated as nonflammable, or as nonflammable at ordinary
temperatures and only moderately flammable at higher temperatures, rated not over 5. (Examples – Carbon Tetrachloride
and Perchlorethylene.)
Sec. 5-403 Permit Required
1. Conditions. No person shall engage in the business of dry cleaning without a permit, which shall prescribe the
location and the class of system to be used.
2. Solvent. No change shall be made in the solvent used in equipment to a solvent in a more hazardous (lower)
class unless permission for such change shall first have been obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer,
with the advice of the Fire Chief.
Sec. 5-404 Construction of Buildings Housing Class II Systems
1. Building construction and location. Class II systems shall be located in buildings having walls of masonry or
noncombustible construction and wall finish shall be plain or plastered without furring or concealed spaces.
Floors shall be of fire-resistive construction and without pits, wells or pockets; and where located over a
basement, floor shall be vapor and liquid-tight. Roof and floors above grade floor, if of combustible
construction, shall have the ceilings over the dry cleaning areas protecting by cement or gypsum plaster on
metal lath or equivalent construction. Dry cleaning buildings shall not be closer than 10 feet to the line of
adjoining property, except that if exposing walls are equivalent to 12-inch brick construction without
openings that building may be located on the property line.
2. Proximity to other occupations and operations. Dry cleaning operations shall be restricted to the first floor
above grade and shall not be located on any floor below grade, nor in the same building with other
occupancies. Operations incidental to the dry cleaning business such as laundering, pressing and ironing may
be in a communicating building or located on the same floor with the dry cleaning plant, provided the dry
cleaning operations are separated there from by partitions having a fire resistance rating of not less than two
hours and the communicating openings are protected by fire doors approved for such openings.
296
3. Doors. Door openings on stairs or elevators leading from a dry cleaning area to a basement, or opening into
room having openings or stairs to basements, shall be provided with noncombustible sills or ramps raised at
least 6 inches. Approved self-closing fire doors shall be provided at such openings. Enclosures shall be of
construction equivalent to the floor construction but having a fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour.
Sec. 5-405 Construction of Buildings Housing Class III Systems
Class III Systems, if located in the same building with other occupancies, shall be separated from the remainder of
the building vertically and horizontally by construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour with
openings protected by approved fire doors, except that such separation shall not be required for operations incidental to or
in connection with the dry cleaning business, such as laundering, scouring, scrubbing, drying, pressing or ironing, and the
requirement for such separation may be waived at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, with the advice of the
Fire Chief, based upon a consideration of such factors as type of building construction, nature of occupancy, storage and
operating capacity of the system and extent of private fire protection provided.
Sec. 5-406 Class IV Systems
Class IV Systems shall comply with NFPA 32, chapters 2, 3, 4 and 7.
Sec. 5-407 Drying Rooms
Rooms in which articles are hung up to dry after cleaning shall be separated from dry cleaning rooms by partitions
having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours if Class II system solvents are used, and not less than one hour if
Class III system solvents are used. Entrances to drying rooms shall be provided with approved, self-closing fire doors.
Ventilation of drying rooms shall conform to the requirements for ventilation of dry cleaning rooms and the provisions for
fire extinguishing equipment shall be complied with. If the drying room is in a separate building, it shall conform in
construction and equipment to all requirements for dry cleaning buildings.
Sec. 5-408 Heating Equipment
1. Class II systems. Where Class II systems are used, heating shall be by steam or hot water only. Steam and
hot water pipes and radiators for heating and drying purposes shall be at least one inch from all woodwork
and shall be protected by substantial metal screens arranged so as to prevent combustible goods or materials
from coming in contact with pipes and radiators.
2. Boilers. Boilers shall be located in a detached building or in a boiler room cut off from the dry cleaning
room. For Class II systems this cut-off shall be by a firewall without openings into the cleaning room. For
Class III systems this cut-off shall be by a fire partition without openings, having a fire-resistance rating of
not less than two hours.
Sec. 5-409 Electrical Equipment
All electrical equipment in dry cleaning rooms or other sections subject to flammable vapors shall be of a type approved
for Class I, Division 1 hazardous locations under the 2006 National Electrical Code.
Sec. 5-410 Ventilation
A mechanical system of ventilation shall be provided in the dry cleaning rooms of plants employing Class II
systems, of sufficient capacity to insure complete and continuous change of air once every 6 minutes, and shall be
provided with means of remote control.
297
Sec. 5-411 Storage and Handling of Cleaning Solvents
1. Classes II and III. Aboveground containers comprising purifiers, clarifiers and filters in Class II systems,
shall not exceed 350 gallons individual capacity. Solvent storage tanks for Class II and Class III systems may
be inside of buildings if individual capacity of storage tanks does not exceed 275 gallons and the aggregate
capacity of storage tanks does not exceed 550 gallons. Quantities of solvents for Class II and Class III
systems in excess of the above shall be in accordance with Article VIII.
2. Closed circuit piping. The handling of solvents from storage tanks through the various machines and back to
the settling and clear solvent tank shall be through closed circuits of piping. Pumps of positive displacement
type and shall have a by-pass and relief valve.
3. Sight glasses. Sight glasses, the breakage of which would permit the escape of liquids, shall be of a type not
readily damaged by heat and shall be reliably protected against physical damage.
4. Gauge glasses. Liquid level gauge glasses in Class II systems shall be equipped with an automatic device,
which will immediately shut off the flow of solvent if the glass is broken. These liquid level gauge glasses
shall also be guarded against physical damage.
5. Underground tanks. When underground treating and settling tanks are used a separate suction and discharge
connection shall be provided to the pump for removal of sludge. The suction pipe shall be carried to the tank
bottom and the discharge connection to a suitable container.
6. Pressure. All piping shall be tested to a pressure of at least fifty per cent in excess of normal operating
pressure and proved tight and protected against physical damage.
Sec. 5-412 Grounding of Equipment
The cylinders and shells of all washing machines, drying tumblers, outside shell of extractors and all aboveground
containers shall be permanently and effectively grounded. In plants employing Class II systems, all pulleys and belting in
the dry cleaning room shall have grounded collectors or other suitable devices for the removal of static electricity.
Sec. 5-413 Scouring, Brushing and Spotting
1. Brushing table. The brushing (pre-spotting) table shall have a liquid-tight top with a curb on all sides not less
that 1 inch high. The top of the table shall be pitched so as to insure thorough draining to a 1 ½-inch drain
connected to a suitable container especially provided and marked for that purpose.
2. Solvent limits. All scouring or brushing and spotting (pre-spotting) operations utilizing solvents rated higher
than the solvent used in the plant dry cleaning machines shall be limited to one gallon and dispensed from
approved safety cans. Additional storage shall be in approved safety cans of not over one gallon capacity, or
in unopened shipping containers.
3. Location. Scouring or brushing operations utilizing in excess of one gallon of solvent shall be conducted only
in a room or building conforming to all the requirements for a dry cleaning system utilizing the same type of
solvent.
4. Maximum amount; safety precautions. The total amount of solvent rated higher that 25 used on
scouring or brushing tables or in scrubbing tubs, in accordance with section 5-414(3), shall not exceed 3
gallons. The scouring or brushing table or scrubbing tub shall be so located as to ensure thorough and
effective disposal of vapors through the ventilating system. Scrubbing tub shall be used only for articles the
character of which prevents their washing in the usual washing machines. Scrubbing tubs shall be secured to
the floor and shall be provided with permanent 1 ½-inch trapped drains to a suitable container specially
provided and marked for that purpose.
Sec. 5-414 Fire Extinguishing Equipment
Adequate fire appliances of a type suitable for fighting fires involving flammable liquids shall be provided in all
dry cleaning plants; at least one extinguisher shall be provided at each entrance to every room or area where flammable
liquids are stored or used.
298
Sec. 5-415 Smoking Prohibited
Smoking in plants employing Class II or Class III systems, except in smoking rooms so designated, shall be
strictly prohibited and “No Smoking” signs shall be posted.
Sec 5-416 Flashpoints
Dry-cleaning plants or systems using solvents that have a flash point below 100F(37.8C) shall be prohibited.
Sec. 5-417 Conformity to Nationally Recognized Standard Practice
This section shall conform to NFPA 1, 2003 edition
Cross Reference: Chapter 3, Article III, Caribou Code.
ARTICLE V EXPLOSIVES
Sec. 5-01 Application
This Article applies to all explosives, except small arms ammunition and pyrotechnic devices covered by Article
VI.
Sec. 5-502 Permit Required
The manufacture of explosives is prohibited. A permit shall be obtained from the State Fire Marshal’s Office, to
have, keep, use, store or transport any explosives.
Sec. 5-503 Storage
1. Location. All storage of explosives shall be in approved explosive magazines located at distances from
neighboring buildings, highways and railways in conformity with the American Table of Distances for
Storage of Explosives.
2. Removal and delivery. When explosives in excess of immediate requirements are removed from a magazine
and delivered in the vicinity of a blasting operation, they shall be kept in a portable magazine consisting of
either a stout tight box covered with no less that 24-gauge sheet iron and equipped with a hinged lid or in a
small portable building similarly covered. Such portable magazine shall be painted red and conspicuously
marked “Explosives – Dangerous”, in white block letters not less than 3 inches in height. Portable magazines
as described in this paragraph shall be located as required by the State Fire Marshal’s Officer and Fire Chief
or Designee.
Sec. 5-504 Transportation of Explosives
1. Detonators. Blasting caps, or detonators, shall not be transported over the highways or the municipality on the
same vehicles with explosives.
2. Vehicles. Vehicles used for the transportation of explosives shall be strong enough to carry the load without
difficulty, and shall be in good mechanical condition. If vehicles do not have a closed body, the body shall be
covered with a tarpaulin or other effective protection against moisture and sparks. Such vehicles shall have
tight floors and shall have a lining of wood or other non-sparking material, which shall cover any projections,
or metal, which might come into contact with packages of explosives.
3. Warnings. Every vehicle while carrying explosives shall have painted on both sides and rear, in letters at
least four inches high, in contrasting colors, the word “EXPLOSIVES’, or in lieu thereof shall display in such
manner that it will be visible from all directions, a red flag with the word “EXPLOSIVES” printed, stamped
or sewed thereon in white letters at least six inches high.
4. Prohibited materials when transporting explosives. No metal, metal tools, oils, matches, firearms, electric
storage batteries, flammable substances, acids, oxidizing or corrosive compounds shall be carried in the bed
or body of any vehicle transporting explosives.
299
Sec. 5-505 Use of Explosives
1. Written notice. At least 24 hours in advance of blasting, the blaster shall give written notice specifying the
location and intended time of blasting to appropriate representative of the gas, electric, water, fire alarm,
telephone, telegraph and steam utilities which operate within the municipality. In an emergency the Fire
Chief or Designee may waive the time limit and allow verbal, instead of written notice to be given.
2. Radio Transmissions. No radio use to avoid accidental discharge of electric blasting caps by radio
transmitters or other source of extraneous electricity.
__________________
State Law Reference: 25 MRSA §2441 et seq., State of Maine Laws for the Fire Service 1997 edition
ARTICLE VI FIREWORKS
5-601 Storage and Sales of Consumer Fireworks:
All new commercial Consumer Fireworks storage and sales facilities must be approved by the Caribou Planning
Board under Site Design Review.
No person may store or sell consumer fireworks for commercial purposes without first obtaining an annually
issued municipal permit from the Caribou Fire Chief. All Commercial Consumer Fireworks Storage and sales
Permits shall expire on April 1 of each year. The annual permit fee for a Commercial Consumer Fireworks
Storage and sales permit shall be $100.00. (one hundred dollars). All Fireworks storage and sales facilities shall
be inspected for compliance annually by the Caribou Fire Chief or their designee and the code enforcement
officer prior to issuance of the initial permit and annually prior to the renewal of a permit.
Storage: A person authorized to sell consumer fireworks may store the fireworks only in a permanent, fixed,
stand-alone building dedicated solely to the storage and sale of consumer fireworks in accordance with this
subsection.
A. The building must be constructed, maintained and operated, and all consumer fireworks must be stored, in
compliance with the requirements of National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, as adopted by the
Office of the State Fire Marshal, relevant building codes, zoning ordinances and other municipal ordinances.
All consumer fireworks storage and sale facilities shall have approved Sprinkler Systems in compliance with
NFPA-13.
B. The building may not be less than 60 feet from any other permanent building and may not be less than 300
feet from a structure at which gasoline, propane or other flammable materials are stored, sold or dispensed.
C. Insurance. A person authorized to sell consumer fireworks under subsection 1 shall at all times maintain
public liability and product liability insurance with minimum coverage limits of $2,000,000 to cover the
losses, damages or injuries that might ensue to persons or property as a result of the person storing or selling
consumer fireworks. Proof of insurance is a prerequisite of obtaining a permit from the Fire Chief.
D. Consumer Fireworks storage and sales shall be allowed in the Commercial 2, Residential-Commercial 2,
Industrial 1, Industrial 2 and Residential 3 Zones. Consumer Fireworks storage shall not be allowed in the
Commercial 1, Residential 1, Residential 2 or Hospital Zones.
5-602 Use of Consumer fireworks:
The use of consumer fireworks is governed by this subsection.
A. Aerial Consumer Fireworks are not allowed within the Urban Compact Zone of The City of Caribou unless
the property provides an ignition location of at least 100’ distance to any property line. No Aerial Consumer
fireworks shall be used within 100’ of any building or structure.
B. No Consumer Fireworks may be used without first obtaining a permit from the Caribou Police Department for
a fee to be set by the City Council. Aerial Consumer Fireworks may only be used on days indicated as Low or
Moderate Fire Danger by the Caribou Fire Department.
300
C. Consumer fireworks may only be used within the City of Caribou after first obtaining a permit from the
Caribou Police Department. The Caribou Fire Department may restrict the use of consumer fireworks
throughout all of Caribou due to location and or fire hazards at the discretion of the Caribou Fire Chief or
designee.
D. Consumer fireworks may be used between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except that on the following
dates they may be used between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. the following day: (1) July 4th & (2)
December 31st; and (3) The weekends immediately before and after July 4th and December 31st.
E. A person may use consumer fireworks only on that person's property or on the property of a person who has
consented to the use of consumer fireworks on that property. No person under the age of 21 shall possess or
use consumer fireworks when not in the direct supervision of a parent or guardian. No person shall use
Consumer Fireworks if they are intoxicated or have a blood alcohol level of .08 % or greater.
Penalty:
Any person found to be in violation of this ordinance may be charged and a civil action brought against them in
District Court. The minimum fine for violation of this ordinance is $100.00 (one hundred dollars) plus all court
costs and legal fees. Any expenses incurred by the Caribou Fire & Ambulance Department or Caribou Police
Department due to misuse or damage caused by Consumer Fireworks shall be assessed to the property owner and
or responsible person.
5-603 Definitions:
Consumer Fireworks. "Consumer fireworks" has the same meaning as in 27 Code of Federal Regulations, Section
555.11 or subsequent provision, but includes only products that are tested and certified by a 3rd-party testing
laboratory as conforming with United States Consumer Product Safety Commission standards, in accordance with 15
United States Code, Chapter 47. "Consumer fireworks" does not include the following products which are illegal:
A. Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule.
B. Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule.
C. Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of this paragraph, "sky rockets and bottle rockets" means cylindrical
tubes containing not more than 20 grams of chemical composition, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule, with a
wooden stick attached for guidance and stability that rise into the air upon ignition and that may produce a burst of
color or sound at or near the height of flight.
D. Fire Crackers
E. M-80’s
F. Cherry Bombs
Fireworks. "Fireworks" means any:
A. Combustible or explosive composition or substance;
B. Combination of explosive compositions or substances;
C. Other article that was prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, including blank cartridges or toy cannons in which explosives are used, the
type of balloon that requires fire underneath to propel it, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles,
bombs, rockets, wheels, colored fires, fountains, mines, serpents and other fireworks of like construction;
D. Fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound; or
E. Tablets or other device containing any explosive substance or flammable compound.
The term "fireworks" does not include “consumer fireworks” or toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices
in which paper caps or plastic caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are used if they are
constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, toy pistol paper
caps or plastic caps that contain less than 20/100 grains of explosive mixture, sparklers that do not contain
magnesium chlorates or perchlorates or signal, antique or replica cannons if no projectile is fired.
Historical Note: Article VI Fireworks revised & adopted by the City Council March 12, 2012; Section 5-602 B&C were
amended by the City Council on February 11, 2013.
301
ARTICLE VII FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT
Sec. 5-701 Fire Chief will Survey Premises and Specify Equipment to be provided
The Fire Chief or Designee and/or the State Fire Marshal’s Office , shall survey each mercantile and
manufacturing establishment, school, place of assembly, hospital, place of detention, hotel and multi-family house and
shall specify suitable fire detecting devices and extinguishing appliances which shall be provided in or near boiler rooms,
kitchens or restaurants, clubs and like establishments, storage rooms involving considerable combustible material, rooms
in which hazardous manufacturing processes are involved, garage sections, and other places of a generally hazardous
nature. Such devices or appliances may consist of automatic fire alarm systems, automatic sprinkler or water spray
systems, standpipe and hose, fixed or portable fire extinguishers of a type suitable for class of fire, manual or automatic
covers, Dry Powder or carbon dioxide or other inert gas extinguishing systems. In especially hazardous processes or
storages, appliances of more than one type or special systems may be required.
Sec. 5-702 Maintenance of Fire Suppression and Associated Equipment and Reports
Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems and other fire protective or extinguishing systems or
appliances which have been installed in compliance with any permit or order, or because of any law or ordinance, shall be
maintained in operative condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the
effectiveness of the protection so required; except this shall not prohibit the owner from temporarily reducing or
discontinuing the protection where necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations or additions The Fire Chief or designee
shall be notified before such tests, repairs, alterations or additions are started unless the work is to be continuous until
completion. A copy of all sprinkler maintenance and test reports to be sent to the Caribou Fire Chief. According to State
adopted NFPA 25, 2002 edition, it is the owner’s responsibility to have the fire sprinkler system maintained and operable.
The State of Maine under specific conditions has two shutdown procedures, one Permanent and one Seasonal. Copies of
these procedures can be obtained in the City Code Enforcement Office or the Office of the Fire Chief
ARTICLE VIII FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
Sec. 5-801 Scope
This Article shall apply to the storage, handling and use of flammable liquids as hereinafter defined; except that it
shall not apply to the transportation of flammable liquids wherein conformity with Interstate Commerce Commission
regulations, or regulation lawfully on file with and approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission.
The City of Caribou will follow Chapter 66 of NFPA 1, 2003 edition for the storage, use, and handling of
flammable and combustible liquids, including waste liquids.
Sec. 5-802 Definition
Flammable liquids shall be divided into three classes as follows:
Class I shall include those having flash points below 100oF.
Class IA shall have flash points below 73F & Boiling points below 100F
Class IB shall have flash points below 73F & Boiling points above 100F
Class IC shall have flash points above 73F but below 100F 73F
Class II shall include those having flash points above 100oF but below 140oF.
Class III shall include those having flash points above 140oF.
Class IIIA shall have flashpoints above 140F but below 200F
Class IIIB shall have flashpoints above 200F
When artificially heated to temperatures equal to or higher that their flash points, Class II and III liquids shall be
subject to the applicable requirements for Classes I and II liquids. The provisions in this Article shall also be applied to
high flash point liquids which otherwise would be outside of its scope when they are so heated.
302
Sec. 5-803 Permits (Issued by the Fire Chief or designee)
Permits shall be required in accordance with Table 1.12.19a page 19 of NFPA 1, 2003 edition.
1. Maximum for storage, handling or use of Class I . Storage, handling, or use of Class I flammable liquids in
excess of 5 gallons in a dwelling or other place of human habitation; or in excess of 10 gallons in any other
building or occupancy; or in excess of 15 gallons outside of any building; except that no permit shall be
required for the following:
A. For the storage or use of flammable liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile
power plant or mobile heating plant.
B. For Business Garages and Filling Stations (see Article IX)
C. C. For the storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures when such liquids are
stored for maintenance, painting or similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days.
2. Maximum for Class III storage, handling or use. Storage, handling or use of Class III flammable liquids in
excess of 25 gallons in a building; or in excess of 60 gallons outside of a building.
3. Flammable liquids. For the manufacture, processing, blending or refining of flammable liquids.
4. Stationary tanks. For the storage of flammable liquids in stationary tanks.
Sec. 5-804 Outside Aboveground Tanks must conform to NFPA 30
1. Within Fire Limits. The storage of Class I flammable liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is
prohibited, within the Fire Limits of the City, defined as “The Compact Zone” of the City of Caribou Except
those areas that have been approved before this ordnance or with approval of the Fire Chief and Code
Enforcement Officer.
2. Adjoining property. Location of an aboveground tank for storage of flammable liquids with respect to
distance from the nearest line of adjoining property, which may be built upon, shall be such that the distance
between any part of the tank and the line shall be not less that that set forth in Table 804.
TABLE 66.2.3.2.1.1(a) and 66.2.3.2.1.1(b) page 796 NFPA 1 2003 edition
Minimum Distance of Outside Aboveground Tanks for Stable Flammable Liquids Other Than Crude Petroleum at
pressures not in excess of 2.5 psig. To Line of Adjoining Property Which May Be Built Upon
Minimum Distance from Minimum Distance from
Property Line that is or can Nearest Side of any public
Be built upon, including the way or from nearest
Opposite side of a public way important building on
Tank Capacity (Gals) (ft) same property (ft)
275 or Less 5 5
276 to 750 10 5
751 to 12,000 15 5
12,001 to 30,000 20 5
30,001 to 50,000 30 10
50,001 to 1,000,000 100 35
1,000,001 to 2,000,000 135 45
2,000,001 to 3,000,000 165 55
3,000,000 or more 175 60
3. Other tanks. The location of a tank for the storage of any flammable liquid with respect to any such other tank
shall be of such that the distance between them shall follow Table 66.2.3.2.2.1 page 799 of NFPA 1, 2003
edition.
4. Tank supports. Tanks shall rest directly on the ground or on foundations made of concrete, masonry, piling or
steel. Fire-resistive materials to provide a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours shall protect
exposed piling or steel supports. Tank foundations shall be designed to minimize the possibility of uneven
settling of the tank and to minimize corrosion of any part of the tank resting on the foundation. (30:2.3.1.1
Unprotected steel supports for tanks shall be prohibited
303
5. Connections. Each connection to an aboveground tank storing flammable liquids located below normal liquid
level shall be provided with an internal or external control valve located as close as practicable to the shell of
the tank. Except for flammable liquids whose chemical characteristics are incompatible with steel, such
valves, when external and their connection to the tank shall be of steel. Installation must meet the
requirements of NFPA 30.
6. Protection: All Above Ground Tanks over 250 gallons capacity, will have a form of protection from being
hit, approved by the Fire Chief
Sec. 5-805 Control of Spills
Every tank that contains a Class I, Class II or Class IIIA liquid shall be provided with means to prevent an accidental
release of liquid from endangering important facilities and adjoining property or from reaching waterways. Such means
shall meet the requirements of 2.3.2.3.1, 2.3.2.3.2 or 2.3.2.3.3 of NFPA 30, whichever is applicable (30:2.3.2.3)
Sec. 5-806 Underground Tanks
The City of Caribou will use NFPA 30-23 for the installation of Underground Tanks. All such installations will
conform to NFPA 30.
1. Location Class I and II. An underground tank for Class I or Class II flammable liquids shall be located not
less than the distance indicated in Table 806, measured horizontally from the nearest point of the shell to the
nearest line of adjoining property that may be built upon and the nearest outside wall of any basement or pit,
of which the floor is lower in elevation that the top of suck tank. Where such location causes unnecessary
hardship, an underground tank may be placed closer than the distance specified if enclosed, encased or
otherwise protected from physical damage.
TABLE 806
Minimum Distance from Underground Tanks for Class I or II Flammable Liquids to Basements or
To Line of Adjoining Property that May be built upon
Location
If top of tank is above the lowest
Individual Tank Capacity floor, basement, or part of any
Class I and II building which is not less than:
550 Gallons 5 feet away
5,000 Gallons 10 feet away
10,000 Gallons 15 feet away
15,000 Gallons 20 feet away
Unlimited 25 feet away
2. Depth and cover. Underground tanks shall be set on firm foundation and surrounded with soft earth or sand
well tamped in place. Tanks shall be covered with a minimum of 2 feet of earth, or shall be covered with not
less than one foot of earth on top of which shall be placed a slab of reinforced concrete not less than four
inches thick. When subject to traffic or likely to be so subjected in the future, tanks shall be protected against
damage from vehicles passing over them by at least 3 feet of earth cover, or 18 inches of well-tamed earth
plus either 8 inches of asphaltic concrete or 6 inches of reinforced concrete. When asphaltic or reinforced
concrete paving is used as part of the protection it must extend at least 1 foot horizontally beyond the outline
of the tank in all directions.
Sec. 5-807 Tanks Inside of Buildings, Class I or II Liquids
Tanks for storage of Class I and II flammable liquids, not including vehicle tanks, shall not be installed inside
buildings except using Maximum Allowable Size Containers, Intermediate Bulk Containers and Portable Tanks shown in
Table 66.4.2.3 page 815 of NFPA 1, 2003 edition.
304
Sec. 5-808 Tanks Inside of Buildings, Class III Liquids
1. Unenclosed tanks. Unenclosed tanks shall not be located within 5 feet, horizontally of any appliance with a
flame.
2. All other tanks inside of building must be in compliance with NFPA 31 and State Statue Title 32 MRSA
Chapter 33 and Chapter 66 of NFPA 1, 2003 edition.
Sec. 5-809 Design and Construction of Tanks
Tanks shall be designed and constructed to withstand safely the service to which subjected. Tanks shall be
permitted to be of any shape, size, or type consistent with sound engineering design. Metal tanks shall be welded, riveted
and caulked, or bolted, or constructed using a combination of these methods (30:2.2.l) and be in compliance with chapter
66 or the NFPA 1, 2003 edition.
Sec. 5-810 Vents on Outside Aboveground Tanks
1. Vents for normal breathing. Tanks shall have normal venting capacity sufficient to permit the filling and
emptying of such tanks, plus their breathing due to temperature changes, without distortion of tank shell or
roof. Tanks storing Class I and Class II flammable liquids shall be equipped where practical with either
venting devices which shall be normally closed when not under pressure or vacuum, or with approved flame
arresters, except that tanks under 2,500 gallons capacity for Class I liquids may have openings vents.
2. Vents for emergency relief. In addition to the provisions for normal venting herein required, every
aboveground storage tank shall have some form of construction or device that will relieve excessive internal
pressure, caused by exposure fires that might cause the rupture of the tank shell or bottom. In a vertical tank,
this construction may take the form of a weakened seam in the roof. Where entire dependence for such
additional relief is placed upon some device other than a weak roof seam or joint, the total venting capacity
for both normal and emergency vents shall be enough to prevent rupture of the shell or bottom of the tank if
vertical, or of the shell or heads if horizontal. Such devices may be a self-closing manhole cover, or one using
long bolts that permit the cover to lift under internal pressure, or an additional or larger relief valve or valves.
3. All vent construction and methods must be in compliance with NFPA 1, 2003 edition.
Sec. 5-811 Vents on Tanks Underground or in Buildings
1. Location and arrangement of vent – Class I or II: Vent pipes from tanks storing Class I or Class II flammable
liquids shall be so located that the discharge point is outside of buildings, higher than the fill pipe opening and
not less that 12 feet above the adjacent ground level. Vent pipes shall discharge only upward or horizontally
(not downward) in order to disperse vapors. Vent pipes 2 inches or less in nominal inside diameter shall not
be obstructed by devices that will reduce their capacity and thus cause backpressure. Vent pipe outlets shall
be so located that flammable vapors will not enter building openings, or be trapped under eaves or other
obstructions. If the vent pipe is less than 10 feet in length or greater than 2 inches in nominal inside diameter
the outlet shall be an approved flame arrester located in the vent line at the outlet or within the approved
distance from the outlet. In no case shall a flame arrester be located more than 15 feet from the outlet end of
the vent line.
2. Location and arrangement of vents – Class III: Vent pipes from tanks storing Class III flammable liquids
shall terminate outside of building and higher than the fill pipe opening. Vent outlets shall be above normal
snow level. They may be fitted with return bends, course screens or other devices to minimize ingress of
foreign material.
3. Size of vents. Each tank shall be vented through piping adequate in size to prevent blowback of vapor or
liquid at the fill opening while tank is being filled. Vent pipes shall not be less than 1 ¼ inches nominal
inside diameter.
4. Vent piping. Vent pipes shall be so laid as to drain toward the tank without sags or traps in which liquid can
collect. They shall be located so that they will not be subjected to physical damage above ground Vent pipes
from tanks storing the same class of flammable liquids may be connected into one outlet pipe. The outlet pipe
305
shall be as least one pipe-size larger than the largest individual vent pipe connected thereto. In no case shall
the point of connection between vent lines be lower than the top of any fill-pipe opening. The lower end of a
vent pipe shall enter the tank through the top and shall not extend into the tank more than 1 inch.
5. Venting must be in compliance with NFPA 1, 2003 edition.
Sec. 5-812 Fill and Gauge Openings and Drainage on Tanks Underground or in Buildings
1. Fill and discharge piping. Filling and discharge lines for Class I and Class II liquids, and for Class III liquids
where practicable, shall enter tanks only through the top and shall be graded toward the tank.
2. Fill openings. The fill-pipe opening shall be located outside any building. For Class I or II flammable liquid
storage, the fill-pipe opening shall not be less than 5 feet from any door or cellar opening. For Class III
flammable liquid storage the fill-pipe opening shall not be less than 2 feet from any building opening at the
same or lower level. The fill-pipe opening shall be closed and liquid tight when not in use. Fill-pipe for
filling by tank car or tank truck shall be not larger than 4 inches nominal inside diameter and shall not e
constricted. Fill-pipe openings shall be identified by a definite color scheme or other means.
3. Gauge Openings. Gauge openings, if independent of fill-pipe, shall be provided with liquid tight cap or cover.
Where Class I or Class II liquids are stored within a building, such gauge opening shall be protected against
vapor release or liquid overflow by means of a spring-loaded check valve or other approved device.
4. Drainage of tanks in buildings. Inside storage tanks for Class III flammable liquids shall be provided with
draw-off or drain openings. Tanks shall be installed so that the bottom pitches to the draw-off or drain
openings at a slope of not less that1/4-inch per foot of length. The draw-off or drain opening shall be
provided with suitable connection to provide sump from which water or sediment can be drained readily.
5. Be in compliance with NFPA 1, 2003 edition
Sec. 5-813 Piping, Valves and Fittings
1. Design. Piping, valves and fittings for flammable liquids shall be designed for the working pressures and
structural stresses to which they may be subjected.
2. Support. Pipe systems shall be substantially supported and protected against physical damage and excessive
stresses arising from settlement, expansion or contraction.
3. Number of valves. Pipe systems shall contain sufficient number of valves to operate the system properly and
to protect the plant. Pipe systems in connection with pumps shall contain a sufficient number of valves
properly to control the flow of liquid in normal operation and in the event of physical damage. Connections
to pipe lines, by which equipment such as tank cars or tank vehicles discharge flammable liquids by means of
centrifugal pumps into above ground storage tanks shall be provided with, check valves for automatic
protection against back-flow.
4. Be in compliance with NFPA 1, 2003 edition
Sec. 5-814 Dispensing Devices at Service Stations
All installations must be in compliance with Chapter 30, NFPA 1, 2003 edition
1. Fixed Fire Protection is required
2. Design and construction. Class I and Class II flammable liquids shall be transferred from underground tanks
by means of fixed pumps so designed and equipped as to allow control of the flow and to prevent leakage or
accidental discharge. Supplemental means shall be provided outside of the dispensing device whereby the
source of power may be readily disconnected in the event of fire or other accident. Dispensing devices for
Class I or Class II flammable liquids shall be of approved type. Devices meeting the standards of the
Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., shall be deemed to be in compliance with this section. Class I or Class II
flammable liquids shall not be dispensed by pressure or gravity from drums, barrels and similar containers.
Gear pumps or similar positive displacement devices taking suction through the top of the container shall be
used. Class I or Class II flammable liquids shall not be dispensed by a device that operates through press
within a storage tank, unless the tank has been approved as a pressure vessel for the use to which it is
subjected. In no case shall air or gas pressure be used for this purpose.
306
3. Automatic dispensing devices. The installation and use of coin-operated dispensing devices for Class I
flammable liquids are prohibited. The dispensing of Class I flammable liquids into the fuel tank of a vehicle
or into a container shall at all time be under the control of a competent person. The use of any device which
permits the dispensing of Class I flammable liquids when the hand of the operator of the discharge nozzle is
removed from the nozzle control lever, is hereby forbidden except when using an automatic nozzle as
provided in Section 5-814(2)(A).
4. In lieu of being held open by hand, an approved automatic nozzle may be used for dispensing Class I
flammable liquid into the fuel tank of a vehicle. Such a nozzle shall have the latch-open device as an
integral part of the assembly and shall shut off the liquid reliably and positively when the gasoline tank is
filled, when it falls from the filling neck of any automobile tank, when it is subject to rough usage such as
dropping or lack of proper lubrication, or when an automobile is driven away while the nozzle is still in the
tank. A competent attendant shall be in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle being filled by such an
approved nozzle.
5. Location. Dispensing devices at automotive service stations shall be so located that all parts of the vehicle
being served will be on private property.
Sec. 5-815 Ventilation
1. All ventilation methods must conform to Chapter 30 and 66 of NFPA 1, 2003 edition
2. Rooms or enclosures in which Class I or Class II flammable liquids are pumped or dispensed, used in open vats
or dip tanks, or mixed or blended shall be provided with natural or mechanical ventilation that will prevent the
accumulation of flammable vapors in hazardous concentrations.
Sec. 5-816 Commercial and Industrial Establishments
Must be in compliance of Chapter 66 of NFPA 1, 2003 edition
1. Class I and II Liquids. Class I or Class II flammable liquids shall be stored in aboveground tanks out of
doors, in underground tanks in closed containers outside of buildings, in rooms of buildings meeting the
requirements of Type A or Type B Inside Storage or Mixing Rooms, or in outside storage houses used
exclusively for the storage and mixing of flammable liquids; storage inside of buildings, not in Type A or B
rooms, shall be in sealed containers or in approved safety cans of not more than 5 gallons capacity, and the
aggregate capacity shall not exceed 25 gallons unless in a storage cabinet which may be utilized for storage of
not over 50 gallons.
2. Standards. Inside storage or mixing rooms, outside storage houses and storage cabinets shall conform to
nationally recognize standard practice as specified in Section 5-108.
3. Class III. Class III flammable liquids shall be stored in aboveground tanks out of doors, or within buildings,
in underground tanks, in tank in enclosures in closed containers out of doors or within buildings, in room
meeting the requirements of Type A or Type B inside storage or mixing rooms or in outside storage houses.
Containers in buildings, other than sealed containers of not over 5 gallons capacity each, shall not exceed an
aggregate quantity of 275 gallons, unless stored in Type A or B inside storage rooms.
4. Set back. Containers of flammable liquids stored outdoors shall be segregated by an open space of at least 10
feet from roadways, sidewalks and structures so as not to constitute an immediate life or property hazard in
event of fire. Special attention should be given to routes of egress of building occupants, window and door
openings, and combustible exterior walls, platforms, cornices and roofs in securing the desired separation.
Containers piled one upon the other shall be separated by dunnage sufficient to provide stability and to
prevent excessive stress on container walls. The height of piles shall be consistent to provide stability.
Drums and barrels stored on their sides shall have their heads facing aside so that leakage or bungs may be
detected. Containers storing flammable liquids shall have caps, plugs or bungs replaced immediately after use
and when the container is empty.
5. Class I and II. Class I or Class II flammable liquids shall not be drawn from or dispensed into vessels or
containers within a building except by means of a device drawing from top of the tank of the container.
307
Sec. 5-817 Sources of Ignition
Open flames, heating devices and processes employing temperatures capable of igniting the vapors of the
flammable liquids used shall be prohibited in buildings, rooms and other confined spaces in which Class I or Class II
flammable liquids are used in the open, or in which Class III flammable liquids are used for the purpose of saturating,
coating or otherwise treating goods or materials. Artificial lighting shall be by electricity only. Electric devices located
within the possible path of vapor travel shall be of a type approved for such location. Compliance with applicable
provisions of the Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters known as the “National Electrical Code” shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of compliance with this section. Smoking shall be prohibited and suitable signs to that
effect shall be displayed.
Sec. 5-818 Fire Extinguishers
Where flammable liquids are used or dispensed, fire extinguisher appliances shall be provided in such quantities
as required by NFPA 10, 2007 Edition.
Sec. 5-819 Oil Burners
1. All installations shall conform to NFPA 31, Chapter 33, State Statue Title 32.
2. Heating and other devices using oil burners shall be installed, maintained and operated in accordance
with nationally recognized standard practice as specified in Section 5-108
Sec. 5-820 Tank Vehicles for Flammable Liquids
1. Tank vehicle shall mean any vehicle other than railroad tank cars and boats, with a cargo tank mounted
thereon or built as an integral part thereof used for the transportation of flammable liquids. Tank vehicles
include self-propelled vehicles, and full trailers and semi-trailers without motive power and with wheels
carrying either part or the entire load.
2. Standards. Tank vehicles used for the transportation of flammable liquids shall be constructed, maintained
and operated in accordance with nationally recognized standard practice as specified in Section 5-108.
__________________
Historical Note: “Fire limits” were originally established by Sec. 110 of the 1956 Building Code.
Cross Reference: Chapter 4, Article II.
ARTICLE IX GARAGES
Sec. 5-901 General
Garages shall conform to all applicable requirements of Chapter 30, NFPA 1, 2003 edition, as well as the
following provisions.
Sec. 5-902 Permit Required
No person shall use any building, shed or enclosure as a place of business for the purpose of servicing or repairing
any motor vehicle therein without a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer with the advice of the Fire Chief.
Sec. 5-903 Repair Work
Welding and cutting and other processes involving direct application of flame shall not be carried on in any
garage housing more than twenty automobiles on any floor unless the garage is equipped with an approved automatic
sprinkler system, or such process are carried on in a room enclosed by walls and ceiling of construction having a fireresistance
rating of not less than one hour with openings therein protected by approved fire doors or fire windows, and
with no opening from such room to any upper story. No repairs of any kind shall be made in any garage the floor of
which is more than two feet below the drive-in entrance level.
308
Sec. 5-904 Cleaning with Flammable Liquids
No flammable liquid with a flash point below 100oF. Shall be used in any garage for washing parts or removing
grease or dirt, unless in a special closed machine approved for the purpose or in a separate well ventilated room enclosed
by walls having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours with openings therein protected by approved fire doors
or fire windows, and with no opening from such room to any upper or lower story.
Sec. 5-905 Handling of Gasoline or Oils
1. Vehicle fuel tanks. The fuel tanks of motor vehicles shall be filler directly through hose from approved
pumps attached to approved portable tanks or drawing from underground storage tanks. Storage and handling
of flammable liquids shall conform to Article 8. No transfer of gasoline in any garage shall be made in any
open container.
2. Floor drains. No garage floor drain shall connect to any sewer unless provided with an oil separator or trap.
ARTICLE X GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES
Sec. 5-1001 Installation to Conform to Standard Safe Practices
Standards. Gas piping and gas appliances in buildings shall be installed in accordance with standard safe practice.
Installation of gas piping and appliances for domestic and commercial uses, in accordance with NFPA 37, 54, 58, 61, 82,
86, 96, 302, 501A and 501C shall be deemed prima facie evidence of installation in accordance with standard safe
practice.
Sec. 5-1002 Pressure Regulation
1. When regulator required. Where the pressure of gas supplied to domestic, commercial or other low pressure
gas piping systems in buildings is in excess of one pound per square inch, an approved gas pressure regulator
of sufficient size shall be installed in the service pipe of each such system to prevent pressure in excess of one
pound per square inch from being introduced into such building piping.
2. Vent pipe. If located inside a building, the above required regulator shall be equipped with a vent pipe leading
to the outer air. Means shall be employed to prevent water from entering this pipe and also to prevent
stoppage of it by insect or foreign matter.
Sec. 5-1003 Pipe Entrance to Buildings
Where gas piping enters a building through a wall or floor of masonry or concrete any gas pipe or other nearby
pipes entering the same wall or floor shall be suitably sealed against entrance of water or gas.
Sec. 5-1004 Outside Valves
Approved means for shutting off the flow of gas from outside the building shall be provided on every gas service
pipe 2 inches or larger in diameter or which supplies gas at a pressure in excess of one pound per square inch. Outside gas
shut-off cocks or valves shall be located so as to be readily accessible and, when underground, shall be placed in suitable
valve boxes, manholes or vaults the covers of which shall be clearly marked “Gas”.
ATRICLE XI LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GASES
Sec. 5-1101 Definition
“Liquefied Petroleum Gas” shall mean any material, which is composed predominantly of any of the following
hydrocarbons, or mixtures of them: propane, propylene, butane (normal butane is iso-butane) and butylenes. All
installations must conform to NFPA 58 & 1, 2003 edition
309
Sec. 5-1102 Permits and Reports of Installations
1. When permit required. A permit shall be obtained for each installation of liquefied petroleum gas employing
a container or an aggregate of interconnected containers of over 2,000 gallons water capacity, and for each
permanent installation, irrespective of size of containers, made at buildings in which people congregate of
civic, political, educational, religious, social or recreational purposes. Such buildings shall include schools,
churches, hospitals, institutions, hotels, and restaurants, each having a capacity of 20 or more persons. Prior
to making such an installation, an installer shall submit plans to the Code Enforcement Officer and follow
compliance with the requirements of this code is shown by said plans, a permit shall be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer, with the advice of the Fire Chief.
2. Records. Installers shall maintain a record of all installations for which a permit in not required by paragraph
(1) above (but not including installation of gas burning appliances and replacing or portable cylinders) and
have it available for inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Sec. 5-1103 Standards for Liquefied Petroleum Gas Equipment and Its Installation
All installations of liquefied petroleum gas equipment including such equipment installed at utility gas plants,
shall be in conformity with generally recognized standards for safety to persons and property. Except as otherwise
provided in this Article or in other laws or regulations legally in effect, conformity with the Standards of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases (Pamphlet No. 58), and in the case
of liquefied petroleum gases at utility gas plants, conformity with the Standards of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases at Utility Gas Plants (Pamphlet No. 59) shall be
prima facie evidence of conformity with generally recognized standards for safety to persons and property.
Sec. 5-1104 Location of Containers
Within the Fire Limits as defined in Sec. 5-804(1) of this Chapter, the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted for the protection of the heavily congested commercial area, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall
not exceed 2,000 gallons water capacity; except that in particular installations this capacity limit may be altered at the
discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, with the advice of the Fire Chief, after consideration of special features such
as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed tanks, degree of private
fire protection to be provided and facilities of the local fire department.
Sec. 5-1105 Container Protection
Any LP tank over 250 gallons will have protection around tank approved by the Fire Chief.
ARTICLE XII PRECAUTIONS AGAINST FIRE, GENERAL
Sec. 5-1201 Outdoor Fires and Permits
The Caribou Fire and Ambulance Department Chief or designee, (AHJ), shall have the authority to issue all fire permits
within the jurisdiction:
1. Camp Fire, Bonfires and all other Outdoor Fires. Kindling or maintaining any open fire on either public or private
property within the City of Caribou, must have a written fire permit. Instructions and stipulations on the permit
shall be adhered to. These permits shall only be issued to owners, renters, lessee or contractors hired for lot
cleaning of property where the burning operation is to occur.
2. Except for special events or conditions, cooking fires or other fires approved by the Fire Chief, there will be no
burning within the Compact Zone of the City of Caribou.
3. Fire permits for Campfires or fires for cooking purposes or any other purpose can be issued for the season. These
fires must be wood only and be contained within a metal, masonry or stone fireplace, pit or ring. These fires must
be a minimum of 50 feet from any building.
4. In some cases, the Chief or designee may require inspection of the site prior to burning.
The Fire Chief or designee may prohibit any or all outdoor fires within the City of Caribou.
310
5. You shall be liable for Response and Suppression Cost if you are burning without a permit or the fire escapes due to
negligence or not following the safety requirements listed on the permit. All open burning shall be in conformity to
existing laws and regulation of the Maine Forest Service, Department of Environmental Protection and the City of
Caribou Fire Prevention Ordinance. In accordance with Title 12 statutes, the out-of-door burning of plastic, rubber,
Styrofoam, metals, food wastes, chemicals, treated wood or other solid wastes, except for wood wastes, is prohibited in all
areas of the State. Any person who engages in out of door burning or who fails to comply with any stated permit
condition or restriction commits a Class E crime.
Sec 5-1202
(SAMPLE)
CARIBOU FIRE DEPARTMENT
OPEN BURNING PERMIT
Must call 493-4204 (before 9PM) before burning to activate this permit
Business: 493-4204 Permit #__________________
In Case of Emergency Dial 9-1-1
Permission_to_____________________________________________________________________________________
Permittee Address
With permission from property owner _____________________________________________ is permitted to kindle an open fire for:
( ) Cooking ( ) Burning Leaves ( ) Burning Brush ( ) Burning Grass ( ) Seasonal Campfire
( ) Other (specify type) ____________________________________________________________________________
Location of Burn _________________________________________________________________________________
Date of Burn _____-_____-_______ Time to Burn [ ] 5 pm to 12 am [ ] All day to 12 am
[ ] 12 am to 8 am [ ] Seasonal to 12-31-_______
Thru _____-_____-_______
PLEASE READ SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
Specify number of adults: ____________ ( ) Portable Pump ( ) Charged Garden Hose ( ) Hand Tools
Other equipment (specify): ________________________________________________________________________________
This permit is granted in good faith that the fire is carefully watched and controlled by sufficient force of adults and adequate
equipment. You shall be liable for suppression if fire escapes due to negligence or not following listed safety requirements. All open
burning shall be in conformity to existing laws and regulations of the Maine Forest Service, Department of Environmental Protection
and the City of Caribou Fire Prevention Ordinance. No open burning of tires, rubber products, wire insulation, paints, solvents or
sludge is allowed. Violation of this permit can be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more that $1,000.00 in accordance
with the City of Caribou Fire Prevention Code.
Permittee’s Phone #: _____________________________ Time Issued: __________________ AM - PM
______________________________________________ _____________ __________________________________
Signature of Permittee Date Issued Signature of person issuing permit
State law requires permit to be in hand during burning operations
(White Copy – FD) (Yellow Copy – Permittee)
311
Sec. 5-1203 Hot Ashes and Other Dangerous Materials
No person shall deposit hot ashes or cinders, or smoldering coals, or greasy or oily substances liable to
spontaneous ignition, into any wooden receptacle, or place the same within ten feet of any combustible materials, except
in metal or other noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground
outside the building shall be placed on noncombustible stands and in every case must be kept at least two feet away from
any combustible wall or partition.
Sec. 5-1204 Accumulations of Waste Materials
Accumulations of waste paper, hay, grass; straw, weeds, litter or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of
any kind shall not be permitted to remain upon any roof or in any courtyard, vacant lot or open space. All weeds, grass,
vines or other growth, when sane endangers property, or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner
or occupant of the property it is on.
Sec. 5-1205 Handling Readily Combustible Materials
No person making, using, storing or having in charge, or under his control any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sack,
bags, litter hay, straw or combustible waste materials shall fail or neglect at the close of each day to cause such materials
which is not compactly baled and stacked in an orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable
vaults or in metal or metal lined, covered receptacles or bins. The Code Enforcement Officer, with the advice of the Fire
Chief, shall require suitable baling presses to be installed in stores, apartment buildings, factories and similar places where
accumulations of paper and waste materials are not removed at least every second day.
Sec. 5-1206 Storage of Readily Combustible Materials
1. Permit required. No person shall store in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume of combustible empty
packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, or rubber tires or baled cotton, rubber or cork or other
similarly combustible materials without a permit.
2. Storage requirements. Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be within two feet of the ceiling,
and not so located as to endanger exit from building. Storage in open shall not be more than twenty feet
in height, shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as not to constitute a hazard, and shall be
compacted and orderly.
Sec. 5-1207 Flammable Decorative Materials in Stores
Cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees or other highly flammable materials shall not be used for decorative
purposes in show windows or other parts of stores unless flame-proofed; provide, however, that nothing in this section
shall be prohibit the display of saleable goods permitted and offered for sale. Highly flammable materials shall not be
stored or used for sale or decorative purposes in any commercial business establishments unless flameproofed or
contained in the original manufacturer’s packaging.
Sec. 5-1208 Chimneys and Heating Appliances to be maintained in Safe Condition
1. Shall conform to NFPA 31
All chimneys; smokestacks or similar devices for conveying smoke or hot gases to the outer air in the stoves,
furnaces, fireboxes or boilers to which they are connected shall be constructed and maintained in such manner as not to
create a fire hazard. All chimneys must be 3’ above the highest point of the building and 2 feet above any part of the
building within 10 feet of such chimney.
312
Sec. 5-1209 Use of Torches or Flame-producing Devices for Removing Paint
Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for removing paint from any building or structure shall
provide one approved fire extinguisher or water hose connected to the water supply on the premises where such burning is
done. In all cases, the person doing the burning shall remain on the premises 1 hour after the torch or flame-producing
device has been used.
__________________
Historical Note: Article XII, Sec. 5-1201 & sec. 5-1207 as amended January 9, 2006
State Law References: 25 MRSA §2432 and §2436-A, 12 MRSA §9321 and §9325
ARTICLE XIII SMOKING PROHIBITED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS
Sec. 5-1301 Definition
“Smoking” shall mean and include the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any form. State of
Maine Law prohibits smoking in any public building.
Sec. 5-1302 Chief to Designate Area Where Smoking Shall be prohibited
Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas of piers, wharves, warehouses, stores,
industrial plants, institutions, places of assembly, and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored or handled,
the Chief of the Fire Department is empowered and authorized to order the owner or occupant in writing to post “No
Smoking” signs in each building, structure, room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall designate specific safe locations, if necessary in any building structure or place in which smoking may
be permitted.
Sec. 5-1303 No Smoking Signs
“No Smoking” signs required in accordance with Section 5-1302 shall read “By Order of the Chief of the Fire
Department”.
Sec. 5-1304 Smoking and Removal of No Smoking Signs Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any legally required “No Smoking” sign or to smoke in any place
where such signs are posted.
_______________________
State Law Reference: 25 MRSA §2433
ARTICLE XIV ADMINISTRATION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 5-1401 Enforcement
The Code Enforcement Officer, the Fire Chief or Designee shall enforce this code, hereby adopted.
Sec. 5-1402 Definition
Wherever the word “Municipality” is used in this Chapter, it shall be held to mean the City of Caribou.
Sec. 5-1403 Appeals
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer, with the advice of the Fire Chief, or the Fire Chief disapproves an
application or refuses to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions for the code do not
apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire Chief to the Board of Appeals or Superior Court within
30 days of the date of the decision.
313
Sec. 5-1404 Penalties
1. Fine; imprisonment. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Chapter or who shall violate or fail
to comply with any order made there under, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved there under, or any certificate or permit issued there under,
shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor more than twenty five hundred (2500.00)
or by imprisonment for not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. Some
violations will be considered a Class E Crime.
2. Abatement. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.
Sec. 5-1405 Validity
The City Council of the City of Caribou hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence or word of
this Chapter hereby adopted be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is the intent of the City Council that it would have
passed all other portions of this Chapter independent of the elimination here from of any such portion as may be declared
invalid.
___________________
Historical Note: Sections 5-101 to 5-1405 were originally Chapter 2 of the 1956 Caribou Code, as amended June 4, 1980
ARTICLE XV COMMERCIAL & PRIVATE BUILDING ACCESS LOCK BOXES
Sec 5-1501 Lock Box System
The City of Caribou, Caribou Fire and Ambulance Department, will use a lock box system of access to commercial &
private buildings chosen by the Fire Chief. Current provider is Easton Electronics, 4 Pequot Way, Canton, Ma 02021. No
other system will be used without the Fire Chief’s approval.
In certain cases, by order of the Fire Chief, these lock boxes will be required to be purchased and installed on building
by the owner. The keys to these boxes will be in each Police Cruiser and all Fire and Ambulance Vehicles. No other keys
will be permitted without Fire Chief’s approval.
Applications to purchase these lock boxes will be provided in the Fire Chief’s Office.
ARTICLE XVI
Sec. 5-1601 Adoption of Code
A certain document, one copy of which will be on file in the City of Caribou’s Code Enforcement Office and one
copy of which will be on file in the Fire Chief’s Office marked and designated as the Life Safety Code 101, 2006 Edition
as prepared and published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the safety code of the City of
Caribou regulating construction and storage activities in order to minimize danger to life resulting from fire, smoke,
fumes, panic, etc., providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees thereof; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such Life Safety Code 101, 2006 Edition, on file in the office of the Code
Enforcement and Fire Chief ,
Sec. 5-1602 Deletions, Additions, Insertions
______________
Historical Note: Adopted June 4, 1980
City of Caribou, Chapter 5 Fire Prevention – completely Revised and Adopted June 23, 2008; Article VI Fireworks
revised and adopted by the City Council on March 12, 2012.
State Law Reference: 30 MRSA §2156.
314
Chapter 6 Health and Sanitation
ARTICLE I WASTE DISPOSAL
Section
6-101 Permission to Deposit Fill Material
6-102 Within the Compact Area
6-103 On Public Property
6-104 Municipal Dump
6-105 Industrial Waste
6-106 Additional Penalty
ARTICLE II HAULING OF GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WASTE
6-201 Garbage, Refuse, Waste to be Covered When Hauled
6-202 License Necessary When Hauling for Hire
6-203 Designated Areas of Disposal
6-204 Separation of Materials
6-205 Suspension and License Revocation
6-206 Penalty
6-207 Severability
ARTICLE III OUTDOOR WOOD FIRED BOILERS
6-301 Statement of Purpose
6-302 Permit Required
6-303 Existing Outdoor Wood Fired Boilers
6-304 Specific Requirements
6-305 Penalty
6-306 Severability
ARTICLE IV PUBLIC INDECENCY ORDINANCE
6-401 Purpose and Authority
6-402 Definitions
6-403 Public Indecency Prohibited
6-404 Nursing Women
6-405 Certificate of Occupancy and License Required for Nude Entertainment
6-406 Penalties
6-407 Severability
365
Chapter 6 Health and Sanitation
ARTICLE I WASTE DISPOSAL
Sec. 6-101 Permission to Deposit Fill Material
Any person wishing to deposit or cause to be deposited, waste material for the purpose of
filling, must first obtain permission from the health officer to maintain a dump and be required at all
times to keep the surface in a clean condition. The applicant shall also secure all necessary State
permits.
Sec. 6-102 Within the Compact Area
It is unlawful to burn paper, garbage, leaves, clothing material and rubber material within the
State Highway Compact Area and within the City of Caribou Compact Area, as designated on the
urban zoning map, at any time of day or night.
Sec. 6-103 On Public Property
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, wood ashes, boxes or rubbish in any such street,
land, public square, or other public place in said City (except that any such material is intended for
removal, may stay thereon not over 24 hours, providing said rubbish or trash is properly contained so
as not to cause litter.)
Sec. 6-104 Municipal Dump
1. Designated areas. Refuse shall be deposited at the Tri-Community Sanitary Landfill only.
Sec. 6-105 Industrial Waste
No depositing of industrial wastes shall be allowed without a permit being obtained from the
Code Enforcement Officer. No dumping of industrial wastes shall be made in any area except at a
dumping place or places designated as such by the Caribou City Council, after review and
recommendations by the Caribou Planning Board.
Any person or firm after notification by the Code Enforcement Officer of any illegal dumping
must cease all or any dumping immediately. Any person or firm found in violation of the above shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 and not less than $300.00 for each offense. Each day
during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 6-106 Additional Penalty
In addition to any other penalties provided in this Article, any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this Article shall be liable to a penalty of from one dollar to one hundred dollars for
each offense, to be recovered for the use of the City, by complaint before the Caribou District Court.
367
Historical Note: Sections 6-101 and 6-106 were formerly Chapter 3 of the 1956 Caribou Code.
Section 6-103 was formerly Chapter 8, Article I of the 1956 Code. Section 6-102 was originally
adopted as an emergency ordinance on June 21, 1971 (effective July 1, 1971), adding section 111 to
Chapter 3; it was amended June 18, 1980. Sections 6-101, 6-104, and 6-105 were adopted or
amended June 4, 1980.
State Law References: 38 MRSA § 1304 et seq;30 MRSA § 4102.
Cross References: Chapter 13, Article I, Section 13-104(14); Chapter 5, Article XII.
ARTICLE II HAULING OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND WASTE
Sec. 6-201 Garbage, Refuse, Waste to be Covered When Hauled
No person shall transport waste paper, ashes or other refuse material, except when the
material is covered in such a manner that the refuse shall not be strewn along public ways. All
persons hauling or transporting waste paper, ashes and other refuse material for pay or hire shall, at
all times when hauling such waste paper, ashes or other refuse material, have such waste or refuse
material in a completely enclosed vehicle. Such vehicle shall have a box having a front, top, sides
and tailgate, which, when closed, shall render the waste or refuse material completely enclosed.
Sec. 6-202 License Necessary When Hauling For Hire
All persons hauling waste paper, ashes, or other refuse material for hire or pay in the City of
Caribou shall secure a license from the Municipal Officers for the ability to haul said refuse for
which they shall pay to the City Treasurer the sum of $25.00 per truck used to haul said refuse. Said
license holder shall make each vehicle, used to haul such refuse, available for inspection upon
request to any police officer of the City of Caribou for adherence to State vehicle inspections laws as
amended from time to time.
Sec. 6-203 Designated Areas of Disposal
When such a license is issued, such Solid Waste collected within the Township of Caribou
shall be deposited at the Tri-Community Landfill in accordance with the rules and regulations as set
forth at the time of deposit by the authority of said landfill. Any necessary deposit of materials not
accepted by the Tri-Community Landfill shall be as authorized by and in accordance with all State
and Federal Laws.
Sec. 6-204 Separation of Materials
Any licensed Solid Waste Collector as condition of it’s license shall perform all necessary
separation of material as mandated by the terms and conditions set forth in the Tri-Community
Recycling & Sanitary Landfill General Rules as amended from time to time.
368
Sec. 6-205 Suspension and License Revocation
Any licensed Solid Waste Collector who violates any provisions of Chapter 6 of the Caribou
Municipal Code may be subject to temporary suspension subject to the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines the violation(s) to be a serious
breech of this Chapter, revocations shall occur.
The Solid Waste Collector shall have the right to appeal the ruling of the Code Enforcement
Officer to the City Council. Such appeal must be filed within two business days after the date of the
CEO’s ruling. This meeting shall be public and may be subject to a notice of public hearing with a
minimum of seven days notice.
The City Council may affirm the Code Enforcement Officer’s ruling and/or penalty, or issue
a new ruling, which may include temporary suspension or permanent revocation of the license.
The City Council may refuse to grant or renew a Solid Waste Collectors License to an
applicant based upon past practices or violations of said Collector.
Sec. 6-206 Penalty
Any person, whether owner or agent of any vehicle, who shall violate any of the applicable
provisions of this Article, shall be liable to a penalty of up to $50.00 for each offense, to be recovered
for the use of the City upon complaint. Such a levy of monetary fines may be in conjunction with the
consideration of ruling of a temporary or permanent revocation of said license.
Sec. 6-207 Severability
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance be declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said Ordinance shall not be affected
thereby.
Historical Note: 1956 Code, Chapter 3, Article 2; as amended June 4, 1980; Chapter 6, Article 2 as
amended April 8, 2002; Section 6-202 as amended April 8, 2013.
State Law Reference: 17 MRSA §2261 et seq; 38 MRSA §1301 et seq.; Sec 6-203 Reference: 38
MRSA §1304-B et seq.; Sec 6-206 Reference: 17 MRSA §2261 et seq.
369
ARTICLE III OUTDOOR WOOD FIRED BOILERS
Sec. 6-301 Statement of Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure that outdoor wood fired boilers are operated in a
manner that limit particulate discharges, do not create a nuisance to neighbors, and protect members
of the community from harmful levels of smoke and other emissions.
Definition: Any equipment, device or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, or
situated outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a
component of a heating system providing heat for any interior space or exterior use.
Sec. 6-302 Permit Required
No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor wood fired boiler within the R-1, R-2,
R2A, RC-2, C1, C2 or H-1 Zones as defined by the Caribou Zoning Map. The installation of
outdoor wood fired boilers shall only be allowed in the R-3, R-4, I-1 & I-2 Zones as defined on the
Caribou Zoning map.
No outdoor wood fired boiler shall be installed within 150 feet of a property line.
No outdoor wood fired boiler shall be installed within 50 feet of any structure.
No installation shall be allowed without first obtaining a permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer. Application for such permit shall be made to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms
provided. All installations must comply with state, federal regulations and manufacturer's
installation instructions. All permit applications must include a copy of the manufacturer's
installation instructions. The permit fee shall be $100.00
Sec. 6-303 Existing Outdoor Wood Fired Boilers
Any outdoor wood fired boiler in existence, installed, and operating or operable on the
effective date of this ordinance shall be allowed to remain provided that the owner registers the
outdoor wood fired boiler within 60 days of the effective date of this ordinance with the Code
Enforcement Officer. There is no fee to register an existing outdoor wood fired boiler.
Any outdoor wood fired boiler found to be located within Caribou after the 60 day
registration period that is not registered may be ordered to be removed from Caribou by the City
Council.
Any outdoor wood fired boiler not located in the R-3, R-4, I-1 or I-2 zones may not be
replaced when found to be unsafe or beyond repair by the Code Enforcement Officer or a Maine
licensed mechanical engineer.
370
6-304 Specific Requirements
Only dry seasoned firewood and untreated lumber are permitted to be burned in an outdoor
wood fired boiler. Burning of any and all other materials in an outdoor wood fired boiler is
prohibited.
Particulate discharges shall be no greater than 27.4 grams per 100,000 British Thermal Units
per hour (BTU/h) as rated by a certified testing laboratory for outdoor wood fired boilers. Should the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) adopt a stricter emissions standard, that stricter standard shall be automatically considered as
adopted by this Code. The outdoor wood fired boiler shall be required to display a listing plate on
the unit that certifies that the unit is in compliance with the appropriate emissions standard, as
determined by a qualified testing facility using appropriate and applicable Underwriter Laboratories
standards.
6-305 Penalty
Any person, owner or operator of an outdoor wood fired boiler found to be in violation of this
ordinance may be charged and a civil action may be brought against them. Anyone violating this
ordinance may prosecuted pursuant to MRSA, Title 30-A, §4452. A minimum fine of $100.00 up to
$2,500.00 for each offense per day plus legal fees and court costs will be requested by the City of
Caribou.
6-306 Severability
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance be declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said ordinance shall not be affected
thereby.
Historical Note: Chapter 6, Article III was adopted on February 26, 2007.
371
Chapter 6 Health and Sanitation
Article IV
PUBLIC INDECENCY ORDINANCE
Sec. 6-401 Purpose and Authority
To prohibit certain acts of commercial exploitation of human sexuality within the City of Caribou in
order to reduce the likelihood of criminal activity, moral degradation, sexually transmitted diseases,
and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community which may occur when such
commercial exploitation is permitted in such places, and to protect the health, safety, welfare and
morals of the community by using the government’s recognized and traditional enforcement power
to protect societal order, morality, and physical and emotional health in public places without
infringing on protected First Amendment rights.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to municipal home rule authority, Title 30-A.M.R.S.A. 3001.
Sec. 6-402 Definitions
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions apply:
“Adult Entertainment Facility” means a public or private establishment, with or without a liquor
license, featuring nudity, strippers or similar entertainers for observation of by patrons.
“Nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less
than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering
of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
“Public Indecency” means the knowing or intentional commission of a “Sexual Act”, “Sexual
Contact”, “Sexual Touching” or “Nudity” in a public place.
“Public Place” means all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, and all buildings
and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including but not limited to commercial
or business establishments, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, public ways, schools,
government owned facilities, and the lobbies, hallways, and basement portions of apartment houses,
hotels, motels, public buildings and transportation terminals.
“Sexual Act” means: (1) Any act between 2 persons involving direct physical contact between the
genitals of one and the mouth or anus of the other, or direct physical contact between the genitals of
one and the genitals of the other; (2) Any act between a person and an animal being used by another
person which act involves direct physical contact between the genitals of one and the mouth or anus
of the other, or direct physical contact between the genitals of one and the genitals of the other; or (3)
Any act involving direct physical contact between the genitals or anus of one and an instrument or
device manipulated by another person when that act is done for the purpose of arousing or gratifying
sexual desire or for the purpose of causing bodily injury or offensive physical contact. A sexual act
may be proved without allegation or proof of penetration.
“Sexual Contact” means any touching of the genitals or anus, directly or through clothing, other than
as would constitute a sexual act, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire or for the
purpose of causing bodily injury or offensive physical contact.
372
“Sexual Touching” means any touching of the breasts, buttocks, groin or inner thigh, directly or
through clothing, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire.
Sec. 6-403 Public Indecency Prohibited
Engaging in public indecency is prohibited.
Engaging in or encouraging or permitting another person to engage in an act or acts of public
indecency by the person who or entity which owns, leases or otherwise controls a premises on which
the act or acts of public indecency occurs is also prohibited.
Sec. 6-404 Nursing Women
Notwithstanding any City ordinance to the contrary, this ordinance shall not prohibit, or be
interpreted or construed to prohibit or regulate, women from nursing or breast-feeding a child under
two (2) years of age in public or private.
Sec. 6-405 Certificate of Occupancy and License Required for Nude Entertainment
1. No commercial or private establishment within the City of Caribou shall operate an Adult
Entertainment Facility without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk and a Certificate of
Occupancy from the Code Enforcement Officer. The procedural requirements to obtain a License
and Certificate of Occupancy shall be as required in this section and in Sections 13-300 through 13-
307 for Site Design Review by the Planning Board. Applications for Site design Review may be
obtained from the Code Enforcement Office at City Hall.
2. No License or Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted for an Adult Entertainment Facility
unless the premises concerned is located in a commercial C-1 or C-2, industrial I-1 or I-2, residentialcommercial
RC-2, or the rural R-3 zone.
3. Set Back: No License or Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted for an Adult Entertainment
Facility if the premise concerned is located within 1000 feet of a public or private school, day care
facility, public playground, public park, place of worship or residential dwelling unit.
4. No License or Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted for an Adult Entertainment Facility
unless the premises concerned is equipped with changing rooms and toilet facilities for the
performers separate from any area accessible by the public.
5. Neither nudity nor nude dancing shall be permitted in any Adult Entertainment Facility. Any
exotic dancers or strippers or similar performers shall at a minimum wear a G-string and pasties
covering all of the nipple area. No dancers, performers, employees of an Adult Entertainment
Facility shall fondle, caress any patron or client. No patrons or clients shall fondle or caress any
dancers, performers or employees of an Adult Entertainment Facility.
6. No License or Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted for an Adult Entertainment Facility unless
the premises concerned is in complete compliance with the current Life Safety, Plumbing, Electrical,
Building and Zoning Codes.
7. The License and Certificate of Occupancy shall expire one (1) year after the date of issuance
thereof, unless terminated, suspended, or revoked prior thereto by the City Council for violation of
any part of this ordinance, after hearing by the city Council with reasonable written notice to the
applicant, given ten (10 ) days prior to the hearing date.
373
8. The license fee for each year issued under this ordinance shall be $500.00.
Sec. 6-406 Penalties
The violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of One Thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each offense upon conviction by District Court regardless of the time between offenses. Each act of
violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to such penalties, the City may enjoin or abate a violation of this ordinance by appropriate
action, and, if the court finds for the city, the city shall recover its costs of suit, including reasonable
experts’ fees, reasonable attorney’s fees, and reasonable investigative costs.
Sec. 6-407 Severability
If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this ordinance is for any reason, held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court or competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of
any other section, phrase, sentence, or portion thereof.
Historical Note: Article IV was adopted on May 14, 2007.
374
Chapter 7 Licenses and Permits
ARTICLE I TAXICAB LICENSES
Sections
7-101 Vehicles Used for Conveyance of Persons for Hire
7-102 Taxicab License Requirements
7-103 Parking Stand and License Issued
7-104 Driver of Taxicab Must Have License
7-105 Requirements for Taxicab Driver’s License
7-106 Identification Card and Revocation
7-107 Rates
7-108 Inspection by Police Chief
7-109 Violation of Highway Laws Reason for Revocation
7-110 License May be Revoked for Cause
7-111 Penalties
ARTICLE II DEALERS IN JUNK, SECOND HAND ARTICLES, AND PAWN BROKERS
7-201 License Required
ARTICLE III PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS
7-301 License Required
7-302 Application; Revocation
7-303 Private Residences
7-304 Penalty
ARTICLE IV COMMERCIAL RUBBISH HAULERS
ARTICLE VI LUNCH WAGONS
ARTICLE VII AUTOMOBILE JUNKYARDS
7-701 License Required
7-702 Planning Board Approval
7-703 Screening
7-704 State Law
419
ARTICLE VIII SPECIAL AMUSEMENT PERMITS
Section
7-801 Title
7-802 Purpose
7-803 Definitions
7-804 Permit Required
7-805 Suspension or Revocation of a Permit
7-806 Rules and Regulations
7-807 Permit and Appeal Procedures
7-808 Admission
7-809 Penalty
7-810 Separability
ARTICLE IX STREET AND ROAD ACCESS PERMIT
ARTICLE X OPENING PERMIT
ARTICLE XI REGISTERED NONPROFIT DISPENSARIES AND REGISTERED
CULTIVATION FACILITIES
Section
7-1101 Purpose
7-1102 Permit Required
7-1103 Suspension of Revocation of a Permit
7-1104 Rules and Regulations
7-1105 Permit and Appeal Procedures
7-1106 Penalty
7-1107 Separability
ARTICLE XII LICENSES FOR THE SALE OF LIQUOR
Section
7-1201 Purpose
7-1202 Permit Required
7-1203 Suspension of Revocation of a Permit
7-1204 Permit and Appeal Procedures
7-1205 Penalty
7-1206 Separability
420
ARTICLE I TAXICAB LICENSES
Sec. 7-101 Vehicles Used for Conveyance of Persons for Hire
Every motor vehicle used or to be used for the conveyance of persons for hire upon the streets in
the City of Caribou shall be deemed a taxicab within the meaning of this Article, except a motor vehicle
subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Maine, and motor vehicles
collecting fares by tickets or coupons sold for interstate transportation. All vehicles accepted shall be
granted special license in such form and on such conditions as the City Manager or designee may
determine, and such license may be revoked for failure to comply with all pertinent laws and regulations.
Historical Note: Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-102 Taxicab License Requirements
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated a taxicab unless licensed as
herein provided. Application for licensure shall be made on forms provided by the City and shall set forth
the name and address of the applicant, the trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do
business; where proposed offices and garages are to be located; the number of vehicles the applicant
desires to operate, with a clear description of each vehicle, insurance coverage, and such other facts as the
City may require for determining compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
Historical Note: Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-103 Parking Stand and License Issued
A license fee shall be $40.00 yearly for each taxicab. The City administration may designate a taxi
stand or stands, upon request by the taxicab owner for each licensed taxicab, and after the designation, no
vehicle shall park in that stand or stands except the taxicab for which that stand or stands is/are designated.
No taxicab shall remain standing on any street on which parking meters are installed along side or next to
any parking meter, except while serving passengers.
Historical Note: Amended April 8, 2013; Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-104 Driver of Taxicab Must Have License
No person shall drive or operate a taxicab unless duly licensed as a taxicab driver as required by
Section 7-105 of this Article.
Sec. 7-105 Requirements for Taxicab Drivers’ License
Application for a license to drive a taxicab shall be made on forms furnished by the City and shall
set forth under oath such information as the City may require. Such licenses shall be signed by the City
Clerk, shall be numbered in order granted and, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall continue in force
until the first day of May next after the date thereof. The fee for such license shall be $10.00. No such
license shall be granted to any person unless he/she shall present a valid license to operate motor vehicles
issued to him/her by the State, nor unless he/she shall have attained the age of twenty one years.
Historical Note: Amended April 8, 2013; Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
421
Sec. 7-106 Identification Card and Revocation
Upon issuance of a license to any taxicab driver, the City Clerk shall deliver to the licensee an
identification card setting for the number and terms of the license, the name of the licensee, together with
their signature and a photograph of themselves of such size as the City Clerk may require. Two such
photographs shall be provided by the applicant for license at his own expense. The identification card
above described shall be displayed so that it may be plainly seen by the passenger in each cab, which such
licensed driver operates. Failure to comply with the terms of this Section shall be grounds for the
revocation of the taxicab driver’s license; and operation of cabs by any person, firm or corporation, the
drivers of which do not comply with the terms of this Article, shall be grounds for the revocation of the
license of such person, firm or corporation.
Sec. 7-107 Rates
No owner or operator of a vehicle for hire business shall charge any passenger any rate for service
in excess of the rates posted with the City Clerk. The owner or operator of a vehicle for hire shall provide,
in writing a list of the maximum rates to be charged for any services. Rates that are provided to the City
Clerk will be listed on a Taxi License by the City Clerk. The Taxi License, on which the above rates are
clearly written shall be conspicuously displayed in the specific taxi that is being licensed, so it can be seen
by a passenger day or night.
Failure to so display such license or demanding any amounts in excess of the rates disclosed to the
City Clerk shall be grounds for revoking the license, both of the driver of the taxicab and the person, firm
or corporation operating such cab.
Sec. 7-108 Inspection by Police Chief
Every person operating a taxicab shall present such taxicab to the Chief of Police for inspection
whenever the Chief of Police may require it.
Sec. 7-109 Violation of Highway Laws Reason for Revocation
Violation of any of the highway laws of the State of Maine or of the Articles of the City of Caribou
regulating traffic shall be grounds for the revocation of license, both of the driver of the taxicab and the
person, firm or corporation operating such taxicab, after notice and hearing.
Sec. 7-110 License May be Revoked for Cause
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Council at any time after notice and a hearing
in the event that any licensee or any employee of a licensee: (a) knowingly furnishes, or delivers liquor for
or to a minor while utilizing a licensed taxicab; or (b) is convicted of a violation of Title 28-A M.R.S.A.
Section 2081 while utilizing a licensed taxicab; or (c) any other cause which is detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare.
Sec. 7-111 Penalties
In addition to any other penalties provided in this Article, whoever violates any of the provisions
of this Article shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding $150.00 for each offense, to be recovered for the
use of the City , by complaint before the Caribou District Court.
Historical Note: Chapter 5, 1956 Caribou Code; as amended, December 17, 1973, April 2, 1980, June 4, 1980, April 2, 1984,
October 23, 2000, Article 1, Section 7-110 amended June 10, 2002.
State Law Reference: 35 MRSA §§1501-1518; 35 MRSA §§1641-1646.
422
ARTICLE II DEALERS IN JUNK, SECOND HAND ARTICLES, AND PAWN BROKERS
Sec. 7-201 Licensed Required
All dealers in junk and second hand articles, and pawn brokers, before doing any business in the
City of Caribou shall secure a license from the City Manager or designee. They shall pay to the Treasurer
of the City, the sum of $25.00, for the use of the City and shall give the City a good and sufficient bond
which shall be approved by the City, in the sum of $300.00, conditioned to perform all duties pertaining to
their business. Dealers shall keep records of all goods brought and the date of sale and the name of the
seller. These records shall be open at all times for the inspection of any police officer, deputy sheriff,
constable or other properly designated city officials.
Historical Note: Chapter 5, 1956 Caribou Code; amended June 4, 1980; Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9,
2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Cross Reference: Chapter 13, Zoning, Section 13-700 (38) Establishments dealing in the consignment or resale of used
personal property
State Law Reference: 30 MRSA §3051, 30 MRSA §3151-3155, 30 MRSA §2151(5).
ARTICLE III PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS
Sec. 7-301 Licensed Required
It shall be unlawful for any person in his own behalf or as agent or servant of any other person,
firm or corporation, to engage in the business of hawking and peddling goods, wares and merchandise at
retail, within the limits of the City of Caribou without first obtaining a license from the City of Caribou,
excepting in the following classes: commercial agents or other persons selling by lists, catalogues or
otherwise, goods or wares or merchandise for future delivery, persons selling fish, persons selling farm,
dairy or orchard products of their own production, persons selling bark, wood or forest products, and
persons selling newspapers or religious literature. No vendor will be allowed to sell at curb side on any
City street. Street vending shall be defined as the business of selling of goods, wares and/or services.
Historical Note: Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-302 Application; Revocation
Licenses for hawkers and peddlers under this Article may be issued by the City upon proper
application in writing therefore, and upon payment of a license fee of $25.00. Such license shall be valid
for the thirty days next following the issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked, after notice and hearing, for
good and sufficient cause in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare.
Historical Note: Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-303 Private Residences
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the City of Caribou by such hawkers and
peddlers, whether licensed or not, and not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or
owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences, for the purpose of peddling and hawking goods,
wares, and merchandise at retail, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a violation of this Article.
423
Sec. 7-304 Penalty
Any person, in his own behalf or as agent or servant of any other person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this Article shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not more than
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
Historical Note: Chapter 5, 1956 Caribou Code; as amended June 4, 1980, Sec. 7-301 amended June 24, 1999.
State Law Reference: 32 MRSA §§4681-4689; 30 MRSA §2151(5).
ARTICLE IV COMMERCIAL RUBBISH HAULERS
Any person engaged in the business of collection or disposal of garbage or rubbish in the compact
area must apply for a license as provided in Chapter 6, Article III, Section 6-202.
Historical Note: Article V Itinerant Photographers adopted June 4, 1980; Article V Itinerant Photographers deleted by
Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
ARTICLE VI LUNCH WAGONS
The City may issue a license to any reputable person to maintain a vehicle for the sale of food in
the public way, pursuant to 30 MRSA §3101. The annual license fee shall be $10.00. Any person who
operates without a license required by this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100 for
each offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Historical Note: adopted June 4, 1980; Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
ARTICLE VII AUTOMOBILE JUNKYARDS
Sec. 7-701 License Required
No automobile junkyard shall be established, operated, or maintained, without first obtaining a
nontransferable license to do so from the City, which license shall be valid only until January 1 of the
following year.
Historical Note: adopted June 4, 1980; Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-702 Planning Board Approval
A license for the establishment of an automobile junkyard shall not be issued by the City until the
proposed location of such junkyard shall have been approved under this Article by the Planning Board and
unless the application for such license is accompanied by a certificate from the Board stating it’s approval
of such location and setting forth such special requirements for fencing, screening, setback, etc. as the
Board my deem necessary as a condition of its approval in order to adequately serve the public health and
welfare, and to protect the appearance of the area.
Historical Note: Adopted June 4, 1980; Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
424
Sec. 7-703 Screening
Any area to be occupied by junk automobiles or parts thereof shall be kept entirely screened to
view from highways and streets, residences, and from any place of public assembly or recreation by
natural objects or well constructed and properly maintained fences at least six feet high. Applicants shall
submit drawings or written specifications for the fencing or screening to be approved by the Planning
Board. Applicants shall provide appropriate bonds or other financial guarantees to the City for installation
of any required fencing or Planning Board conditioned site improvements before issuance of a license by
the City. Failure to install required improvements within six months from the date of issuance of the
license shall constitute a violation of this Article and shall be punishable by law and/or forfeiture of
financial guarantees.
Historical Note: adopted June 4, 1980; Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-704 State Law
All other pertinent provisions of the State Law on Automobile Junk Yards, Chapter 215, Title 30
Revised Statutes of Maine, as amended, shall be observed.
Historical Note: formerly Section 104.17 of the Zoning ordinance, Chapter 10 of the 1956 Caribou Code; amended June 4,
1980.
ARTICLE VIII SPECIAL AMUSEMENT PERMITS
Sec. 7-801 Title
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the Special Amusement Article of the City of
Caribou, Maine.
Sec. 7-802 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to control the issuance of special permits for music, dancing or
entertainment in facilities licensed by the State of Maine to sell liquor as required by 28 MRSA §702.
Sec. 7-803 Definitions
1. Entertainment. For the purposes of this Article, “entertainment” shall include any
amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion for patrons or customers of the license premises whether
provided by professional entertainers or by full time or part time employees of the licensed premises
whose incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value.
2. Licensee. For purposes of this Section, “licensee” shall include the holder of a license
issued under the Alcoholic Beverages Statutes of the State of Maine, or any person, individual,
partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity, or any agent, or employee of any such
licensee.
Sec. 7-804 Permit Required
1. Music, dancing and entertainment. No licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on his
licensed premises shall permit, on his licensed premises, any music, except radio or other
mechanical device, any dancing or entertainment of any sort unless the licensee shall have first
obtained from the City a special amusement permit.
425
2. Application for permit. Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing
to the City and shall state: the name of the applicant; his residence address; the name of the
business to be conducted; his business address; the nature of his business; the location to be
used; whether the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the business therein described
either denied or revoked and, if so, the applicant shall describe those circumstances specifically;
whether the applicant, including all partners or corporate officers, has ever been convicted of a
felony, and, if so, the applicant shall describe specifically those circumstances; and any
additional information as may be needed by the City in the issuing of the permit, including but
not limited to a copy of the applicant’s current liquor license.
3. Compliance with all local laws. No permit shall be issued for any thing, or act, or premises, if
the premises and building to be used for the licensed purposes do not fully comply with all
ordinances, articles, bylaws, or rules and regulations of the municipality.
4. Fee. The fee for a special amusement permit shall be $30.00, plus publication costs.
5. Public hearing. The City Council shall, prior to granting an initial permit and after reasonable
notice to the municipality and the applicant, hold a public hearing within 15 days of the date of
the request was received, at which the testimony of the applicant and that of any interested
members of the public shall be taken. Renewals of permits do not need a public hearing and
may be authorized by the City Manager.
6. Factors in issuing permit. The municipal officers shall grant a permit unless they find that
issuance of the permit will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or would
violate municipal ordinances, or rules and regulations, articles, or bylaws.
7. Term of license. A permit shall be valid only for the license year of the applicant’s existing
liquor license.
Historical Note: Sec. 7-804(4) as amended April 8, 2013; Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018;
effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-805 Suspension or Revocation of a Permit
The City may suspend or revoke any special amusement permits which have been issued under this
Article on the grounds that the music, dancing, or entertainment so permitted constitutes a detriment to the
public health, safety, or welfare, or violates any municipal ordinances, articles, bylaws, or rules and
regulations.
Historical Note: Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-806 Rules and Regulations
The City Manager or designees are hereby authorized to establish written rules and regulations
governing the issuance, suspension and revocation of special amusement permits. These rules and
regulations may specifically determine the location and size of permitted premises, the facilities that may
be required for the permitted activities on those premises, and the hours during which the permitted
activities are permitted.
Historical Note: Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
426
Sec. 7-807 Permit and Appeal Procedures
1. Notice of decision. Any licensee requesting a special amusement permit from the City shall be
notified in writing of the City’s decision no later than fifteen (15) days from the date of decision. In the
event that a licensee is denied a permit, the licensee shall be provided with the reasons for the denial in
writing. The licensee may not reapply for a permit on the same premises within 30 days after an
application for a permit which has been denied.
2. Appeal. Any licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied, or whose permit has been
revoked or suspended, may, within 30 days of the denial, suspension or revocation, appeal the decision to
the municipal board of appeals as defined in 30 MRSA §2411. The municipal board of appeals may grant
or reinstate the permit if it finds that the permitted activities would not constitute a detriment to the public
health, safety or welfare, or that the denial, revocation or suspension was arbitrary or capricious, or that
the denial, revocation, or suspension was not based by a preponderance of the evidence on a violation of
any ordinance, article, bylaw, or rule or regulation of the municipality.
Historical Note: Amended by Ordinance No. 2, 2018 Series on April 9, 2018; effective May 9, 2018.
Sec. 7-808 Admission
A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern or restaurant malt liquor licensee who has
been issued a special amusement permit may charge admission in designated areas approved by the
municipal special amusement permit.
Sec. 7-809 Penalty
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than
Fifty Dollars ($50) for the first offense, and up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) for subsequent offenses,
to be recovered, on complaint, to the use of the City of Caribou.
Sec 7-810 Separability
The invalidity of any provision of this Article shall not invalidate any other part.
Historical Note: Originally effective on July 1, 1978; amended June 4, 1980.
Cross Reference: Chapter 13, Art. I, Sec. 13-107.
ARTICLE IX STREET AND ROAD ACCESS PERMIT
Whenever an additional access is desired to a city road or street, the requesting property owner
shall obtain an access permit from the Caribou Public Works Department. No new additional road or
street connection shall be allowed without such a permit.
The permit application shall state how proper roadside drainage will be maintained, whether
through a driveway depression, a culvert, or through a subsurface drainage system. If a culvert is deemed
appropriate, the size of the culvert, both in diameter and in length, will be listed. The drainage system,
including whether or not a culvert is required and the size of the culvert, shall be subject to approval by
the Public Works Director, or his designee.
Whenever a property owner requests a new culvert that is approved by the city, the city shall
install it. The property owner shall agree to pay the cost of the culvert and the cost of installation,
including labor and equipment. Upon request, the City Public Works Department shall provide an
advance estimate of cost of the culvert and its installation. Once the culvert is installed, the city shall be
responsible for maintaining the culvert, including replacement.
427
Failure to comply with this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty of $50.00 for each offense.
Historical Note: Adopted May 11, 1987.
Cross Reference: Similar provisions, Section 11-403.
ARTICLE X OPENING PERMIT
Any person required to excavate or in any way interfere with the surface or sub-surface of any
public way must, through a recognized qualified contractor, apply for an opening permit with the Director
of Public Works. Permittees’ are required to comply with written “Conditions Applicable to Opening
Permits on Public Ways”, as determined and updated periodically by the City Manager and Public Works
Director, and provide evidence of Liability Insurance of not less than $300,000. The “Opening Permit”
must be retained by the permittee and posted at the work site for inspection by City Officials. Permittees’
violating the terms of this ordinance will be subject to the cost of repairing the excavation plus 50%.
Additional permits will not be granted if the applicant has other opening permits that remain open and out
of compliance with the terms of this ordinance.
Historical Note: Chapter 7, Article XI was adopted May 27, 1997.
Cross Reference: Similar provisions, 11-404.
ARTICLE XI REGISTERED NONPROFIT DISPENSARIES
AND REGISTERED CULTIVATION FACILITIES
Section 1101 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to control the issuance of a permit to operate either a Registered
Nonprofit Dispensary or Registered Cultivation Facility as may be permitted by the State of Maine and the
Caribou Planning Board.
Section 1102 Permit Required
1. Operation of a Registered Nonprofit Dispensary or Registered Cultivation Facility: No Permit or
renewal of a Permit may be issued unless the facility is permitted by the State of Maine
Department of Health and Human Services and the Caribou Planning Board to be eligible for a
Certificate of Occupancy. No facility shall conduct business within the limits of Caribou without
first securing a permit from the Municipal Officers of the City of Caribou.
2. Applications for permit: Applications for a permit shall be made in writing to the Municipal
Officers through the City Clerk’s Office and shall state:
a. The name of the Nonprofit
b. Location and type of Facility
c. State License Number
d. Copy of complete State of Maine DHHS Application establishing the Nonprofit
3. Compliance with all laws: No permit shall be issued unless the Applicant can prove full
compliance with all applicable State and Local Ordinances pertaining to the type, operation, and
location of the facility or mobile unit to be permitted.
428
4. Fee: A fee of $500 per location of either a Registered Nonprofit Dispensary or Registered
Cultivation Facility shall apply for first time and renewal applications to provide for the cost of
advertising, notices to abutters, compliancy checks, and use of administrative time to process.
5. Public Hearing: The Municipal Officers shall, prior to granting any permit new or annual renewal,
provide for not less than 7 days notice of a public hearing, within 30 days upon the receipt of the
application, to receive written and verbal testimony from the applicant and interested members of
the public pursuant to the granting of a permit.
6. Factors in issuing permit: In granting or denying an application, the Municipal Officers shall
indicate the reasons for their decision and provide a copy to the applicant. A license may be denied
on one or more of the following grounds:
A. Conviction of the Applicant of any Class A, Class B, or Class C crime;
B. Noncompliance of the licensed Dispensary or Cultivation Facility or its use with any local
zoning ordinance or land use ordinance;
C. Conditions of record such as waste disposal violations, health or safety violations or
repeated parking or traffic violations on or in the vicinity of the licensed premises and
caused by persons patronizing or employed by the licensed premises or other such
conditions caused by persons patronizing or employed by the licensed premises that
unreasonably disturb, interfere with, or affect the ability of persons or businesses residing
or located in the vicinity of the licensed premises to use their property in a reasonable
manner;
D. Repeated incidents of record of breaches of the peace, disorderly conduct, vandalism or
other violations of law on or in the vicinity of the licensed premises and caused by persons
patronizing or employed by the licensed premises;
E. Any violation of State Law or Caribou Code directly related to the operation under the
provisions of law of the Registered Nonprofit Dispensary or Registered Cultivation
Facility.
7. Term of License: A permit shall be valid for only one (1) year from the date of first issuance and
shall be subject to meeting all requirements as set forth in this Chapter for subsequent renewal.
8. Annually, within 30 days prior to the license renewal date; the dispensary shall be inspected by
Code Enforcement, Fire Chief and Police Chief to insure that the dispensary is in compliance for
Zoning, Fire Safety and Security requirements.
Section 1103 Suspension of Revocation of a Permit
The Municipal Officers may, after public hearing preceded by notice to the Applicant and
interested parties, suspend, or revoke any permit issued for the operations of either a Registered Nonprofit
Dispensary or Registered Cultivation Facility, which have been issued under this Article, on the grounds
that the continued operations of the facility would constitute a detriment to the public health, safety, or
welfare, or violates any municipal ordinances, articles, bylaws, or rules and regulations.
Section 1104 Rules and Regulations
The Municipal Officers are hereby authorized, after public notice and hearing, to establish written
rules and regulations governing the issuance, suspension and revocation of Registered Nonprofit
Dispensaries or Registered Cultivation Facilities permits and other limitations of these operations required
429
to protect the public health, safety and welfare. These rules and regulations may specifically amend the
determination of the location and size of permitted premises, the hours during which the permitted
activities are permitted, or other operational considerations that would otherwise impact the public’s
wellbeing.
Section 1105 Permit and Appeal Procedures
1. Notice of decision. Any Licensee requesting either a Registered Nonprofit Dispensaries or
Registered Cultivation Facilities permit from the Municipal Officers shall be notified in writing of their
decision no later than fifteen (15) days from the date the request was received by the City Clerk. In the
event that a Licensee is denied a permit, the Licensee shall be provided with the reasons for the denial in
writing. The Licensee may not reapply for a permit within 30 days after an application for a permit which
has been denied.
2. Appeal. Any Licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied, or whose permit has
been revoked or suspended, may, within 30 days of the denial, suspension or revocation, appeal the
decision to the Municipal Board of Appeals as defined in 30 MRSA §2411. The Municipal Board of
Appeals may grant or reinstate the permit if it finds that the permitted activities would not constitute a
detriment to the public health, safety or welfare, or that the denial, revocation or suspension was arbitrary
or capricious, or that the denial, revocation, or suspension was not based by a preponderance of the
evidence on a violation of any ordinance, article, bylaw, or rule or regulation of the municipality.
Section 1106 Penalty
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than
One Hundred ($100) for the first offense, and up to Twenty-five Hundred Dollars ($2,500) for subsequent
offenses, to be recovered, on complaint, to the use of the City of Caribou. Penalties are set pursuant to
Title 30-A MRSA §4452, 3 Civil Penalties, paragraph B, the minimum penalty for a specific violation is
$100.00, and the maximum penalty is $2,500.00.
Section 1107 Separability
The invalidity of any provision of this Article shall not invalidate any other part.
Historical Note: Article XI was adopted on October 25, 2010.
ARTICLE XII LICENSES FOR THE SALE OF LIQUOR
Section 1201 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to set forth the application process for Licensed Establishments
meaning premises to which a license for the sale of spirits, wine or malt liquor to be consumed on or off
the licensed premises applies, and any person or organization which is licensed to sell spirits, wine or malt
liquor in the times, places and manners as specified in the license, pursuant to Title 28-A MRSA Chapter
27 as may be permitted by the State of Maine.
Section 1202 Permit Required
1. Operation of a Licensed Establishment: No license or renewal of a license may be subsequently
issued by the State unless the municipal officers have first approved the application for State
license as set forth.
430
2. Applications for permit: Applications for a liquor license shall be made in writing on forms
provided by the Department of Public Safety Bureau, to the municipal officers through the City
Clerk’s Office and shall be complete as will be submitted to Bureau.
3. Compliance with all laws: No license shall be issued unless the Applicant can demonstrate full
compliance with all applicable State and Local Ordinances pertaining to the type, operation, and
location of the Licensed Establishment to be permitted.
4. Fee: A fee of $10 plus applicable publication costs or notice to abutters if a public hearing is
required for the initial issuance or renewal of the liquor license
5. Public Hearing: The City Clerk shall provide public notice of a public hearing at the applicant's
prepaid expense, stating the name and place of hearing, to appear on at least 3 consecutive days
before the date of hearing in a daily newspaper having general circulation in the municipality or
one week before the date of the hearing in a weekly newspaper having general circulation in the
municipality and by posting. The municipal officers may provide for a public hearing at the
applicant’s prepaid expense, as above, if there is cause to question the past operation under the
license being applied for renewal, or if the application is a change in category. The applicant may
request a waiver of the public hearing if the applicant has held a license for the prior 5 years and a
complaint or violation has not been filed against the applicant within that time period.
6. Factors in issuing permit: In granting or denying an application, the municipal officers shall
indicate the reasons for their decision and provide a copy to the applicant. A license may be denied
on one or more of the following grounds:
a. Conviction of the Applicant of any Class A, Class B, or Class C crime;
b. Noncompliance of the licensed premise or its use with any local zoning ordinance or land
use ordinance not directly related to liquor control;
c. Conditions of record such as waste disposal violations, health or safety violations or
repeated parking or traffic violations on or in the vicinity of the licensed premises and
caused by persons patronizing or employed by the licensed premises or other such
conditions caused by persons patronizing or employed by the licensed premises that
unreasonably disturb, interfere with, or affect the ability of persons or businesses residing
or located in the vicinity of the licensed premises to use their property in a reasonable
manner;
d. Repeated incidents of record of breaches of the peace, disorderly conduct, vandalism or
other violations of law on or in the vicinity of the licensed premises and caused by persons
patronizing or employed by the licensed premises;
e. Any violation of State Law or Caribou Code directly related to the operation under the
provisions of law of the licensed premise.
f. A determination by the municipal officers that the purpose of the application is to
circumvent the provisions of Title 28-A MRSA Section 601;
g. Additional factors which may be considered: (1) character of any applicant; (2) location of
the business; (3) manner in which the business has been operated and (4) whether the
operation has endangered the safety of persons in or on areas surrounding the place of
business.
431
7. Term of License: A permit shall be valid for only one (1) year from the date of first issuance and
shall be subject to meeting all requirements as set forth in this Chapter for subsequent renewal.
8. Annually, the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement, and Fire Chief shall report to the municipal
officers any findings that may impact the decision to renew pursuant to Section 6 the continued
operations of the licensed premise
Section 1203 Suspension of Revocation of a Permit
The municipal officers may, after public hearing preceded by notice to the Applicant and interested
parties, suspend, or revoke any permit issued for the operations of the licensed premise, which has been
issued under this Article, on the grounds that the continued operations of the facility would constitute a
detriment to the public health, safety, or welfare, or violates any municipal ordinances, articles, bylaws, or
rules and regulations.
Section 1204 Permit and Appeal Procedures
1. Notice of decision. Any Licensee requesting either a liquor license from the municipal officers
shall be notified in writing of their decision no later than fifteen (15) days from the date the
request was received by the City Clerk. In the event that a Licensee is denied a liquor license,
the Licensee shall be provided with the reasons for the denial in writing. The Licensee may
not reapply for a permit within 30 days after an application for a permit which has been denied.
2. Appeal. Any Licensee who has requested a liquor license and has been denied, or whose liquor
license has been revoked or suspended, may, within 15 days of the receipt of the written
decision of municipal officers, appeal the decision to the Bureau of Liquor Enforcement.
Section 1205 Penalty
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than
One Hundred ($100) for the first offense, and up to Twenty-five Hundred Dollars ($2,500) for subsequent
offenses, to be recovered, on complaint, to the use of the City of Caribou. Penalties are set pursuant to
Title 30-A MRSA §4452, 3 Civil Penalties, paragraph B, the minimum penalty for a specific violation is
$100.00, and the maximum penalty is $2,500.00.
Section 1206 Separability
The invalidity of any provision of this Article shall not invalidate any other part.
Historical Note: Article XII adopted by City Council May 9, 2011.
432
Chapter 8
Miscellaneous Offenses
ARTICLE 1 LOITERING
Section
8-101 Loitering Prohibited
8-101.1 Loitering or Trespassing on Public Parking Lots
8-101.2 Loitering or Trespassing in any City Park or Playground
8-102 Definitions
8-103 Police Order to Disperse
8-104 Penalty
8-105 Drug Free Safe Zones
ARTICLE II FIREARMS
ARTICLE III CURFEW
ARTICLE IV FALSE BANK AND BURGLAR ALARMS
ARTICLE V NUISANCE PROPERTY ORDINANCE
479
Chapter 8
Miscellaneous Offenses
ARTICLE 1 LOITERING
Sec. 8-101 Loitering prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either
alone, and/or in consort with others in a public place in such manner as to:
1. Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place
or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and
uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrian; or
2. Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other
public place or building any act or thing whish is an obstruction or interference to the
free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by
anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway,
public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free
and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon and thereto.
Sec. 8-101.1 Loitering or Trespassing on Public Parking Lots
There shall be no loitering or trespassing in all public parking lots between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. except for parking vehicles or removing the same. Violators will be
prosecuted under Maine Criminal code 17A, Sec. 402.
Sec 8-101.2 Loitering or Trespassing in any City Park or Playground
There shall be no Loitering or Trespassing in any City Park or Playground between the
hours of 9 p.m. through 6 a.m. excepting Teague Park where, beginning Memorial Day and
continuing to Labor Day there will be no loitering nor trespassing between 10 p.m. and 5 a.m.
Activities sanctioned at any City Park or Playground by the Superintendent of Parks and
Recreation are exempt from this ordinance. Violators will be prosecuted under Maine Criminal
Code 17A, Sec. 402.
Sec. 8-102 Definitions
As used in this Article:
1. Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include
the concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to
stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression “hanging around”.
2. Public place shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a
right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not
necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the
front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business
and also public grounds, areas or parks.
481
Sec. 8-103 Police Order to Disperse
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in section 8-101, a
police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or
committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey
such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this Article.
Sec. 8-104 Penalty
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $100 dollars.
Sec. 8-105 Drug Free Safe Zones
All public athletic fields, parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities under the
jurisdiction of the City of Caribou shall be designated as Drug Free Safe Zones in accordance
with the State of Maine Title 17-A §1101(23). Any subject apprehended dealing drugs within
1,000 feet of any designated Drug Free Safe Zone shall be subject to enhanced penalties (17-A
MRSA Chapter 45, Section E).
Historical Note: formerly section 106 of Chapter 8, 1956 Code; amended August 28, 1988.
Section 8-101.2 as amended December 12, 2005; Section 8-105 adopted January 23, 2006.
State Law Reference: 17-A MRSA §§501, 502, 503, 504, 505 and 30-A MRSA §3253.
ARTICLE II FIREARMS
No person or persons, except police or other public officers in the line of duty, shall
discharge any firearms, or other explosive material of any kind, within the city limits of Caribou,
except when authorized by the City Council.
Historical Note: Chapter 8, Article I, 1956 Code; amended June 4, 1980.
State Law Reference: 25 MRSA §2031.
ARTICLE III CURFEW
No person or persons shall be in the public area of the Downtown mall from 9:00 pm to
6:00 am. This area includes the walkway from the southern parking lot to the telephone booth at
the northern end, and the walkway form the corners of the Northern National Bank and Wyman’s
Store on Record Street to the westerly end of the canopy at he point immediately West of the
night deposit box on the Aroostook Trust Company Building. Anyone in the area without
authorization from the Caribou Police Department shall be prosecuted under Maine Criminal
Code 17A, § 402. Wording of the signs shall be left to the discretion of the Chief of Police and
the District Attorney’s Office.
Historical Note: Adopted May 21, 1980.
482
ARTICLE IV FALSE SECURITY ALARMS
The following fees shall be charged for response to false alarms for any business, private
residence, commercial, or public facility whose alarm systems are connected directly, by second
party notification, or automated systems to the Caribou Police or Fire and Ambulance
Departments for response. If, upon responding, the Caribou Police Department determines the
alarm was a false alarm, then the fees shall apply. Alarm systems may be tested with prior
notification to the Police Department without cause for charge.
False Alarms (per Year)
3 No Charge
After 3 $25.00 each
Historical Note: adopted May 8, 1989; Amended October 25, 2010
ARTICLE V NUISANCE PROPERTY ORDINANCE
501. Purpose; Legislative Findings.
The purpose of this Nuisance Property Ordinance is to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the City of Caribou by reducing the recurrence of nuisance conduct in
dwellings that disturbs the peace and tranquility of others. The City has a substantial and
compelling interest in protecting neighborhoods affected by conduct that unlawfully disturbs the
peace and/or constitutes a nuisance, because such conduct adversely affects the health, safety,
and welfare of residents, and diminishes the quality of life in neighborhoods where it occurs.
Such nuisance conduct, and its impact, should be abated. This Nuisance Property Ordinance is
required because other prohibitions and penalties under state law and the City Code have not
adequately eliminated or controlled chronic, disorderly or nuisance activity in the City. The
enactment of this ordinance is intended to alleviate the deleterious impact of chronic, unlawful or
nuisance activity in dwelling places and neighborhoods by authorizing early and constructive
intervention by the City’s Police Department. The goal of the City of Caribou is to provide a
framework for property owners and the City to work collaboratively to address nuisance issues in
the community.
502. Definitions.
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms have the following meanings:
“Authorized agent” means the person or entity identified by the Owner as the Owner’s
authorized agent in the Caribou Property Management Designation Form on file with the City of
Caribou.
"Chronic nuisance property" means any property at which five (5) or more nuisance
activities have occurred in any sixty (60) day period, or ten (10) or more nuisance activities have
occurred in any one (1) year period.
483
“Hotel”, “bed & breakfast”, “rooming house” and “apartment building” shall have the
same meanings as set forth in the Caribou Code.
“Nuisance activity” or “Nuisance conduct” meansa)
any activity which constitutes a crime or civil infraction under either federal, state or
local law;
b) illegal sale, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages;
c) disorderly conduct as defined in Title 17-A MRSA §501;
d) illegal sale, manufacture, storing, use, possession or distribution of narcotics or other
controlled substances or drug paraphernalia;
For the purpose of this ordinance, calls related to domestic violence complaints shall not
be considered a nuisance activity or nuisance conduct.
For the purpose of this ordinance, calls related to a chronically ill person who has
repeated visits by emergency services shall not be considered a nuisance activity or nuisance
conduct.
“Owner” means any person or entity with legal title to the property or the beneficial
interest in a property as recorded in the tax records of the City of Caribou or Aroostook Registry
of Deeds.
“Police Chief” means the acting Chief of Police of the City of Caribou or other official of
the Police Department as may be designated by the Police Chief.
“Residential property” means (a) a parcel of land on which a residential building or a
building of mixed occupancy in which there is at least one residential occupancy, including,
single and multi-family dwellings, apartment buildings and multi-family housing developments.
503. Administration; Notice; Meeting with Property Owner(s).
a. The Police Department shall document and monitor the occurrence of nuisance
conduct at properties in the City of Caribou.
b. When any occurrence of nuisance conduct has taken place, it will be recorded by
the Police Chief or his/her designee who shall provide written notice of the
occurrence to the property owner and the authorized agent in accordance with
Section 509.
c. Each written notice of nuisance conduct shall identify the property, describe the
nuisance conduct and advise that subsequent nuisance conduct may result in the
property being classified as a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall request
that the property owner (or the owner’s duly authorized agent) contact the Police
Chief within ten (10) days to discuss the nuisance incident and develop a plan to
abate the nuisance and prevent a recurrence.
484
d. An owner wishing to appoint an agent with the authority to act on the owner’s
behalf must complete the City of Caribou Property Management Designation
Form. Only agents duly appointed through the approved Property Management
Designation process shall be authorized to act on behalf of the Owner. If an owner
has completed a Property Management Application Form with the City office, all
written notices will be mailed to the authorized agent in addition to the owner.
504. Declaration of a Chronic Nuisance Property
a. If there have been five (5) or more documented occurrences of nuisance conduct
at any property in any sixty (60) day period, or ten (10) or more occurrences of
nuisance conduct in the preceding year, the property shall be classified as a
chronic nuisance property.
i. For purposes of calculating the number of occurrences of nuisance
conduct which have occurred at a particular property, the following rules
shall apply:
1. All occurrences of nuisance conduct which occur at a single family
residence, multi-family residence of 1-4 units, bed and breakfast,
hotel, motel, or rooming house shall be counted against the
property as a whole regardless of the number of units;
2. With respect to apartment buildings with 5 or more units, a
property will only be classified as chronic nuisance property if any
individual apartment unit exceeds the specified limit. By way of
example, a 30 unit apartment complex will only be classified as a
chronic nuisance property if there are 5 or more occurrences of
nuisance conduct at the same apartment unit in any 60 day period
or 10 or more occurrences at the same unit in any one year period.
b. Whenever a property is classified as a chronic nuisance property, the City shall
cause the owner of the property to be notified, in writing, of such classification
and of the events which form the basis for that designation. The notice shall
require the owner or owner’s agent to meet with the Police Chief or his
designee(s) within ten (10) business days from the date of delivery of the written
notification to identify ways to prevent additional nuisance conduct at the
property.
c. At the time of the nuisance property meeting required under section 504 (b), the
owner or his/her designee shall be obligated to provide to the city the following
documentation:
i. A copy of the names of all tenants or other persons authorized to reside or
presently residing in the building(s) on the property` and the units they
occupy;
ii. Copies of all leases with tenants residing in the building(s) on the
property; and
485
iii. Contracts with any property manager or other person responsible for the
orderly operation of the property;
In addition, the owner or his/her designee must agree to take effective
measures to abate the nuisance activity which measures shall be memorialized in
a written remediation agreement at the conclusion of the meeting with the City.
The written agreement shall be signed by both parties and be implemented by the
owner within seven 7 days of said meeting unless another date is agreed upon.
505. Duration of Chronic Nuisance Property Classification.
The chronic nuisance property classification shall be removed from the property by the
Chief of Police upon the Chief’s determination that:
a. The passage of 180 days without any nuisance conduct at the property;
b. Payment of all civil penalties and costs arising from enforcement;
c. Satisfactory implementation of the remediation agreement agreed upon between
the City and owner.
506. Declaration of Public Nuisance
A chronic nuisance property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
The owner of residential property shall provide sufficient control, oversight, monitoring
and management of the property to prevent the same from becoming a chronic nuisance
property.
The owner of a chronic nuisance property shall be responsible for taking all necessary
measures to abate or eliminate the public nuisance.
507. Violations
a. No owner of property shall maintain or allow to be maintained a chronic nuisance
property as defined in this Ordinance. Each and every day that a nuisance activity
occurs on a property after it has been classified as a chronic nuisance property
shall constitute a separate offense.
b. It is a further violation of this Ordinance for any owner to:
i. refuse to meet with the Police Chief or other authorized City official as
required by Section 504 (b), or to have the owner’s duly authorized agent
meet with the Chief; or
ii. refuse to enter into a written remediation agreement as required by Section
504 (c); or
iii. fails to fully implement the remediation agreement in compliance with the
timetable specified in the agreement; or
iv. fails to abate or eliminate the public nuisance caused by a chronic
nuisance property.
486
508. Civil Penalty
Any person who is found in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject
to a civil penalty of not less than $250.00 and not more than $2,500.00. Each violation of a
separate provision of this Ordinance and each day of violation shall constitute separate offenses.
In addition, if the City is the prevailing party in any enforcement action, said Owner shall
also be liable for all reasonable expenses incurred by the City in enforcement, including City of
Caribou staff time, attorney fees and costs. All civil penalties shall inure to the benefit of the
City of Caribou.
509. Notices
Any notice authorized or required within this section shall be deemed delivered to the
owner as follows:
a. if notice is provided by certified mail, return receipt requested, the date the owner
signs the receipt; or
b. the date the owner is personally served by a Caribou police officer; or
c. the date the owner is personally served by another person authorized to effect
service of process.
510. Other Remedies
In addition to a civil penalty, the City may seek injunctive relief in any legal action to
enforce this Ordinance and to abate the public nuisance.
Historical Note: Adopted by the City Council on February 23, 2015.
487
Chapter 9 Parks and Recreation
ARTICLE I RECREATION COMMISSION
Sections
9-101 Parks and Recreation Commission Established
9-102 Organization
9-103 Powers and Duties
9-104 Superintendent
9-105 Budget and Gifts
9-106 Annual Report
533
Chapter 9
Parks and Recreation
ARTICLE I RECREATION COMMISSION
Sec. 9-101 Parks and Recreation Commission Established
There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation Commission. This Commission shall be
appointed by the City Council and shall consist of five (5) persons. The City Manager and Parks and
Recreation Director may serve as ex-officio members, without voting privileges.
Members of the board shall serve for three years, or until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Original members of the Commission shall be appointed for such terms that one or two
members shall expire annually thereafter. Appointments shall be made during January of each year.
Vacancies in the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of terms shall be filed by the City
Council for the unexpired term. If the Council does not fill the vacancy within 60 days, the Recreation
Commission may point someone to fill that position.
The Commission shall be responsible to the City Council for performing any duties regarding
recreation that may be delegated to it.
Sec. 9-102 Organization
Immediately after their appointments, the Commission members shall meet and organize by
electing one of their members chairman and such other officers as may be necessary. The Commission
shall have the power to adopt By-Laws, subject to review and approval by the City Council.
Sec. 9-103 Powers and Duties
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds,
playfields, indoor recreation centers, parks and other recreational areas and facilities owned or controlled
by the City. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activities that will
employ the leisure time of the people in a constructive and wholesome manner. It may conduct such
activities on public properties under its jurisdiction, on other public properties with the consent of the
authorities thereof, and on private property with the consent of the owners. The Commission shall work
with the Manager and the City Council to ensure that adequate insurance coverage is available before
undertaking a particular activity.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have the maintenance responsibility for Teague
Park, Hardison Playground, the park in front of the Caribou Fire Station, the lawns and landscaped areas
in the downtown area, Monument Park, North Caribou Park, the Collins Pond Park area, and such other
park and recreation areas that may be developed by the Commission or given to the Commission by the
City Council.
Sec. 9-104 Superintendent
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall participate in the appointment of a Superintendent
who is trained and properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the Commission deems
proper, to carry out the functions of the Commission. Final decision concerning these appointments will
rest with the City Manager in accordance with Section 2.19, Section 3.04, and Section 4.01 of the City
Charter.
535
Sec. 9-105 Budget and Gifts
Annually the Commission shall submit a budget to the City Council for its approval. The
Commission may solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any
donation to the playgrounds, parks or other recreational purposes, subject to the approval of the Council.
Sec. 9-106 Annual Report
The recreation Commission shall make an annual report to the City Council and such other
reports as from time to time may be requested by the City Council.
Historical Note: Originally, Chapter VII, 1956 Caribou Code; revised June 4, 1980; amended December
28, 1992; Section 9-103 as amended October 10, 2006.
State Law Reference: 30 MRSA § 1903, 1904, 1905, 3853 and 5052
Charter Reference: Article II, Section 2.19(a)(10)
536
Chapter 10
Planning
ARTICLE I PLANNING BOARD
Section
10-101 Planning and Code Enforcement Offices
ARTICLE II TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
10-201 Introduction
10-202 Purpose
10-203 Definitions
10-204 General Considerations
10-205 Basic Provisions
10-206 Mandatory Guidelines
10-207 Guidelines that Determine Level of Municipal Participation
10-208 Standard Operating Procedure
Chapter 10
Planning
ARTICLE I PLANNING BOARD
Sec. 10-101 Planning and Code Enforcement Offices
To assist in carrying out the policies of the Planning Board, there shall be an office with
appropriate staffing to provide planning and code enforcement. These objectives may be
accomplished by one or more staff persons.
Historical Note: formerly Chapter 6, 1956 Code; replaced June 4, 1980; amended July 11, 1988; January 7, 1991;
November 22, 1993; June 24, 1996; April 13, 1998; Section 10-102 adopted by City Council on May 9, 2011;
Section 10-102 Community & Economic Development was repealed by City Council on November 27, 2012.
Historical Note: Section 10-103 adopted by City Council on May 9, 2011; Section 10-103 Chamber of Commerce
repealed by City Council November 25, 2013, effective December 31, 2013.
ARTICLE II TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
Sec. 10-201 Introduction
State of Maine law establishes Tax Increment Financing (TIF) as one of the few tools
cities can use to assist in economic development activities. TIFs provide partnering opportunities
between private developers and local government to realize greater economic benefits for the
community. These efforts may include new developments, redevelopment, or expansion of
existing business operations. While TIFs provide the potential for cash influx to projects, other
tools may also be beneficial and should be seriously considered when requests for TIF
designation are made. These other tools may include changing zoning or land use regulations,
streamlining review processes, helping to get funding through other economic agencies, private
funding or city revolving loan funds, utility services programs, etc.
The City of Caribou will generally consider use of TIFs for all areas zoned for
commercial development in an effort to build community and economic growth through publicprivate
partnerships with both existing and new businesses. Special consideration will be given
to projects proposed in the Downtown District.
Sec. 10-202 Purpose
The purpose of these guidelines is to outline standards that the City of Caribou will use in
considering applications for tax increment financing. These guidelines are intended to be
consistent with State laws, as they may be updated from time to time. State laws shall be utilized
when any specific conflict between the two occurs. Notwithstanding these guidelines, the
creation of a TIF agreement is a policy decision made on a case-by-case basis by the Caribou
City Council and the Maine Department of Economic & Community Development. Tax
Increment Financing is a not a right under Maine law and meeting these guidelines should not be
interpreted as creating any rights or entitlements in any application.
589
Sec. 10-203 Definitions
The following terms, as may be used within this Article, shall have the following
meanings. Those terms which are not included herein, but which are found in Maine Revised
Statutes, Title 30-A, pertaining to Development Districts within Municipalities, shall have the
same meaning as provided in the state statutes.
Commercial and Industrial Zones: Those land use zones adopted by the City of Caribou
which allow for uses of a primarily non-residential nature.
Retail: Those establishments identified as Retail Trade and Wholesale Trade under the
2017 North American Industry Classification System
Sec. 10-204 General Considerations
Economic development projects are eligible for consideration when they meet the
following standards:
• Would not occur otherwise;
• Create or retain employment opportunities;
• Expand significantly the City's tax base; and
• Conform to the quality and types of development sought by the City as outlined in the
Zoning ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, and other policies enacted by the City Council
Sec. 10-205 Basic Provisions
Once a TIF district is created, the City of Caribou can utilize increment funds in two
ways; first, the City may bond for and install public infrastructure to be paid for with any
generated tax increment funds, and second, the City may return tax increment funds directly to
the investing business to cover project costs. This second option is formalized through a Credit
Enhancement Agreement (CEA) between the City and the benefiting parties. Because of the
potential risk to the City in either of these cases, special consideration needs to be given to the
following:
1. Tax Increment Financing shall be revenue neutral, or better, to the City over the life
of the district.
2. Applicants must provide all documentation deemed necessary by the City to
substantiate the TIF requirements and protect the City's economic and financial
position.
3. The applicant is obligated to apply for any State reimbursement programs for
personal property and/or real estate taxes.
4. All applicants will be required to sign a Professional Fee Consent Form agreeing to
reimburse the City for all out-of-pocket expenses including outside professional
consulting costs (e.g. legal, accounting and advertising) and expenses related to
calling special Council meetings, printed documents, travel, postage, etc., which may
be incurred as a result of the Tax Increment Financing proposal. Such reimbursement
is to occur whether or not Tax Increment Financing is approved.
590
5. If Tax Increment Financing is approved, an annual Administrative Fee, equal to 1%
of the incremental taxes reallocated back to the project, will be charged.
6. Credit Enhancement Agreements must provide for a recapture of the benefits if the
project should move to another municipality. Assignments will be allowed only for
conventional, commercial financing purposes or where the proposed assignee agrees
to be bound by the same terms and conditions as the original applicant.
7. Invoices, cancelled checks, lien waivers, and other documents supporting cost
reimbursement proportional to the captured value, must be substantiated with
documentation from non-affiliated companies.
8. Tax Increment Financing Agreements of five years or less are highly preferred by the
City when structured as a CEA. Increased duration may be considered depending
upon the magnitude of increased tax value, job creation, or economic benefits.
Projects involving bonds for public infrastructure may be considered for the
maximum time allowed by law (30 years).
9. The City will not entertain requests from retail enterprises for Credit Enhancement
Agreements as a means of tax increment financing for onsite activities within a TIF
district unless such businesses or developments will create a minimum of 10 new Full
Time Equivalent (FTE) jobs which pay 100% of the area median income; the City
may however, at its sole discretion, consider requests from all retail enterprises for
Credit Enhancement Agreements to assist in the financing of necessary off-site public
infrastructure improvements, installed by the investing business and for which
detailed financial documentation is provided.
10. The City will not return to any investing business under any Credit Enhancement
Agreement more than eighty (80) percent in any one (1) given year.
11. The City may deviate from provisions 8-10 when working with a project that will
redevelop or repurpose properties held by a non-taxed entity for at least 5 years
immediately prior to application for TIF designation (e.g. tax acquired properties,
school sites, state holdings, etc.).
Sec. 10-206 Mandatory Guidelines
In all instances, applicants for tax increment financing must demonstrate that the City of
Caribou's participation is economically necessary, and that participation is needed to undertake
the project. Such justification is demonstrated by:
1. A need to offset infrastructure costs unique to the site; or
2. A need to offset economic advantages available to a corporate entity if it should
develop a project (or expand operations) outside of Caribou; or
3. A lack of sufficient private or other public funding sources to meet the full capital
investments needed to undertake a project.
4. If the project creates significant new tax value equal to or greater than $50,000
dollars and creates or retains jobs throughout the City's planned development,
commercial, industrial zones and Pine Tree Zones, including projects located in
the Downtown District. Retail projects must demonstrate a new tax value equal to
or greater than $1.5Million dollars.
591
5. The developer is financially capable to undertake the project.
6. The developer is compliant with all statutory and regulatory guidelines of the City
of Caribou and the State of Maine.
Sec. 10-207 Guidelines that Determine Level of Municipal Participation
In addition to the above guidelines, the City will use the following criteria to determine
the level and duration of participation by the City of Caribou:
1. The project assists an established business in the City of Caribou, thus retaining
existing employment opportunities;
2. The project creates long-term, permanent and quality employment opportunities
which will provide wages exceeding the area median income;
3. The project contributes to the revitalization of the Downtown District, Commercial
and Industrial Zones, designated Growth Areas or Pine Tree Zone District.
4. The project improves a blighted building or site in need of rehabilitation;
5. The project creates public infrastructure facilities that have application beyond the
particular development such as improvements to utilities, telecommunications, traffic
patterns, parking facilities, green space, etc.;
6. The project supports or will support community projects, provides job training,
provides student internships, supports local contractors and suppliers; and
7. The project supports or will support local efforts and programs that assist those who
are under-employed or low to moderate income (LMI).
8. The developer has a responsible history with personal properly tax payment and
pledges the continued responsibility.
9. The project helps stimulate other business(es) within the City or offers presently
unavailable economic benefits;
10. The project does not require direct borrowing by the City, and tax increment revenues
are not obligated or pledged as collateral for third-party project financing but simply
are reimbursed to the project;
11. Projects seeking Credit Enhancement Agreements conform to the business categories
established for the State of Maine's Pine Tree Business Zone program, i.e.,
manufacturing businesses, financial services business, and the targeted technology
business (composite materials, biotechnology, aquaculture and marine technology,
environmental technology, information technology, advanced technologies for
forestry and agriculture, and precision manufacturing technology;
Sec. 10-208 Standard Operating Procedure
The City of Caribou will coordinate all activities regarding applications for tax increment
financing. Working with applicants, the City will undertake the following steps when reviewing
applications:
A. Preliminary Evaluation
1. Provide information on tax increment financing to potential business/developers;
2. Discuss project proposals and accept preliminary applications; (applications for tax
increment financing will be provided by the Department of Community
592
Development). All applicants must pay a $250.00 non-refundable application fee at
the time of submission.
3. Review preliminary applications based on policy guidelines with the City Manager,
Tax Assessor, Code Enforcement Officer, Director of Community Development,
Director of Public Works; Director of Public Safety, Utilities District or other
applicable departments.
4. Advise applicants on the findings of city staff.
5. The City staff will review applications and makes recommendations to the Caribou
City Council. The City Council will determine the appropriateness of the request and
provide direction to staff for continued evaluation under Final Review.
B. Final Review
1. Based on the City Council's direction, the City staff will coordinate with the
business/developers to determine full compliance with all basic and mandatory
review criteria. Staff will prepare credit enhancement agreements and/or agreements
for consideration by the Council.
2. The City Council will review and grant approval for any agreements to be associated
with the TIF. Such approval must be contingent upon final acceptance and approval
of the TIF plan and documents by the State of Maine.
3. City staff will prepare and submit applications for tax increment financing to the State
of Maine and will monitor ongoing public and private investments in the particular
development project.
Historical Note: Article II adopted by Ordinance No. 1, 2018 Series on May 14, 2018; effective June 13, 2018.
Current ordinance replaced original ordinance adopted September 13, 2004.
593
Chapter 11 - Streets
ARTICLE 1 COASTING AND SKATEBOARDING
Section
11-101 Coasting or Sledding Regulated
11-102 Skateboarding Regulated
ARTICLE 11 SNOW REMOVAL
11-201 Snow Removal on Sidewalks Required
11-202 Placing Snow on Public Way
ARTICLE 111 HORSES
11-301 Horses on Sidewalks
ARTICLE IV DISPLAYING GOODS AND WARES
11-401 Use of Sidewalks for Purpose of Displaying Wares in Business Section
11-402 Residential Areas
11-403 Street and Road Access Permit
11-404 Opening Permit
ARTICLE V PENALTIES
11-501 Penalties
ARTICLE VI NAMING AND NUMBERING STREETS AND ROADS
11-601 Authority to Name Streets and Roads
11-602 Authority to Number and Identify Property
11-603 Procedure for Numbering
11-604 Penalty
641
Chapter 11 - Streets
ARTICLE I COASTING AND SKATEBOARDING
Sec. 11-101 Coasting or Sledding Regulated
Coasting or sledding with any sled or motor powered sled on any street, road, or way, or
on any sidewalk, street, road or way in the City of Caribou is prohibited. The City Council may
designate certain streets and hours for the purpose of sledding or coasting.
Sec. 11-102 Skateboarding Regulated
No person shall ride a skateboard on the sidewalk or within any sidewalk area, or any
pedestrian way within the C-1 Zone of the City of Caribou. Any person who violates this
section, upon adjudication, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $10.00. The Chief of
Police, when satisfied a person is in violation of this section, may impound the skateboard for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
ARTICLE 11 SNOW REMOVAL
Sec. 11-201 Snow Removal or Sidewalks Required
Within the urban compact zone of Caribou, the occupant of a property therein shall be
responsible for the removal of all accumulation of snow, ice and debris from the sidewalk in
front of the property. If the said property is vacant for one reason or another, the owner is still
responsible to the removal of same.
Historical Note: Section 11-201 as amended by City Council March 23, 2015.
Sec. 11-202 Placing Snow on Public Way
Except for in the business district, it shall be unlawful for a person to place snow or ice
on a public way. “Public way” means any public way or sidewalk, private way laid out under
authority of statute, way dedicated to public use, way upon which the public has a right of access
or has access as invitees or licenses, or way under the control of park commissioners or a body
having like powers.
Historical Note: Section 11-202 as amended by City Council March 23, 2015.
ARTICLE III HORSES
Sec. 11-301 Horses on Sidewalks
No person shall ride on horseback, or dive or lead any horse or beast, by themselves, or
attached to any vehicle of any kind or description, or cause them to be driven or led along upon
any sidewalk in the City of Caribou, except at private driveways or over crossings.
643
ARTICLE IV DISPLAYING GOODS AND WARES
Sec. 11-401 Use of Sidewalks for Purpose of Displaying Wares in Business Section
The following rules shall govern the placing or displaying of goods, wares or articles on
publicly owned sidewalks or streets in the business section of the City of Caribou.
1. Permission from Chief of Police. Permission must be obtained from the Caribou
Chief of Police. Permission may be denied for repeated or flagrant violation of the rules below.
Denials may be appealed to the City Council.
2. Six foot maximum. Goods, wares or articles shall not extend more than six feet
into the sidewalk or street.
3. Four foot corridor. A space of at least four feet shall be kept free and clear of all
such goods, wares or articles.
4. Area in front of business. Individual businesses shall only use that portion of any
sidewalks or street that is directly in front of said business establishment. This shall not apply to
community events such as an arts and crafts festival but the activities of such community events
shall not obstruct the entrance or exit of any building.
5. Three day limit. The placing or displaying of goods, wares or articles on the
sidewalk, or street of Caribou by any one individual or business shall be limited to no more than
three days in any one calendar month.
Sec. 11-402 Residential Areas
The placing or displaying of goods, wares or articles on the sidewalks or streets in all
residential areas in the City of Caribou is hereby prohibited. The placing or displaying of signs
on public ways and utility poles is also prohibited.
Sec. 11-403 Street and Road Access Permit
Whenever an additional access is desired to a city road or street, the requesting property
owner shall obtain an Access permit from the Caribou Public Works Department. No new
additional road or street connection shall be allowed without such a permit.
The permit application shall state how proper roadside drainage will be maintained,
whether through a driveway depression, a culvert, or through subsurface drainage system. If a
culvert is deemed appropriate, the size of the culvert, both in diameter and in length, will be
listed. The drainage system, including whether or not a culver is required and the size of the
culvert, shall be subject to approval by the Public Works Director, or his designee.
Whenever a property owner requests a new culvert that is approved by the city, the city
shall install it. The property owner shall agree to pay the cost of the culvert and the cost of
installation, including labor and equipment. Upon request, the City Public Works Department
shall provide an advance estimate or cost of the culvert and its installation. Once the culvert is
installed, the city shall be responsible for maintaining the culvert, including replacement.
Failure to comply with this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty of $50.00 for each
offense.
Cross Reference: Similar provisions, Ch. 7, Art. X.
644
Sec. 11-404 Opening Permit
Any person required to excavate or in any way interfere with the surface or sub-surface
of any public way must, through a recognized qualified contractor, apply for an opening permit
with the Director of Public Works. Permittees’ are required to comply with written “Conditions
Applicable to Opening Permits on public Ways”, as determined and updated periodically by the
City Manager and Public Works Director, and provide evidence of Liability Insurance of not less
than $300,000. The “Opening Permit” must be retained by the permittee and posted at the work
site for inspection by City Officials. Permittees’ violating the terms of the ordinance will be
subject to the cost of repairing the excavation plus 50%. Additional permits will not be granted
if the applicant has other opening permits that remain open and out of compliance with the terms
of the ordinance.
Cross Reference: Similar provisions, Ch. 7, Art. XI.
Historical Note: Chapter 11, Article 404 was adopted May 27, 1997.
ARTICLE V PENALTIES
Sec. 11-501 Penalties
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding $100 dollars for each offense. All references to an infraction herein shall be deemed a
civil violation.
Historical Note: Chapter VIII, 1956 Code; amended June 4, 1980.
State Law Reference: 17-A MRSA subsection 505.
ARTICLE VI NAMING AND NUMBERING STREETS AND ROADS
Sec. 11-601 Authority to Name Streets and Roads
The City Council may change or alter the name of any street or public place; and the
council shall establish the names of all streets and public places hereafter laid out and accepted
by the City Planning Board, within the city. There will be no duplication of Street/Road names
to avoid confusion. The Street/Road will have one (1) name only and will have the same name
throughout the entire length.
Sec. 11-602 Authority to Number and Identify Property
The City Tax Assessor shall forthwith determine the number which shall designate and
identify and be affixed. The City Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the name and
numbering ordinance created by the City Council.
645
Sec. 11-603 Procedure and Numbering
1. The following procedures shall be followed in the assignment of Lot/Door
numbers to buildings constructed under the provisions of the building code. Numbers will be
assigned following application of permit for new construction.
A) The minimum size of the number shall be no less than four (4) inches in
height. Color to be a contrast to the building color.
B) The number shall be placed so that it is visible from the street during the
entire year, a minimum of 6’ from the ground if placed on the building.
C) The number may be affixed on or near the front entrance way, if the
entrance is visible from the road and is located not more than 100 feet from the
edge of the road.
D) The number must be placed at the main driveway entrance at the road
when the structure is not visible from the road or is located a distance greater and
100 feet from the edge of the road.
E) A number displayed at the driveway entrance shall be set outside of the
road right-of-way (generally 33 feet from the center of the road) and set at a
minimum height of 60 inches from the ground. This number must be away from
the mailbox and the number must face the road. The same number will also be
placed on the building, minimum of 6’ from the ground as stated above.
2. It will be the duty of the Assessing Department of the City of Caribou to develop
a street numbering system.
A) A 50 foot frontage unit will be the standard interval used to assign
consecutive numbers for urban or rural streets or roads, and 25 foot in high
density areas.
B) Odd numbers on the right hand side of each street and even numbers on
the left.
i. No Fractions.
ii. No Alphas.
C) Apartment Building/Condominiums get one number. The numbering of
individual units is the responsibility of the owner with the advise of the Assessor.
D) Shopping Center numbers are assigned within the range available to the
property. Numbering of individual units is the owners responsibility.
E) All other streets will be numbered from the start of the main artery.
Sec. 11-604 Penalty
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article of ordinance shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as follows:
First Violation Minimum of $25.00
Second Violation Minimum of $100.00
Subsequent Violations Minimum of $200.00
Historical Note: Article VI was adopted December 9, 1996.
646
Chapter 12 - Traffic
Sections
12-101 Words Defined
ARTICLE II POLICE AUTHORITY
12-201 Compliance with Directions of a Police Officer
12-202 Placing and Uniformity of Signs
12-203 Crosswalks
12-204 Mechanical or Electrical Signals
12-205 Damaging or Defacing Signs
12-206 [Prosecutorial Function of Chief of Police]
ARTICLE III DRIVING
12-301 Vehicles Keep to Right
12-302 Vehicle Turning to Right
12-303 Vehicle Turning to Left
12-304 Slow Moving Vehicles
12-305 Stopping
12-306 Deliveries
12-307 Exceptions
12-308 Vehicles Left Unattended
12-309 Passing “Silent Policemen” Marker
12-310 Boarding Vehicle Without Owner’s Consent
12-311 Avoiding Fire Apparatus
12-312 Passing Through Funeral Procession
12-313 Marking Complete Turn on Streets
12-314 Vehicles Leaving Curb
12-315 Entering Street from Driveway
12-316 Streets with more than two Traffic Lanes
12-317 Vehicles to Stop on Fire Alarm or Special Sirens
12-318 Truck Prohibition on Grange Street; Exception
12-319 Main Street – Truck, Tractor and Bus Prohibition
12-320 (Certain Streets – No Thru Trucks)
ARTICLE IV PARKING
12-401 Facing Down Hill
12-402 Obstructing Traffic
12-403 Parking on Streets not Marked
12-404 Restricted Area
12-405 Parking Prohibited at all Times on Certain Streets
12-406 Parking Prohibited at Specific Times
12-407 All Night Parking
12-408 Authority in Install Parking Lines
12-409 Municipal Parking Lot Regulations
12-410 Parking Lot Regulations
12-411 Streets with Parking Spaces
12-412 Maximum Legal Parking Period
12-413 Designated Handicapped Parking Spaces as Follows;
12-414 Parking Over Time Limit Prohibited
12-415 Enforcement
12-416 Reporting Violations and Penalty
695
ARTICLE V ONE WAY STREETS
12-501 Designation
12-502 Direction of Flow
ARTICLE VI BICYCLE REGULATIONS
12-601 Bicycles
12-602 Equipment
12-603 Sidewalks
12-604 Traffic Laws Apply
12-605 Obedience to Traffic-Control Devices
12-606 Clinging to Moving Vehicles
12-607 License Required
12-608 Issuance of License
12-609 Tags and Inspection
12-610 Bicycle Violations
12-611 Parent or Guardian
ARTICLE VII TOWNWAY STOP AND YIELD DESIGNATIONS
12-701 Townway Stop Designations
12-702 Townway Yield Designations
ARTICLE VIII PENALTY AND SAVINGS PROVISIONS
12-801 Relation to Previous Ordinances
12-802 Saving Clause
696
Chapter 12 - Traffic
ARTICLE 1 DEFINITIONS
Sec. 12-101 Words Defined
1. Vehicle. The word “vehicle” shall mean any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported upon a highway except baby carriages.
2. Horse. The word “horse” shall include domestic animals.
3. Cross Walk. The words “cross walk” shall mean that part of any way reserved part time for the exclusive use of
pedestrians by marks on the surface of the roadway or by such other markings or contrivances as the Chief of
Police may deem suitable.
4. Loading Zone. The words “loading zone” shall mean that part of any way reserved part time for the exclusive
use of vehicles engaged in transportation.
5. Street. The word “street” shall mean any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path or other public
place located in the City of Caribou and established for the use of vehicles.
6. Person. The word “person: shall mean and include any individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
7. Driver. The word “driver” shall mean and include every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner
thereof, or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the owner, or is an actual physical control of a vehicle.
8. Pedestrian. The word “pedestrian” shall mean any person afoot.
9. Individual Parking Space. The words “individual parking space” shall mean a portion of the paved surface of
the street of sufficient length and depth from the sidewalk curb to accommodate the vehicle to be parked as
shall be specified and marked off by the City Manager of the City of Caribou.
10. Parallel Parking. The words “parallel parking” shall mean when vehicles are parked parallel to the curb the
right side wheels shall be within one foot of the curb or ditch.
11. Angle Parking. The words “angle parking” shall mean when vehicles are parked at an angle of 45 degrees to
the curb, the front of the vehicle shall be touching the curb.
12. Interpreting words according to the Maine Motor Vehicle Laws”. Unless the context otherwise indicates, all
other words and terms shall be construed in accordance with the provision of the motor vehicle laws of Maine.
13. Regulatory Signs. The words “regulatory signs” shall include Stop, Yield, Speed limit signs, or similar signs as
spelled out in the Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
14. Warning and Direction Signs and Signals. The words “warning and direction signs and signals” shall include
School Zone, Children Playing, Hill, Curve, Slippery When Wet, Animal Crossing and similar signs as spelled
out in the Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Historical Note: Revisions to Article I were adopted April 28, 1997.
ARTICLE II POLICE AUTHORITY
Sec. 12-201 Compliance with Directions of a Police Officer
All regulations of this Chapter are subject to the provisions that all person must at all times comply with any
direction , by voice or hand of any member of the police force, as to stopping, placing, starting, approaching or departing
from any place, the manner of taking up or setting down passengers or loading or unloading goods on public ways.
Sec. 12-202 Placing and Uniformity of Signs
The City Manager and the Chief of Police shall determine and designate the character of all official warning and
direction signs and signals and all signs herein authorized and required for a particular purpose shall be uniform. Regulatory
signs shall be established by ordinance.
Sec. 12-203 Crosswalks
The Chief of Police shall establish crosswalks wherever in his opinion there is a particular danger to pedestrians, and
designate and maintain the same by appropriate devices, marks, or white lines, upon the surface of the roadway. Wherever
the Chief of Police shall have established said crosswalks, pedestrians shall have the right of way over approaching motor
vehicles.
697
Sec. 12-204 Mechanical or Electrical Signals
Wherever traffic is regulated by a mechanical or electrical traffic signal:
1. Flashing red signals shall mean that all vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection, or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to
proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing amber shall mean “proceed with caution”.
Sec. 12-205 Damaging or Defacing Signs
Any person who removes, destroys, damages or defaces any sign or signal erected by or under the direction of the
Chief of Police as herein provided, shall be deemed guilty of a civil violation, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for each offense.
Sec. 12-206 (Prosecutorial Function of Chief of Police)
The Chief of Police is authorized to represent the City in District Court in the prosecution of alleged violations of
those ordinances which the Police Department is empowered to enforce, if duly certified in accordance with 25 M.R.S.A.
subsection 2803(3)-A.
Under 30 M.R.S.A. subsection 2361(3) or successor statute, the Chief of Police may designate any officer under his
command, if so certified, to perform this prosecutorial function.
Historical Note: Revisions to Article II, Section 202 were adopted April 28, 1997.
ARTICLE III DRIVING
Sec. 12-301 Vehicles Keep to Right
A vehicle, except when passing a vehicle ahead, shall keep to the right, as near the right curb as possible, and shall
always proceed in the general direction of travel.
Sec. 12-302 Vehicle Turning to Right
A vehicle in turning to the right into another street shall keep as near the right curb as possible.
Sec. 12-303 Vehicle Turning to Left
A vehicle turning to the left into another street shall pass to the right of and beyond the center of the intersecting
street before turning.
Sec. 12-304 Slow Moving Vehicles
Slow moving vehicles shall keep as near the curb as possible so as to allow faster moving vehicles free passage to
the left.
Sec. 12-305 Stopping
No vehicle shall stop in such a way as to obstruct any street or crossing for any purpose except in case of accident or
when directed to do so by a public officer.
698
Sec. 12-306 Deliveries.
Vehicles delivering commodities in the Caribou business district, providing there is not an off street loading or
unloading area, may stop on said streets for a reasonable time for the purpose of unloading, loading and delivering
commodities but such vehicles shall be placed parallel to the direction of traffic and in such a manner as to cause the least
obstruction on the traveled way.
Sec. 12-307 Exceptions.
In case of hardship or unusual conditions, the Chief of Police may issue a permit for the violation of section 12-306,
such permit to be limited to time and place wherein it may be used.
Sec. 12-308 Vehicles Left Unattended.
No vehicle shall be left unattended in any street or highway with the motor running.
Sec. 12-309 Passing “Silent Policemen” Marker.
No drivers of vehicles or any person shall drive over, deface, or injure a marker known as “silent policemen” when
same is placed on a public street under the direction of the Chief of Police.
Sec. 12-310 Boarding Vehicle Without Owner’s Consent.
No person shall board, ride or mount upon any vehicle either moving or standing in any street or public way in the
City of Caribou without the consent of the owner or the person in charge.
Sec. 12-311 Avoiding Fire Apparatus.
Drivers of motor vehicles, unless on official business, shall not park any vehicle within, or drive any vehicle in, the
block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
Sec. 12-312 Passing Through Funeral Procession.
No vehicle shall pass through a funeral procession when the procession vehicles display their mission.
Sec. 12-313 Making Complete Turn on Streets.
No vehicle shall make a “U” turn on any streets in urban compact area at any time.
Sec. 12-314 Vehicles Leaving Curb.
Vehicles leaving the curb shall yield the right of way to street traffic.
Sec. 12-315 Entering Street From Driveway.
Vehicles entering a street from a driveway shall yield the right of way to street traffic.
699
Sec. 12-316 Streets With More Than Two Traffic Lanes.
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, traffic shall move in the established traffic lanes, said traffic lanes to be established
by the Chief of Police and the City Manager.
1. Main Street from Water Street to Herschel Street shall be divided into three traffic lanes. The east lane shall be used for east
bound traffic only. The center lane shall be used for north bound traffic on Main Street. The west lane shall be used by west bound traffic
turning on Herschel Street going west.
2. Bennett Drive from a point determined by the Chief of Police and the City Manager to High Street shall be divided into four
traffic lanes. The west lane shall be used by west-bound traffic turning into High Street going west. The center lane shall be used for south
bound traffic going onto Pleasant Street. The east lane shall be used by east bound traffic turning onto High Street going East.
3. Hatch Drive from a point determined by the Chief of Police and the City Manager to Main Street shall be divided into three
traffic lanes. The south lane shall be used for south bound traffic only turning onto Main Street going south. The north lane shall be used
by north bound traffic turning onto Main Street going north. The center lane shall be used for east bound traffic going onto Water Street.
4. Water Street. Right turn only, at Main Street, for all west bound traffic on Water Street except emergency vehicles such as
fire trucks, police vehicles, and ambulances.
5. Main Street. Certain sections shall be divided into three traffic lanes. In those traffic lanes, traffic shall move in the
established direction and manner. The road surface shall be marked to indicate direction of traffic and traffic pattern; the markings to be
determined and maintained by the Chief of Police and the City Manager.
6. Prospect Street. Certain sections shall be divided into three traffic lanes. In those traffic lanes, traffic shall move in the
established direction and manner. The road surface shall be marked to indicate direction of traffic and traffic pattern; the markings to be
determined and maintained by the Chief of Police and the City Manager.
7. Bennett Drive. All of Bennett Drive, located between Glendale Road and U.S. Route #1 shall be divided into four traffic
lanes. In those traffic lanes, traffic shall move in the established direction and manner. The road surface shall be marked to indicate
direction of traffic and traffic pattern; the markings are to be determined and maintained by the Chief of Police and the City Manager.
Sec. 12-317 Vehicles to Stop on Fire Alarm or Special Sirens.
On sounding of fire alarm, all traffic shall come to a stop as near as possible and parallel to the right hand edge or curb of the
street, clear of any intersection, and shall remain in such position until the sirens have stopped sounding, unless otherwise directed by a
Police Officer or constable of the Fire Department.
Sec. 12-318 Truck Prohibition on Grange Street; Exception.
All trucks are prohibited from entering Grange Street except that trucks of no greater length than 36 feet may enter for the
purpose of unloading and delivering commodities. Any person so operating the truck shall be deemed guilty of a civil violation, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for each offense.
Sec. 12-319 Main Street – Truck, Tractor and Bus Prohibition.
No person shall drive or operate truck, tractor or bus, except for local deliveries and emergency vehicles, registered with gross
weight in excess of 6000 pounds in a southerly direction upon Main Street in the City of Caribou from the intersection of Westwind Drive
and Main Street to the intersection of High Street and Main Street. Any person so operating a truck, tractor, or bus (except school bus from
Park Street south) registered with a gross weight in excess of 6000 pounds in a southerly direction along Main Street in said City of
Caribou between the intersection of Westwind Drive and Main Street to the intersection of High Street and Main Street shall be deemed
guilty of a civil violation and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for each
offense.
Sec. 12-320 [Certain Streets – No Thru Trucks].
No thru trucks on the following streets: Rose Street, Garden Circle, Glenn Street, Westwind Drive, St.Anne Street, Washington
Street, Vaughan Street and Lyndon Street.
No thru trucks eastbound on York Street, between Sincock Street and Main Street.
Historical Notes: Revisions to Article III Sections 12-309 to 12-320 were adopted April 28, 1997; Sec. 12-320 was amended July 24, 1991
and May 26, 1998.
700
ARTICLE IV – PARKING
Sec. 12-401 Facing Down Hill
When vehicles are parked facing down hill, the front wheels shall be turned toward the curb and the emergency
brake shall be locked on.
Sec. 12-402 Obstructing Traffic
No vehicle shall park on any street in such a way as to obstruct traffic or to create a traffic hazard. Vehicles parked
in such a manner may be removed by the City at the owner’s expense.
Sec. 12-403 Parking on Streets not Marked
On all streets in the Caribou Urban Compact Area upon which no parking meters, signs or street markings appear,
regulating parking shall be at the right curb and parallel to the street.
Sec. 12-404 Restricted Area
No unauthorized vehicle shall be stopped or allowed to stand, whether occupied or not, within any part of the
following designated spaces:
1. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant
2. Within 16 feet of an intersection
3. In front of a theater exit or entrance
4. Within 3 feet of the entrance of a driveway or any alley
5. On a designated crosswalk
6. In front of a fire station exit
7. On a sidewalk
8. In a loading zone
9. In a handicapped parking space no vehicle which does not have a special registration plate marked “Handicap”
or a handicap place card, issued under MRSA Title 29-A, Section 521 or similar plates issued by another state.
Historical Note: Section 12-404(9) was amended November 12, 2002.
Sec. 12-405 Parking Prohibited at all Times on Certain Streets
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
streets:
1. High Street – Parking prohibited except in designated parking spaces
2. Main Street – Parking prohibited from the intersection with Hatch Drive and Water Streets to the intersection
with Collins Street
3. Herschel Street – Parking prohibited on the north side from Main Street to Prospect Street and on the south side
from Main Street to Record Street
4. Record Street – Parking prohibited
5. Hatch Drive – Parking prohibited
6. Lyndon Street – Parking prohibited
7. Grange Street – Parking prohibited on the East side
8. Fort Street – Parking prohibited
9. Washington Street – Parking prohibited
10. Prospect Street – Parking prohibited on the East side between Sweden Street and Collins Street
11. Elm Street – Parking prohibited
12. Stevens Street – Parking prohibited on the East side
13. Glenn Street – Parking prohibited from High Street to Sperry Drive
14. Park Street – Parking prohibited on the North side from Glenn Street to Bennett Drive
15. Bennett Drive – Parking prohibited except in designated areas
16. Marshall Avenue – Parking prohibited
17. Sincock Street – Parking prohibited on the North side
18. U.S. Route #1 – Parking prohibited on both sides of the road, starting at the Buck Road to a point 5/10 of one
mile south of the Buck Road
19. Intersection of Route #228 & Route #161 – Parking prohibited northerly on Route #161 to convergence of right
hand lane.
20. Caribou Street – Parking prohibited on the northside of the road from the intersection of Myrtle Street, 130 feet
westerly.
Historical Note: Section 12-405 as amended June 12, 2006.
701
Sec. 12-406 Parking Prohibited at Specified Times
1. Vaughn Street – Parking prohibited between the hours of 4:00 p.m. on Saturday to 1:00 p.m. on Sunday.
2. Thomas Avenue – Parking prohibited between the hours of 4:00 p.m. on Saturday to 1:00 p.m. on Sunday.
3. Newton Avenue – Parking prohibited during sporting events at the Caribou Little League Park.
Sec. 12-407 All Night Parking
Parking is prohibited on any street in Caribou between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. from November 1 to
May 1.
Historical Note: Sec. 12-407 as amended March 14, 2016.
Sec. 12-408 Authority to Install Parking Lines
The City Manager and the Chief of Police shall designate lines or marks on the streets, curbs, or parking lots as
required, subject to the approval of the City Council, to designate the space for vehicular parking and all parked vehicles shall
be parked within such lines.
Sec. 12-409 Municipal Parking Lot Regulations
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no persons shall park a vehicle at any time upon any public parking lot
provided by the City of Caribou in violation of the parking limitations of 12-410 and any such vehicle parked in violation of
section 12-410 shall be removed and kept at the owner’s expense. All Municipal parking lots are identified by alphabetical
letter as shown on map number 4, on file and available for inspection during normal office hours at the City Clerk's office.
Sec. 12-410 Parking Lot Regulations
Because of congestion of traffic, the following regulations are hereby established:
1. Unregistered vehicles. No unregistered vehicles shall be parked in any public parking lot provided and operated
by the City of Caribou.
2. Parking in public parking lots shall be as follows:
a. From November 1 to May 1 overnight, 11:00 pm to 6:00 am, parking is allowed only in the North
Downtown Mall Parking Lot along the retaining wall and in the Hatch Drive Parking Lot in the spaces
along Hatch Drive. Overnight parking is not allowed in any other public parking lots.
b. Parking in spaces adjacent to buildings shall be limited to two (2) hours during business hours in the
North and South Mall Parking Lots only.
c. Parking of Tractor Trailer Trucks is prohibited in all public parking lots.
3. Lot in front of Municipal Building, parking shall be limited to fifteen (15) minutes.
4. Parking at 6 Water Street shall be limited to two (2) hours.
Historical Note: Sec. 12-410 as amended March 23, 2015; Sec. 12-410 (2)(a)(c) as amended March 14, 2016. Sec. 12-410
(2)(b) as amended April 11, 2016.
702
Sec. 12-411 Streets with Parking Spaces
The City Manager and the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to designate the space for vehicles parking upon the
following streets and upon such other streets with the boundaries of the City as may hereafter be designated by the City
Council.
1. High Street
2. Center Street
3. Sweden Street
4. Water Street
5. Herschel Street
6. Park Street
Historical Note: Sec. 12-411 as amended April 11, 2016.
Sec. 12-412 Maximum Legal Parking Period
The maximum legal parking period shall be as follows:
1. Two (2) hour parking as posted on those streets listed in section 12-411 sub-sections 2 thru 5.
2. Fifteen (15) minutes for those parking spaces directly in front of the United States Post Office on Sweden Street
as posted and at designated areas on High Street as posted.
______________
Historical Note: Sec. 12-412 (1) as amended April 11, 2016.
Sec. 12-413 Designated Handicapped Parking Spaces as Follows:
The City Manager and the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to designate handicap parking spaces in accordance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Historical Note: Section 12-413 as amended March 23, 2015.
Sec. 12-414 Parking Over Time Limit Prohibited
When any vehicle shall remain parking in any parking space beyond the established parking limit as posted, it shall
be in violation of this Chapter and punished as hereinafter provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow,
permit or suffer any such vehicle registered in his name to be parked overtime or beyond the lawful period of time of this
Chapter.
Sec. 12-415 Enforcement
The Chief of Police of the City of Caribou shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Chapter.
Sec. 12-416 Reporting Violations and Penalty
1. Information reported. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the City, acting in accordance with
instructions issued by the Chief of Police to report;
A. The State vehicle registration number of the vehicle in violation
B. The time such vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter.
C. Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances
attending such violation.
2. Notice to operator. Each officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof, that
such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this Chapter and instructing such owner or operator
to report to the police station of the City of Caribou in regard to such violation.
3. Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter, except sub-section 12-404, shall forfeit and pay a sum of not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) for each violation. Each day on which any violations of this Chapter continue
shall constitute a separate violation. Whoever violates any provision of sub-section 12-404, excluding 12-
404(9), shall forfeit and pay a sum of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and the vehicle towing charges
for each violation.
703
Payments shall be made to the officer on duty at the City police station as a penalty for, and in satisfaction of, such
violation, within a period of 24 hours of the time that a notice of such violation has been served. Repeat offenders
shall be subjected to escalating fines according to the following schedule:
Sec. 12-404
1st thru 4th……………………………..$25.00
5th thru 9th……………………………..$35.00
10th thru 14th…………………………..$45.00
15th thru 19th…………………………..$55.00
20 or more ……………………………$75.00
All Other Violations
1st thru 4th……………………………..$10.00
5th thru 9th……………………………..$20.00
10th thru 14th…………………………..$30.00
15th thru 19th…………………………..$40.00
20 or more ……………………………$50.00
The fines shall escalate considering violations in the prior twelve-month period.
Whoever violates Section 12-404(9), Handicapped Parking, shall forfeit and pay a sum of not less than seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) for each violation. No escalating fine structure shall apply.
4. Time limit for payment. Each such owner or operator shall, within 24 hours of the time when such notice was
attended to such vehicle, pay to the officer at the police station of the City of Caribou as a penalty for and in full
satisfaction of such violation. The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within 24 hours
shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties, herein provided, for the violation of the provisions
of this Chapter.
5. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter, and any person who aids or assists
therein, shall, upon conviction thereof by the Caribou District Court, be subject to a fine not to exceed One
Hundred Dollars ($100) for each offense or violation
Historical Note: Section 12-411(3) was adopted May 21, 1980, Section 12-405(19) was adopted July 13, 1992. Revisions to
Article IV, Sections 403-406 and 416 were adopted April 28, 1997; Section 12-416(3) was amended November 12, 2002;
Section 12-413(5) was amended February 14, 2011; Section 12-413(9) was adopted February 14, 2011; Section 12-416(3) as
amended by City Council April 8, 2013.
ARTICLE V ONE WAY STREETS
Sec. 12-501 Designation
Upon those streets and parts of street described in section 12-502, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in
the opposite direction is prohibited, which signs the Police Chief is hereby authorized and directed to have erected and
maintained.
Sec. 12-502 Direction of Flow
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, traffic shall move only in the following specified directions:
1. Stevens Street. North bound only from Center Street to Sweden Street.
2. Grange Street. South bound only.
3. Main Street. North bound only from Water Street to Herschel Street.
4. Herschel Street. West bound only from Main Street to Record Street.
5. Record Street. South bound only.
6. Goldfrank Drive. South bound only.
7. Sweden Street. West bound from Record Street to Prospect Street and Hatch Drive.
8. Hatch Drive. East bound only.
9. Center Street. West bound only.
Historical Note: Section 12-502(10) through (17) were enacted September 18, 1978. Revisions to Article V, Sections 501
and 502 were adopted April 28, 1997; Section 12-502(2) was amended February 11, 2008.
704
ARTICLE VI BICYCLE REGULATIONS
Sec. 12-601 Bicycles
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public street in this City other than astride a permanent and regular
seat attached thereto, or use a bicycle to carry more persons at any one time that the number for which it is designed and
equipped or ride abreast of any other person riding or propelling a bicycle.
Sec. 12-602 Equipment
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public street in this City unless said bicycle is equipped with a
bell, horn or other warning device, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle
any siren or whistle; nor shall any person ride a bicycle on any street in the City after dark unless such bicycle shall have
attached to it a light so displayed as to be visible.
Sec. 12-603 Sidewalks
No person shall ride or propel on any sidewalk or within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary
driveway anywhere within the City except outside of the business district where children under the age of 16 years may ride
on the sidewalk. In this exception bicycles shall always give way to pedestrians.
No person shall ride a skateboard on the sidewalk or within any sidewalk area, or any pedestrian way within the C-1
Zone of the City of Caribou. Any person who violates this section, upon adjudication, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $10.00. The Chief of Police, when satisfied a person is in violation of this section, may impound the skateboard for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
Sec. 12-604 Traffic Laws Apply
Every person propelling or riding a bicycle upon any public street in this City shall be subject to the provisions of
this Chapter applicable to the drive of any vehicle, except those provisions of this Chapter which by their very nature can
have no application.
12-605 Obedience to Traffic Control Devices
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signs, and other control devices,
and signals, including signs indicating no left turn or U turn is permitted, applicable to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a
police officer.
Sec. 12-606 Clinging to Moving Vehicles
No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.
Sec. 12-607 License Required
From after the effective date of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled
by muscular power upon any of the streets or alleys or public highways of the City of Caribou without first obtaining from
the Chief of Police a license therefore. Said license not to exceed $0.50 per bicycle. This fee shall be used to defray the cost
of the license decal.
12-608 Issuance of License
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to issue bicycle licenses, which shall have no more than a two
(2) year duration.
Sec. 12-609 Tags and Inspection
The Chief of Police shall designate and provide tags for the use of the licensee and direct the manner of placing such
tag on the bicycle by the licensee. The Chief of Police shall keep a record of the name of the licensee, the number of the tag,
and a description of the bicycle so registered. The Chief of Police may also require inspection of the bicycles in order to
ascertain the safe condition of such bicycles and may designate suitable bicycle safety inspection stations.
705
Sec. 12-610 Bicycle Violations.
Any person violating any bicycle provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than one dollar
($1.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00), or at the discretion of the Judge, in lieu of a fine, he may impound said bicycle for
a period of from 3 to 30 days.
Sec. 12-611 Parent or Guardian.
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize nor knowingly permit any such child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this Article.
Historical Note: Revisions to Article VI Sections 607 and 608 were adopted April 28, 1997.
ARTICLE VII TOWNWAY STOP AND YIELD DESIGNATIONS
Sec. 12-701 Townway Stop Designations.
All vehicles are required to come to a complete stop before entering the following intersection:
1. Albair Road at US Route #1.
2. Albair Road at Baird Road.
3. Aldrich Drive at Route 89.
4. Aldrich Drive at Otter Street.
5. Alexander Avenue at Main Street.
6. Alexander Avenue at Morgan Drive.
7. Alpha Street (North End) at Solar Drive.
8. Alpha Street (South End) at Solar Drive.
9. Angle Street at North Street.
10. Angle Street at Liberty Street.
11. Armco Avenue at Main Street.
12. Armco Avenue at Birdseye Avenue.
13. Bailey Road at West P.I. Road.
14. Baird Road at Powers Road.
15. Baird Road at Route 89.
16. Barrett Avenue at High Street.
17. Belanger Road at US Route #1.
18. Belanger Road at Brissette Road.
19. Bell Lane at Bridge Street.
20. Belyea Road at Route 89.
21. Belyea Road at Bog Road.
22. Bennett Drive at High Street.
23. Bennett Drive at US Route #1.
24. Bernadette Street at St. Anne Street.
25. Bernadette Street at Rose Street.
25-A. Beta Street (South End) at Solar Drive.
26. Birdseye Avenue at Fort Street.
27. Birdseye Avenue at Main Street.
28. Bog Road at Noyes Road.
29. Bowles Road (North Bound) at Baird Road.
30. Bowles Road at Route 89.
31. Bowles Road (South Bound) at Baird Road.
32. Bradley Street at Brook Street.
33. Bridge Street at Lyndon Street.
34. Brissette Road at Albair Road.
35. Broadway Street at Water Street.
36. Brook Street at Washburn Street.
37. Buck Road at US Route #1.
38. Buck Road at West P.I. Road.
39. Campground Road at East P.I. Road.
40. Campground Road at Green Ridge Road.
41. Caribou Lake Road at West P.I. Road.
706
42. Caribou Street at Myrtle Street
43. Caroline Avenue at Elmwood Avenue
44. Carroll Street at Route 89
45. Center Street at Stevens Street
46. Charles Street at Rose Street
47. Church Street at Washington Street
48. Clover Street at Pioneer Avenue
49. Collins Street at Main Street
50. Collins Street at Pioneer Avenue
51. Columbus Avenue at Roberts Street
52. Coolidge Avenue at Sweden Street
53. Coolidge Avenue at Clover Street
54. Coolidge Avenue (North Bound) at Collins Street
55. Coolidge Avenue (South Bound) at Collins Street
56. Corbin Street at Hardison Avenue
57. Corbin Street at Crosby Avenue
58. Corriveau Street at Solman Street
59. Country Road at Main Street
60. Country Road at Harvest Road
61. Court Street at Sweden Street
62. Crosby Avenue at Main Street
63. Cross Road at Powers Road
64. Cross Road at Albair Road
65. Dahlgren Street at Washburn Street
65-A. Dorcas Avenue at Harvest Road
66. Dow Siding Road at US Route #1
67. Doyle Road at US Route #1
68. Doyle Road at West P.I. Road
69. East P.I. Road at Route 161
70. E. Green Ridge Road at Green Ridge Road
71. Elizabeth Avenue at Collins Street
72. Elizabeth Avenue at Clover Street
73. Elm Street (West Bound) at US Route #1
74. Elm Street at Broadway Street
75. Elm Street (East Bound) at US Route #1
76. Elmwood Avenue at Garden Circle
77. Elmwood Avenue (North Bound) at Westwind Drive
78. Elmwood Avenue at Franklin Street
79. Elmwood Avenue (South Bound) at Westwind Drive
80. Emond Road at US Route #1
81. Evergreen Parkway at Laurette Street
82. Farrell Street at Sweden Street
83. Fenderson Street at Elm Street
84. Fenderson Street at Water Street
85. Forrest Avenue at Dahlgren Street
85A.Forrest Avenue at Superior Drive
86. Fort Street at US Route #1
87. Fort Street at Main Street
88. Franklin Street at Teague Street
89. Franklin Street at Glenn Street
90. Garden Circle (East Bound) at Glenn Street (South Corner)
91. Garden Circle at Garden Circle
92. Garden Circle at Main Street
93. Garden Circle (East Bound) at Glenn Street (North Corner)
94. Glendale Road at Bennett Drive
95. Glenn Street at High Street
96. Glenn Street at Rose Street
97. Goldfrank Drive at Water Street
98. Grange Street at Herschel Street
99. Grimes Mill Road at Bog Road
100. Grimes Mill Road at Grimes Road
101. Grove Street at Main Street
102. Haines Street at York Street
707
103. Hammond Street at Main Street
104. Hancock Street at North Street
105. Hardison Road at East P.I. Road
106. Hardison Road at Main Street
107. Harvest Road at Main Street
108. Harvest Road at Home Farm Road
109. Harvey Street at Katahdin Avenue
110. Heritage Road at Prospect Street
111. Herschel Street at Prospect Street
112. High Street at US Route #1
113. Highland Avenue at Main Street
114. Highland Avenue at Summit Street
115. Hillcrest Avenue at North Street
116. Hillcrest Avenue at Glendale Road
117. Hoover Avenue at Clover Street
118. Huston Street at Washburn Street
119. Huston Street (South Bound) at Bradley Street
120. Huston Street (North Bound) at Bradley Street
121. Jacobs Street at Paris Snow Drive
122. Jefferson Street at Lyndon Street
123. Jefferson Street at Thomas Avenue
124. Katahdin Avenue at Main Street
125. Kelley Road at Route 161
126. Kittinger Drive at Main Street
127. Lafayette Street (North Bound) at Katahdin Avenue
128. Lafayette Street (South Bound) at Katahdin Avenue
129. Lafayette Street (North Bound) at Crosby Avenue
130. Lafayette Street (South Bound) at Crosby Avenue
131. Lafayette Street at Hardison Avenue
132. Laurette Circle at Bennett Drive
133. Laurette Street at Bennett Drive
134. Lee Street (North Bound) at Katahdin Avenue
135. Lee Street (South Bound) at Katahdin Avenue
136. Liberty Street at Bennett Drive
137. Limestone Street at Route 89
138. Lincoln Street (South Bound) at Katahdin Avenue
138-A. Lincoln Street (North Bound) at Katahdin Avenue
139. Lincoln Street (South Bound) at Crosby Avenue
140. Lincoln Street (North Bound) at Hardison Avenue
141. Lincoln Street (North Bound) at Crosby Avenue
142. Lombard Road at Woodland Road
143. Lombard Road at Washburn Street
144. Lower Lyndon Street at US Route #1
145. Lower Washington Street at US Route #1
146. Lower Washington Street at Lower Lyndon Street
147. Lyndon Street at US Route #1
148. Lyndon Street at Main Street
149. Lynn Drive at Pioneer Avenue
150. MacArthur Avenue at Main Street
151. MacArthur Avenue at Lafayette Street
152. Madawaska Road at Route 89
153. Main Siding Road at Route 161
154. Main Street (South Bound) at US Route #1
155. Main Street (North Bound) at US Route #1
156. Maple Street at Lyndon Street
157. Marshall Avenue at Paris Snow Drive
158. Marshall Avenue at Vesta Drive
159. Mayo Street at Lynn Drive
160. Maysville Road at US Route #1
161. McGraw Siding at East P.I. Road
162. McKinley Street at Roosevelt Avenue
708
163. McKinley Street at Sweden Street
164. Meadow Brook at Washburn Street
165. Meadow Brook at Superior Drive
166. Mecon Drive at Aldrich Drive
167. Mecon Drive at Route 89
168. Mitchell Road at Washburn Street
169. Mitchell Road at York Street
170. Montgomery Avenue at Main Street
171. Montgomery Avenue (West Bound) at Morgan Street
172. Montgomery Avenue (East Bound) at Morgan Street
173. Montgomery Avenue at Lafayette Street
174. Morgan Drive at Scenic Drive
175. Morgan Drive at MacArthur Avenue
176. Myrtle Street at Roberts Street
177. Nancy Street (South Bound) at Katahdin Avenue
178. Nancy Street (North Bound) at Crosby Avenue
179. Nancy Street (South Bound) at Crosby Avenue
180. Nebraska Road at West Gate Road
181. Nebraska Road at Madawaska Road
182. Newton Avenue at Marshall Avenue
183. Newton Avenue at Wellington Avenue
184. North Street at Bennett Drive
185. Northern Avenue at Fontaine Drive
186. Noyes Road at Route 89
187. Nylander Street at Main Street
188. Nylander Street at Lyndon Street
189. Oak Street at Main Street
190. Ogren Road at Sweden Street
191. Old Van Buren Road at US Route #1
192. Old Washburn Road at York Street
193. Old Washburn Road at Caribou Lake Road
194. Otter Street at Route 89
195. Ouellette Road at US Route #1
196. Page Avenue at Sweden Street
197. Page Avenue at Clover Street
198. Page Avenue (North Bound) at Collins Street
199. Page Avenue (South Bound) at Collins Street
200. Paris Snow Drive at Main Street
201. Park Street at Main Street
202. Park Street (East Bound) at Glenn Street
203. Park Street (West Bound) at Glenn Street
204. Park Street at Bennett Drive
205. Patten Street at US Route #1
206. Pilgrim Road at Glenn Street
207. Pilgrim Road at Windy Hill Drive
208. Pilgrim Road (East Bound) at Elmwood Avenue
209. Pilgrim Road (West Bound) at Elmwood Avenue
210. Pioneer Avenue at Mayo Street
211. Pioneer Avenue (South Bound) at Collins Street/Lynn Drive
212. Plante Road at US Route #1
213. Pleasant Street at High Street
214. Pond Road at Plante Road
215. Pond Street at Bradley Street
216. Pool Avenue at Spring Street
217. Powers Road at Route 89
218. Preston Drive at Woodland Road
219. Prospect Street at Home Farm Road
220. Prospect Street at Sweden Street
221. Prospect Street (North Bound) at Collins Street
222. Prospect Street (South Bound) at Collins Street
223. Railroad Street at Elm Street
709
224. Railroad Street at Broadway Street
225. Raymond Street at Sweden Street
226. Raymond Joseph Lane at Powers Road
227. Raymond Joseph Lane at Cross Road
228. Reservoir Street at Main Street
229. Reservoir Street at Elmwood Avenue
230. Richards Road at Grimes Road
231. Richards Road (North Bound) at Route 89
232. Richards Road (South Bound) at Route 89
233. River Road (North Bound) at Route 161
234. River Road (South Bound) at Route 161
235. Roberts Street at Main Street
236. Roberts Street at Caribou Street
237. Roosevelt Avenue at Washburn Street
238. Roosevelt Avenue at Sweden Street
239. Rose Street at Main Street
240. Russ Street at Main Street
241. Russ Street at Vesta Drive
242. Sawyer Road at Route 89
243. Sawyer Road at Bog Road
244. Scenic Avenue at Main Street
245. School Street at High Street
246. School Street at Fenderson Street
247. Shirley Drive at Woodland Road
248. Short Street at Roosevelt Avenue
249. Sincock Street at Main Street
250. Sincock Street at York Street
251. Skyway Drive at Bennett Drive
252. Smith Street at Pleasant Street
253. Smith Street at School Street
254. Solar Drive at Sweden Street
255. Solman Street at Rose Street
256. Solman Street at Main Street
257. Solman Street at Corriveau Drive
258. South Park Street at Liberty Street
259. Sperry Drive at Glenn Street
260. Sperry Drive at Bennett Drive
261. Spring Street at Sweden Street
262. Spring Street at Washburn Street
263. Spruce Ridge at Powers Road
264. St.Anne Street at Main Street
265. St.Anne Street at Charles Street
266. Steven Street at Hatch Drive
267. Stevens Street at Sweden Street
268. Sullivan Drive at Grimes Road
269. Summer Street at Sweden Street
270. Summer Street at Washburn Street
271. Summit Street at Oak Street
272. Summit Street at Wilbur Avenue
273. Sunrise Street at Summit Street
273A.Superior Drive at Dahlgren Street
274. Sweden Street at Prospect Street
275. Teague Street at Park Street
276. Teague Street at Reservoir Street
277. Thomas Avenue at Main Street
278. Thompson Road at West Gate Road
279. Thompson Road at Madawaska Road
280. Townview Road at Dorcas Avenue
281. Townview Road at Home Farm Road
282. Truman Street at Washburn Street
283. Vaughan Street at Main Street
710
284. Vaughan Street at Church Street
285. Veronica Street at Liberty Street
286. Dorilda Circle at Vesta Drive
286-A. Vesta Drive at Russ Street
286-B. Vesta Drive at Vesta Drive
287. Vickers Drive (East Bound) at Route 89
288. Vickers Drive (West Bound ) at Route 89
289. View Street at Washburn Street
290. View Street (South Bound) at Bradley Street
291. View Street (North Bound) at Bradley Street
292. Violette Street at Corriveau Street
293. Violette Street at Solman Street
294. Washburn Street at Hatch Drive
295. Washburn Street at Hatch Drive/Steven Street
296. Washington Street at Main Street
297. Washington Street at US Route #1
298. Water Street at Main Street
299. Watson Memorial Drive at US Route #1
300. Wellington Avenue at Paris Snow Drive
301. Wellington Avenue at Vesta Drive
302. West Gate Road at Route 89
303. West P.I. Road at Main Street
304. Westwind Drive at Main Street
305. Westwind Drive at Glenn Street
306. Wilbur Avenue at Main Street
307. Willow Street at Washburn Street
308. Windy Hill Drive at Westwind Drive
309. Windy Hill Drive at Caroline Avenue
310. Woodland Road at Sweden Street
311. Wright Street at Washburn Street
312. York Street at Main Street
313. York Street at Washburn Road
Sec. 12-702 Townway Yield Designations
All vehicles are required to yield to thru traffic at the following intersections:
1. Bridge Street at Water Street
2. Hatch Drive at Main Street
3. Herschel Street at Record Street
4. High Street at Main Street
5. Main Street at Herschel Street
6. Old Van Buren Road at Main Street
7. Powers Road at Belanger Road
8. Railroad Street at US Route #1
9. Record Street at Hatch Drive
10. Sweden Street at Hatch Drive
Historical Note: Revisions to Article VII Sections 701 & 702 were adopted April 28, 1997; Sections 701 & 702 were
amended August 13, 2001; Section 701 amended July 8, 2002 and August 13, 2007.
ARTICLE VIII PENALTY AND SAVINGS PROVISIONS
Sec. 12-801 Relation to Previous Ordinances
This chapter shall be deemed to be in addition and supplementary to, and not in conflict with nor a repeal of prior or
existing ordinances or articles of the City of Caribou, but shall be an additional provision for the regulation of traffic and
parking in these zones and areas provided herein.
711
Sec. 12-802 Saving Clause
Should any section or part thereof of this Chapter be declared invalid by the court, the same shall not effect the
validity of the Chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid. All references to an
infraction herein shall be deemed a civil violation.
Historical Note: Articles I through VIII were originally Chapter 9, 1956 Code; amended June 4, 1980. Revisions to Article
VIII, Section 801 were adopted April 28, 1997. Revisions to Articles I through VIII were adopted April 28, 1997.
712




Sec. 13-205 Dimensional Requirements.
1. Lots and structures in all Districts shall meet or exceed the dimensional requirements listed below.
2. Height requirements do not apply to barns, barn silos, flagpoles, chimneys, transmission towers, steeples,
windmills, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, sky lights, ventilators, and other necessary appurtenances carried
above roofs; nor towers, stacks, spires, if not used for human occupancy; nor to ornamental towers, observatory
towers, television and radio broadcasting towers and antennas and similar structures that do not occupy more
than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area; nor to churches and public institutional buildings; nor similar
structures, usually erected at a greater height than the principal building, however such accessory structures or
appurtenances require a lot line setback distance of no less than its height.
3. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the
minimum requirement, herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet or at
least the minimum requirements, herein.
4. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about in connection with
any building for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space,
or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
5. The front yard setback requirements of this Ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average
setback on developed lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the same
block and zoning District and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum setback required.
In such cases the front yard setback on such lot may be less than the reduced setback, but not less than the
average of the existing setbacks on the developed lots.
6. Dimensional requirements for mobile home park lots are in Sec. 13-408, “Mobile Homes”.
7. Minimum set back requirements for all Principal and Accessory structures shall be in compliance with Table
13-205-A. Residential R-1 & R-2 zones shall require that structure height be limited to a 3/1 three to one ratio
from the side and rear setbacks. Minimum side set back shall be 5' (five feet) and minimum rear setback shall
be 10' (ten feet) in the R-1 & R-2 zones.
8. Non conforming Lots of Record, recorded prior to May 1980, in the Residential R-3 & R-4 zones, consisting of
less than one acre (43,560 square feet) shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the R-1 & R-2 zones.
9. Definitions
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one building and the accessory buildings or uses
customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by an ordinance, and having frontage upon a
public street, right-of-way, or private way.
Lot Area: The land area enclosed within the boundary lines of the lot, not including the area of any land which is:
part of a right-of-way for a thoroughfare or easement, such as, but not limited to, surface drainage easements or
traveled rights-of-way (but not including any utility easement servicing that lot); or the land below the normal highwater
line of a water body; or upland edge of a wetland; or which is a forested or freshwater wetland.
Lot, Corner: A lot with at least two (2) contiguous sides abutting upon a street or right of way.
Lot, Coverage: The percentage of the lot covered by all buildings.
781
Lot, Interior: Any lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined below:
Front Lot Line: On an interior lot, the lot line abutting the street or right-of-way; or, on a corner lot each lot line
abutting the street or right-of-way; or, on a through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing primary access
to the lot; or, on a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street from which access is
obtained.
Rear Lot Line: The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an
imaginary line between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet long, lying
farthest from the front lot line. On a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line of least
dimension.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot, Minimum Area: The required area within a District for a single lot or use.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are recorded on a
document or map on file in the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds.
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, goods, or property of any kind,
together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive of fences. The
term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks and satellite receiving dishes, but in land
areas outside of shoreland areas, signs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, and parking lots are not defined as structures.
Historical Note: Section 13-205 was amended March 10, 2008.
781-A

Dimensional Requirements Minimum Setback Dimensions
Zoning District Minimum Lot Size Minimum Lot Frontage Maximum Lot C o v e r a g e Principal and Accessory Structures
Front
(from ROW)
Side
(Each) Rear Maximum Height
R-1
Single Family Dwelling: 9,000 SF
Two Family Dwelling 10,500 SF
Other Allowed Use: 12,000 SF
Single Family Dwelling: 85'
Two Family Dwelling: 95'
Other Allowed Use: 100'
30% 20' 5' 10' 35'
R-2
Single Family Dwelling: 9,000 SF
Two Family Dwelling 10,500 SF
Multi Family Dwelling: 12,000 SF
Plus 1,500 SF for Each Additional
Dwelling Unit.
Other Allowed Use: 10,500 SF
Single Family Dwelling 75'
Two Family Dwelling 85'
Multi Family Dwelling 95'
Plus 10' for Each Additional
Dwelling Unit
Other Allowed Use: 85'
30% 20' 5' 10' 35'
RC-2
43,560 SF 150'
30' 15' 15' 60'
R-3
Single Family Dwelling: 43,560 SF
Two Family Dwelling: 65,000 SF
Multi Family Dwelling: 87,000 SF
Plus 10,000 SF for Each Additional
Dwelling Unit
Other Allowed Use: 65,000 SF
Single Family Dwelling: 150'
Two Family Dwelling: 160'
Multi Family Dwelling: 175'
Plus 10' for Each Additional
Dwelling Unit
Other Allowed Use: 160'
30% 30' 15' 15' 35'
C-1
100% 0' 0' 0' 45'
C-2
50% 10' 10' 10' 45'
I-1
43,560 SF 100'
75% 20' 10' 20' 45'
I-2
43,560 SF 100'
40% 20' 10' 20' 45'
H-1
W/Public Sewer: 9,000 SF
WO/Public Sewer: 20,000 SF
75'
40% 40' 10' 20' 0'
Garibou Git¡r
Official Zoning Map - 2018
Legend
Jr¡¡l
lI¡ ¡t : TownshioBoundaries
I caribou Rivers
ffi pono"
Parcel Boundaries
'//, shoretandZone
Zoning Districts
Zone
I tc-rl Downtown commercial
I tc-zl General commerc¡al
f (n-cz) Rural Commercial
I (H-1) Hospital
ffi tl-ll Lighttndustry
| 1t-z¡ tnoustry
(R-1) Res¡dential Single Family
I tn-zl Res¡dential lvixed Housing
(R-3) Rural Mixed Uses
A 0 03 0.8 1.6 2.4 3.2
-Mll.s
Kllomal€rs
0 3
2017 ¡rapAmendments
By offic¡al acüon of the City, the follow¡ng changes were made:
Ordinance No. 8, 201 7 Series, adopted October '1 0, 201 7, effective Octobet 24,20'17, rezoned 0.03 acres from l-2 to R-2 at 47 York Sùeet.
Ordinance No. 9, 201 7 Series, adopÞd October 'l 0, 201 7, efiective Octoæt 24,20'17, rezoned I 8.0 acres from R-'l to R-3 at 30 Lee SÍeet.
"lhis ¡s to ce.tify that this is the Oñic¡al zoning Map
oflhe c¡ty of Caribou, Maine
'*1-+i \
\ r ,.1
a^E
h
iJ -
i
b æ
i**- ¡*1 , f,r-.¡ t.
R-3
= t 5
-ï ílt'
i
q
I
T
)
\.
ìJ
-T1
I ",' \i
t-
R-3
R-3
R::
\
I J / .1
q
r--
a
I
IÈ
I.
J
I
Y
E:=
n f l R-3
I
I
I
I
I 0a
Produced: December 30, 201 7 by Cadbou City Planning & Zoning
Datar All data derived from Cadbou GIS digital td maps.
Soñwarer ESRI ArcMap ,|0.1
HardMre: HP ProBook, lntel(R) CoreOM) iS720O CPU @ 2.5GHz eith l2GB RAM
ftls máp ls for gonorål rcfêrêncs purposos only, No wránty ofdåla or rspr€3enlållons ofsuch raldvê lo
raal wodd condlllons ls gMen.Any quadlons or dlspd6s ábod lhê ldomllon convayôd on lhls map 3hould
b6 addr.ssodlo lhe Cadbou CtyPlánnlng ånd Zonlng oñc.s loc6l.d ål 25 H¡gh gr..l, Cadbou, ME &736.
0.75 1.5 4.5
of the Zonlng
ou,". ri,\ærB
The Land Use Ordinances of the City of Caribou
Table of Contents
Section Page
Sec. 13-100 Legal Status Provisions for the Zoning, Site Design Review, and Subdivision Ordinances 767
Sec. 13-200 Zoning Ordinance 768
Sec. 13-201 Applicability of Zoning Review 768
Sec. 13-202 Official Zoning Map 768
Sec. 13-203 Establishment of Districts 771
Sec. 13-204 District Regulations 778
Land Use Table 779
Sec. 13-205 Dimensional Requirements 781
Dimensional Requirements Table 783
Sec. 13-206 Non-Conformance 784
Sec. 13-300 Site Design Review Ordinance 787
Sec. 13-301 Applicability of Site Design Review 787
Sec. 13-302 Site Design Review Procedure and Requirements 787
Sec. 13-303 Site Design Review Criteria 792
Sec. 13-304 General Requirements for Site Designs 796
Sec. 13-305 Conditional Approval of Site Designs 797
Sec. 13-306 Revisions to Approved Site Plans 797
Sec. 13-307 Post Application Submissions 797
Sec. 13-400 Subdivision Ordinance 798
Sec. 13-401 Applicability of Subdivision Review 798
Sec. 13-402 Procedures for Subdivision Review 798
Sec. 13-403 Pre-Application Meeting and Sketch Plan Procedures 799
Sec. 13-404 Preliminary Plan Procedure and Requirements 800
Sec. 13-405 Final Plan Procedure and Requirements 804
Sec. 13-406 Subdivision Review Criteria 808
Sec. 13-407 General Requirements for Subdivisions 810
Sec. 13-408 Manufactured Housing 811
Sec. 13-409 Cluster Development 814
Net Buildable Acreage Calculation 817
Sec. 13-500 Shoreland Zoning Ordinance 818
1. Purposes 820
2. Authority 820
3. Applicability 820
4. Effective Date and Repeal of Formerly Adopted Ordinance 820
5. Availability 821
6. Severability 821
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances 821
8. Amendments 821
9. Districts and Zoning Map 821
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries 822
11. Land Use Requirements 822
12. Non-Conformance 822
13. Establishment of Districts 825
14. Table of Land Uses 827
15. Land Use Standards 829
16. Administration 843
17. Definitions 849
Sec. 13-600 Flood Hazard Area Regulations 858
Sec. 13-601 Establishment 858
Sec. 13-602 Permit Required 858
Sec. 13-603 Application for Permit 859
Sec. 13-604 Application Fee and Expert's Fee 859
Sec. 13-605 Review of Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications 859
Sec. 13-606 Development Standards 860
Sec. 13.607 Certificate of Compliance 862
Sec. 13.608 Review of Subdivision and Development Proposals 862
Sec. 13-609 Appeals and Variances 862
Sec. 13-610 Enforcement and Penalties 863
Sec. 13-611 Validity and Severability 864
Sec. 13-612 Conflict with other Ordinances 864
Sec. 13-613 Definitions 864
Sec. 13-614 Abrogation 867
Sec. 13-700 General Requirements for Land Uses 868
1. Apartments Accessory to Commercial Uses 868
2. Archaeological Sites 868
3. Basement Drainage 868
4. Bed and Breakfast 868
5. Buffers and Screening 868
6. Campground and/or Recreational Vehicle Park 869
7. Disposal of Solid Waste 870
8. Easements for Natural Drainage Ways 870
9. Electro-Magnetic Interference 870
10. Erosion and Sedimentation Control 871
11. Exterior Lighting 871
12. Fire Protection 871
13. Home Occupations 872
14. Hotels, Motels, and Inns 873
15. Impact on Natural Beauty, Aesthetics, Historic Sites, Wildlife Habitat, Rare Natural Areas, or
Public Access to the Shoreline 874
16. Impact on Water Quality or Shoreline 875
17. Kennels 878
18. Lots and Density 879
19. Monumentation 879
20. Noise 880
21. Preservation of Natural Features 880
22. Professional Offices in Residential Districts 880
23. Rear Lots 881
24. Reservation or Dedication and Maintenance of Usable Open Space and Common Land,
Facilities, and Services 881
25. Residences Excluded from Industrial Districts 882
26. Satellite Receiving Dish 882
27. Sewage Disposal 882
28. Sidewalks 883
29. Signs 884
30. Stormwater Management 888
31. Street Trees, Esplanades, and Open Green Spaces 889
32. Swimming Pools 890
33. Temporary Dwellings 890
34. Toxic and Noxious Discharges 890
35. Utilities 890
36. Waste Material Accumulations Regulated 890
37. Water Supply 890
38. Establishments dealing in the consignment or resale of used personal property 891
39. Registered Nonprofit Dispensaries & Registered Cultivation Facilities for Medical Marijuana 891
40. Livestock and Poultry …………………………………………………………………………….892
41. Prohibiting Recreational Marijuana ………………………………………………………………893
Sec. 13-710 Access Management, Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Road Design and Construction Standards 895
Access Management 895
Off-Street Parking and Loading 898
Road Design and Construction Standards 902
Caribou Road Design and Construction Standards 904
Sec. 13-720 Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards 907
Sec. 13-730 Mineral Exploration and Extraction 909
Sec. 13-740 Mobile Homes 910
General Requirements 910
Mobile Homes Built Before June 15, 1976, or Not Built According to the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, US Code, Title 42,
Chapter 70 909
Sec. 13-745 Confined Feeding Operations .913
Sec. 13-750 Performance Guarantees 915
Sec. 13-760 Daycare Facilities 916
Sec. 13-770 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 917
Sec. 13-800 Administration and Enforcement 925
Sec. 13-810 Appeals 928
Sec. 13-820 Planning Board 931
Sec. 13-830 Board of Appeals 935
Sec. 13-831 Board of Appeals Bylaws Provisions 935
Sec. 13-840 Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses 936
Sec. 13-850 Amendments 936
Sec. 13-900 Definitions 936
The Land Use Ordinances of the City of Caribou.
Sec. 13-100 Legal Status Provisions for the Zoning, Site Design Review, and Subdivision
Ordinances.
1. Title.
The Zoning Ordinance, Site Design Review Ordinance, and the Subdivision Ordinance collectively shall be known and
may be cited as the "Land Use Ordinances of the City of Caribou" or (herein "these Ordinances").
2. Purposes.
The purposes of these Ordinances are to:
A. To provide for the municipal review of development that could impact on the environment and the community;
B. Assure the comfort, convenience, health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of Caribou;
C. Encourage appropriate use of land throughout the City;
D. Promote traffic safety;
E. Prevent overcrowding of real estate;
F. Prevent development in unsuitable areas;
G. Provide an allotment of land area in new developments sufficient for all the requirements of community life;
H. Conserve and protect where necessary natural resources and City character;
I. Provide for adequate public services and facilities as an integral part of Caribou development;
J. Protect archaeological and historic resources, freshwater wetlands, fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and
other wildlife habitat, and buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion;
K. Conserve shore cover, natural beauty, open space, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters;
L. Prevent and control water pollution;
M. Assure new development meets the goals and conforms to the policies of the Caribou Comprehensive Plan.
N. To provide local protection from those particular issues and nuisances which are not governed by State law or
regulation;
O. To balance the rights of landowners to use their land with the corresponding right of abutting or neighboring
landowners to live without undue disturbance from nuisances such as noise, smoke, dust, odor, glare, traffic,
stormwater runoff, or the pollution of ground or surface waters;
P. To reduce the off-site problems associated with development, thereby decreasing the cost of maintaining or
improving municipal services;
Q. Provide for an expeditious and efficient process for the review of proposed development; and
R. To clarify the criteria of the state Subdivision Law, Title 30-A, MRSA, Sections 4401-4407 et seq.
3. Authority.
These Ordinances have been adopted in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution; the
provisions of MRSA Title 30-A, Sections 3001 (Home Rule) and 4401 et seq. (Subdivisions), and the State's Growth
Management Law MRSA Title 30-A, §4312 et seq.; as may be amended.
4. Repeal of Prior Ordinances.
All prior Zoning Ordinances, Site Design Review Criteria/Ordinances, and Subdivision Ordinances/Regulations, except
for the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance of Caribou, are repealed as of the effective date.
5. Effective Date.
These Ordinances shall take effect and be in force from the date of its adoption.
767
6. Conflict with Other Laws.
Whenever the requirements of these Ordinances are at difference with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rule, regulation, ordinance, or resolution, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
7. Severability.
Should any Section (§), subsection (§§), or provision of these Ordinances be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional
or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these Ordinances as a whole or any part thereof other than the
part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
8. Availability.
A certified copy of these Ordinances shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be accessible to any member of the
public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the expense of the person making the request.
Notice of availability of these Ordinances shall be posted.
Sec. 13-200 Zoning Ordinance.
1. Title.
This Section shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Caribou".
2. Administration.
The Planning Board of the City of Caribou shall administer this Section.
Sec. 13-201 Applicability of Zoning Review.
This Section shall apply to all land, buildings, or structures within the boundaries of the City of Caribou.
Sec. 13-202 Official Zoning Map.
1. Official Zoning Map.
Districts are located and bounded as shown on the Official Zoning Map which is a made a part of this Section. There
may for purpose of clarity, necessitate by reasons of scale on the map, be more than one Official Zoning Map. The
minimum scale for the Official Zoning Map shall be no less than 1 inch = 2000 feet.
2. Certification of the Official Zoning Map.
A. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Chair of the City Council, attested by the City
Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Caribou, Maine"
Date: __________________________________
B. The Official Zoning Map shall be located in the office of the City Clerk.
3. Changes on the Official Zoning Map.
A. If, in accordance with the provisions of this Section and Title 30-A MRSA §4503, changes are made in District
boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, changes to the map shall be made within 14 days
768
after the amendment has been approved by the City Council. No amendment to this Section which involves
matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall become effective until signed by the Chair of the City Council
and attested by the City Clerk. In addition, the following wording shall be reflected on the Official Zoning Map:
"On by official action of the City, the following change(s) was (were) made: (insert brief description of the
nature of change)." Immediately beneath the entry the City Clerk shall place their signature.
B. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity
with the procedures set forth in this Section. Any unauthorized change shall be considered a violation of this Section
and punishable as provided for within the Sec. 13-800, "Administration and Enforcement".
4. Replacement of the Official Zoning Map.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the
nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council shall adopt a new Official Zoning Map.
769
Caribou Zoning Map – See Attached
Sec. 13-203 Establishment of Districts.
1. Zoning Districts.
A. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the City is hereby divided into the following Zoning Districts:
1. R-1 Residential District.
The R-1 District encompasses most of the older residential neighborhoods and is located within convenient reach of business
facilities. The District is expected to contain most of higher density single-family type dwellings likely to be needed by the
community. Certain additional uses which meet the requirements of this Ordinance may be permitted which will contribute
to balanced neighborhoods and enhance the attractiveness of the community.
2. R-2 Residential District.
The R-2 District encompasses most of the older residential neighborhoods and is located within convenient reach of business
facilities. The R-2 District is expected to contain most of the multi-family or apartment type dwellings likely to be needed by
the community. However, in harmony with the established neighborhoods, predominant land use will probably continue to
be single-family residence. As in the R-1 District, certain additional uses which meet the requirements of this Ordinance may
be permitted, which contribute to balanced neighborhoods and enhance the attractiveness of the community.
3. R-3 Residential District.
The R-3 District encompasses most of the area outside the urban center and is intended for the kinds of uses which have
traditionally predominated in rural New England; forestry and farming, farm residence, and a scattering of varied uses not
inconsistent with a generally open, non-intensive pattern of land use. The minimum lot size requirement is high in order to
prevent over-development where public sewers are not feasible and where a full range of urban services can not be provided
economically.
4. C-1 Commercial District.
The C-1 District is intended primarily for commercial uses to which the public requires easy and frequent access. Centrally
located and at the center of the existing downtown business district, the C-1 District is intended to encourage the
concentration of commercial development to the mutual advantage of customers and merchants. In order to protect the
integrity of the C-1 Commercial zone, residential dwelling space is not allowed on the first floor (street level) of buildings in
the C-1 Zone. Accessory and incidental residential dwelling units may be developed on the floors other than the first floor
(street level) with Site Design Review and Planning Board approval. No residential dwelling units maybe developed in the
basement (below street level) unless the entire building is constructed of approved noncombustible materials and in
compliance with the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC) as Type 1 or Type 2 Construction. Any
residential dwelling unit in the C-1Zone must meet all requirements of Sections 13-300 through 13-307 Site Design Review,
13-700 through 13-710 General Requirements for Land use, all requirements of the Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) and all
requirements of the Caribou Building Code and the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC).
5. C-2 Commercial District.
The C-2 District is intended primarily for commercial uses to which the public requires free and easy access and to provide
for a wider range of associated activities in the business community than in the "C-1" District. In order to protect the
integrity of the C-2 commercial zone, residential dwelling units are not allowed on the first floor (street level) of buildings in
the C-2 Zone. Accessory and incidental residential dwelling units may be developed on the floors other than the first floor.
Accessory and incidental residential dwelling units may be developed on the first floor (street level) with Site Design Review
and Planning Board approval. Accessory and incidental residential dwelling units may be developed on the first floor only if
50% or greater floor space is maintained for commercial use with Site Design Review and Planning Board approval. Any
residential dwelling unit in the C-2 Zone must meet all requirements of Sections 13-300 through 13-307 Site Design Review,
13-700 through 13-710 General Requirements for Land Use, all requirements of the Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) and all
requirements of the Caribou Building Code and the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC).
771
6. RC-2 Commercial District.
The RC-2 District is intended for commercial uses to which the public requires free and easy access. The lot
size requirements are larger than other commercial Districts, since the area may not be serviced by public
sewer, and the set back requirements are greater, since most RC-2 Districts are expected to be along major
traveled roads.
7. I-1 Industrial District.
The I-1 District is to provide land which is conveniently located with respect to transportation and municipal
services and where other conditions are favorable to the development of industry and which at the same time is
so located as to prevent undesirable conflict with residential and business uses.
8. I-2 Industrial District.
The I-2 District is to provide land which is conveniently located to transportation facilities for business
activities which require extensive land area, but do not require close proximity to residential and commercial
areas of the community and to promote such land use in the community while at the same time locating such
activity as to prevent undesirable conflict with residential and business uses and reduce traffic congestion in
these areas.
9. H-1 Health Related District.
The H-1 District is intended primarily for health use or uses compatible with a hospital or health-related
purpose. Located in the proximity of the Cary Medical Center, the H-1 District is intended to encourage the
concentration of medically related development for efficient land use.
B. Special Protection Overlay Districts.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, Caribou hereby has two special protection overlay Districts; for the sand and
gravel aquifers and for the Caribou Utility District's wellhead. The overlay Districts are intended to maintain safe
and healthful environmental conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish, aquatic
life, bird and other wildlife habitats; control building sites; provide visual and physical points of access to waters and
areas of natural beauty; and to protect and maintain the quality of surface and ground waters. The overlay Districts
shall be superimposed over underlying Districts and land uses are subject to both the standards in the underlying
and the overlay Districts.
1. Sand and Gravel Aquifer Overlay District.
a. This District includes sand and gravel aquifers as identified on the Maine Geological Survey
"Hydrogeologic Data for Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers" maps, as well as, a 75' buffer drawn
around the known boundaries of these aquifers (buffers shall be updated as the aquifer mapping is updated).
b. All future non-residential land uses on the aquifer and within the 75' buffer shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Planning Board.
c. All construction or activity involving the displacement of soil on the aquifer and within the 75' buffer shall
follow soil erosion control measures as outlined in appropriate Best Management Practices.
772
d. No vehicle carrying pesticides, fertilizers, or other toxic or hazardous chemicals or substances shall pump
water from the aquifer. Penalties of heavy fines and suspension of licenses shall be imposed for handling
potentially toxic or hazardous chemicals or substances within the aquifer or for the contamination of any
waters within the aquifer.
2. Wellhead Protection Overlay District.
a. The Wellhead Protection District (WPD) is created to protect the public water supply for the City by
preventing contaminants from reaching the well and realizing that drinking water is essential to the survival
of the City. The WPD includes the land area within 2500 feet of the Caribou Utility District's (CUD)
wellhead as may be delineated on the official zoning map. All land use activity regulated by this Ordinance
within the WPD shall require a brief application be obtained, completed, and returned by the applicant at
the CUD prior to the issuance of any permit.
b. No new or existing aboveground or underground storage of fuel, except for household heating fuel, or
chemical tank or toxic or hazardous materials shall be permitted or expanded within the WPD, except for
water treatment chemicals or materials of the CUD.
c. All construction or activity involving the displacement of soil within the WPD shall follow Best
Management Practices. The Planning Board may adopt, by reference, additional Best Management
Practices. In so doing the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing.
d. No vehicle carrying pesticides, fertilizers, or other potentially toxic or hazardous chemicals or substances
shall pump water from the WPD. Penalties of heavy fines and suspension of licenses shall be imposed for
handling potentially toxic or hazardous chemicals or substances within the WPD or for the contamination
of any waters within the WPD.
e. The City and the CUD shall have the right to install groundwater monitoring wells and shall further
maintain the right to sample such wells on properties within the WPD when the City or the CUD can
clearly show that groundwater monitoring in the area will serve to protect the public water supply from
existing or potential threats.
f. When and where applicable within the WPD, the CEO shall have the right, upon 24-hour notice, to enter,
inspect, and to determine whether all premises which have groundwater pollution control devises or
management practices are in good condition and working properly. Such testing shall be at the City's and
CUD's expense. If such testing indicates that the groundwater has been contaminated above the State
Primary and Secondary Drinking Water Standards, then further testing shall be at the expense of the land
owner in question. Additionally, the owner shall reimburse the City and/or the CUD for expenses incurred
in the initial well installation and testing.
g. The collection and disposal of petroleum products, chemicals, and wastes used in construction shall
conform to the following:
1. Petroleum products, chemicals, and wastes shall be collected and stored in closed, clearly marked,
water tight containers.
2. Containers shall be removed regularly for disposal to prevent spills and leaks which can occur due to
corrosion of containers. A schedule for removal shall be included with the application and in any
construction specifications for the project.
3. Fertilizers and landscape chemicals such as herbicides and pesticides shall be applied following
appropriate Best Management Practices.
h. Stormwater Runoff/Snow and Ice Control.
1. Drainage systems, including detention basins, drainage ways, and storm sewer systems, shall be
maintained in order to insure they function properly.
2. Chemicals and wastes shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent rainfall from contacting them.
773
3. Runoff from parking lots should be diverted to stormwater drains where applicable.
4. Snowmelt from parking lots should be diverted to stormwater drains.
5. Parking lots should be maintained on a yearly basis.
6. Sand/salt mixtures with a reduced portion of salt should be used for snow and ice control.
i. Industrial and Maintenance Operations.
1. A plan detailing the reuse, recycling, or proper disposal of waste chemicals shall be kept, maintained,
and updated as needed. Provisions shall be provided for implementing the plan.
2. Buildings, rooms, and areas where chemical potential pollutants are used, handled, or stored shall be
designed to contain spills and or leaks.
a. Floor drains shall not be used except as required by fire regulations; and
b. A waterproof dike shall be placed around areas to contain accidental spills. The dike shall have an
equivalent volume to the amount of material stored or used in the room.
3. Spill/leakage prevention and detection programs shall be maintained and updated.
a. Plans shall insure the regular collection and transport of chemicals; and
b. Plans shall provide for inspection of containers and storage areas on a regular basis.
4. A spill clean-up plan shall be maintained and updated annually. The plan shall:
a. Insure adequate materials and equipment are available;
b. Insure that personnel are trained; and
c. Insure that the local fire department is knowledgeable of clean-up procedures.
5. Wash waters and other diluted wastes shall be adequately treated consistent with State law and the
current pre-treatment ordinances.
a. Wastes shall be discharged to sewer systems where possible; and
b. Grease traps and oil separators shall be installed where necessary and shall be maintained on a
regular basis.
j. Septic/Sewage Disposal.
1. Sewer/septic systems shall be designed by a Maine Registered Professional Engineer using sound
engineering practices. On-site sewage disposal shall be according to the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules.
2. Construction of sewers and septic systems shall be carefully inspected to insure proper installation.
3. Septic systems and related piping shall be tested for leakage and certified by the LPI that they are
water tight prior to use. Sewer systems shall be tested for leakage, according to State standards or
municipal ordinance/District regulations.
4. Provisions shall be made to maintain sewer and septic systems.
5. Sewers and drainage systems shall be designed to insure that stormwater does not enter sanitary
sewers.
6. For cluster systems, 1000 gallon septic tank capacity shall be provided for each 300 gallons of flow.
Design flows for leachfields shall be less than 2500 gallons per day.
7. Chemicals, industrial wastes, floor drains and stormwater drains (i.e. roof drains) shall not be
discharged to septic systems.
k. Waste Disposal Handling.
1. Inert Fill.
774
a. Waste disposal areas shall be setback 75 feet from wetlands as defined in the Maine Natural
Resources Protection Act (NRPA);
b. Wastes shall be placed a minimum of 2 feet above the seasonal high ground water table; and
c. For wastes other than concrete, stone, and brick, documentation from a laboratory that wastes are
inert shall be provided.
2. Transfer Station/Recycling Facilities.
a. All storage areas shall be located a minimum of 5 feet above the seasonal high ground water table;
b. Sanitary wastes shall be disposed of into a public sewer or in accordance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules;
c. If water clean-up of facilities is used, it shall be discharged to a public sanitary sewer. If no public
sanitary sewer is available, dry clean-up procedures shall be used;
d. Gravel, asphalt, or concrete pads or steel or aluminum containers shall be used for storage
facilities for white goods and tires;
e. Facilities shall not be located in 100 year floodplain;
f. An Operating Manual shall insure that only non-hazardous municipal solid waste is accepted;
g. For recycling facilities, an Operating Manual shall insure that only clean, marketable recyclables
are collected; and
h. For recycling facilities, storage of residuals shall be accomplished to prevent spillage and leakage.
3. Municipal, Commercial, Industrial, and Other Special Wastes.
a. All handling, storage, and transfer shall comply with MDEP rules; and
b. Storage and transfer areas shall comply with the management practices listed in 2. Above.
4. Junkyards/Metal Processing.
a. Fluids shall be removed in a secure area and stored for appropriate disposal;
b. Fluids shall be disposed in accordance with state and federal laws; and
c. Records shall be maintained to indicate the quantities of fluids handled.
l. Chemical and Petroleum Handling and Storage.
1. Non-hazardous chemicals shall be substituted for hazardous varieties whenever possible.
2. A detailed inventory shall be maintained.
3. Provisions shall be made to clean-up all spills immediately with an absorbent material or other
methods and dispose of them properly.
4. Hazardous materials shall be stored in secure, corrosion, resistant containers.
5. Storage shall be in above-ground, corrosion resistant tanks. The following provisions shall be
complied with:
a. A diked area shall be provided around tanks to contain spills. The volume of diked area shall
equal the volume of product stored;
b. A roof shall be provided over containment areas to prevent collection of rain water; and
c. Drains shall not be installed in containment areas.
6. If underground storage is necessary, tanks shall be approved by the MDEP. The system, including
piping, shall be tested prior to use. Underground piping and transmission lines shall be inspected and
tested upon installation and on an annual basis, thereafter.
7. All floors shall be concrete or an impermeable, hardened material. Sub-floor synthetic containment
liners shall be inspected to contain spills or leaks occurring inside buildings with earth or gravel floors.
8. Non-bulk storage of chemicals shall be inside. Such storage areas shall comply with the following:
a. Floor drains shall not be used;
775
b. If floor drains are required by the fire regulations, they shall be discharged to a holding tank.
Tanks shall be pumped by a licensed oil or hazardous waste hauler, as appropriate. Tanks shall be
equipped with gauges to determine used capacity; and
c. Storage and handling areas shall have waterproof dikes around perimeter so as to contain spills.
9. Tanks shall be equipped with automatic shutoffs and/or high level alarms.
10. Spill and leak detection programs shall be maintained and updated annually.
11. Oil and water separators shall not be used to remove dissolved compounds or oil and greases which
had been subjected to detergents.
12. Loading areas shall be covered to prevent the mixing of stormwater and spilled chemicals. Concrete or
other impermeable pads shall be provided under transfer and handling areas.
13. Exterior transfer and handling areas shall be slope as to prevent runoff from other areas from entering
the handling area, but to contain small quantities of spilled product.
14. Procedures shall be made to catch and store chemicals spilled at loading docks and other transfer areas.
15. Provisions shall be made to periodically inspect and test tanks and lines for leaks.
16. The facility and equipment shall be designed to:
a. Prevent tank overflows; and
b. Prevent line breakage due to collision
17. Provisions shall be made to have:
a. Emergency diking materials available; and
b. Emergency spill cleanup materials available.
18. The facility and equipment shall be designed to:
a. Prevent tank overflows; and
b. Prevent line breakage due to collision
19. Exterior transfer and handling sites shall be graded and sloped to prevent runoff for other areas from
entering the handling areas.
20. Residential storage tanks for home heating fuel shall be located in cellars or on a concrete slab above
the ground if outside.
m. Sand and Gravel Mining.
1. Limit Depth of Excavation.
a. Excavation shall be limited to 5 feet above the seasonal high water table;
b. If excavation is proposed such that there will be less than 5 feet separation between excavation
limits and the ground water table, a hydrogeologic investigation must be done to assess the
potential adverse impact including potential contamination and reduction in recharge of this
proposal; and
c. If water supply wells are present within 500 feet of the proposed excavation, ground water level
monitoring wells shall be installed.
2. Haul roads shall be watered to control dust. Salting and oiling of roads is prohibited.
3. Petroleum Storage.
a. If petroleum is proposed for storage above ground, a fully contained storage and refueling area
shall be provided. Provisions must be made for rain falling in the containment area. A roof is
preferable. For large operations, a covered, impermeable refueling/maintenance area shall be
provided;
b. A spill prevention plan shall be maintained and updated; and
4. A reclamation plan shall be provided, maintained, and used.
776
n. Agriculture/Open Space/Power Lines.
1. Soil tests shall be used to determine proper amounts of nutrients and limestone (pH adjustment).
2. Nutrients shall be applied uniformly and only at levels required.
3. Split fertilizer applications should be used for new planting, where possible.
4. A slow release form of fertilizer should be used, where possible.
5. Nutrients shall not be applied to very shallow soils or exposed bedrock.
6. Chemical fertilizer application equipment shall be calibrated.
7. Irrigation shall be scheduled to minimize leaching potential.
8. Limit applications of nitrogen fertilizers to the spring or fall.
9. Nutrients shall not be applied during winter months when ground is frozen or snow covered.
10. Fertilizers and manure shall be stored in properly located and constructed facilities during periods
when application is not suitable.
11. All federal and state laws regulating pesticides shall be followed.
12. Material safety data sheets shall be kept accessible.
13. Application of fertilizers and pesticides shall be accomplished by certified applicators.
14. Secure, safe storage shall be provided for used pesticide containers and dispose of containers in
accordance from federal and state law.
o. Silvaculture.
1. Silvacultural Chemical Handling and Storage.
a. For the spillage or disposal of oils, fuels, coolants or hazardous wastes on the ground during
maintenance or repair, the appropriate collection and disposal of such substances shall take place;
b. The Best Management Practices for Chemical Use and Storage should be followed;
c. The Best Management Practices for Waste Disposal shall be followed; and
d. Salt/sand storage areas shall be covered.
2. Rules Governing District Boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map the following rules shall
apply.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of roads, highways, alleys, railroad rights-of-way,
rivers, or streams shall be construed to follow such center lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change
in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
E. Sources for the delineation of the Special Flood Hazard areas shall be the Caribou Flood Insurance Map.
F. Sources for the delineation of the Aquifer Protection District shall be the latest edition of the Maine Geological
Survey "Hydrogeologic Data for Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers".
G. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A through D above shall be
construed as being parallel to or extensions of such features. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official
Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
H. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning
Map, or other circumstances not covered by subsections A through G above, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the
District boundaries.
3. Lots Divided by District Boundaries.
When a lot of record is divided by a use District zoning boundary, other than the boundary to an overlay zone, the
following rules shall apply:
A. On lots of two (2) acres or less in area, the lot shall be used as if the entire lot were in the District which comprises
the larger portion.
777
B. On lots larger than two (2) acres, the District regulations shall be followed in each portion.
Historical Note: Section 13-203, § 1A (6 & 7) as amended March 26, 2007; Section 13-203, R2-A district dissolved January
11, 2010; Section 13-203 was amended to replace 1996 BOCA with MUBEC February 14, 2011.
Sec. 13-204 District Regulations.
1. Basic Requirement.
Permitted Uses and Uses requiring Site Design Review in all Districts shall conform to all applicable specifications and
requirements. A Plumbing Permit, Building Permit, and/or Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for all buildings,
uses of land and buildings, and sanitary facilities, according to the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Land Use Requirements.
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created unless
in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the District in which it is located, unless a variance is
granted.
3. General Requirements for Specific Districts.
A. All Districts.
No stable or barn, where allowed, shall be closer than 100 feet to any property line.
B. R-1 and R-2 Districts.
1. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained by the property owner or their authorized agent free from
weed growth in excess of ten (10) inches. Noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
2. No motorized vehicle that is not currently or properly registered or which is unserviceable, discarded, worn out,
or junked; or motorized vehicle bodies, parts, or engines shall be gathered together or parked upon any
residential property, except when the vehicle is within a garage or other structure that complies with the
building code of the City.
3. No motorized vehicle, or parts thereof, shall be displayed or offered for sale, trade, or lease for a period not to
exceed ninety (90) days, in aggregate, in a calendar year.
C. R-C-2 Commercial District.
Any commercial use allowed in the C-1 and C-2 Districts shall be allowed in the RC-2 District.
4. District Regulations.
Land uses in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance are shown in the following table.
CEO = Requires both Site Design Review and a permit from the CEO.
PB = Requires Site Design Review by the Planning Board and a permit from the CEO.
NO = Not permitted.
Historical Note: Section 13-204 §3 as amended March 26, 2007; Section 13-204, R2-A District dissolved January 11, 2010.
778
Land Use Tables – See Attached
Land Use Tables – See Attached
Sec. 13-205 Dimensional Requirements.
1. Lots and structures in all Districts shall meet or exceed the dimensional requirements listed below.
2. Height requirements do not apply to barns, barn silos, flagpoles, chimneys, transmission towers, steeples, windmills,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, sky lights, ventilators, and other necessary appurtenances carried above roofs;
nor towers, stacks, spires, if not used for human occupancy; nor to ornamental towers, observatory towers, television
and radio broadcasting towers and antennas and similar structures that do not occupy more than twenty-five (25)
percent of the lot area; nor to churches and public institutional buildings; nor similar structures, usually erected at a
greater height than the principal building, however such accessory structures or appurtenances require a lot line
setback distance of no less than its height.
3. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the
minimum requirement, herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet or at least
the minimum requirements, herein.
4. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about in connection with any
building for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or offstreet
parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
5. The front yard setback requirements of this Ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average
setback on developed lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the same
block and zoning District and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum setback required. In
such cases the front yard setback on such lot may be less than the reduced setback, but not less than the average of
the existing setbacks on the developed lots.
6. Dimensional requirements for mobile home park lots are in Sec. 13-408, “Mobile Homes”.
7. Minimum set back requirements for all Principal and Accessory structures shall be in compliance with Table 13-
205-A. Residential R-1 & R-2 zones shall require that structure height be limited to a 3/1 three to one ratio from the
side and rear setbacks. Minimum side set back shall be 5' (five feet) and minimum rear setback shall be 10' (ten
feet) in the R-1 & R-2 zones.
8. Non conforming Lots of Record, recorded prior to May 1980, in the Residential R-3 zone, consisting of less than
one acre (43,560 square feet) shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the R-1 & R-2 zones.
9. Definitions
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one building and the accessory buildings or uses
customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by an ordinance, and having frontage upon a
public street, right-of-way, or private way.
Lot Area: The land area enclosed within the boundary lines of the lot, not including the area of any land which is: part of
a right-of-way for a thoroughfare or easement, such as, but not limited to, surface drainage easements or traveled rightsof-
way (but not including any utility easement servicing that lot); or the land below the normal high-water line of a water
body; or upland edge of a wetland; or which is a forested or freshwater wetland.
Lot, Corner: A lot with at least two (2) contiguous sides abutting upon a street or right of way.
Lot, Coverage: The percentage of the lot covered by all buildings.
Lot, Interior: Any lot other than a corner lot.
781
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined below:
Front Lot Line: On an interior lot, the lot line abutting the street or right-of-way; or, on a corner lot each lot line
abutting the street or right-of-way; or, on a through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing primary access to
the lot; or, on a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street from which access is obtained.
Rear Lot Line: The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an
imaginary line between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet long, lying farthest
from the front lot line. On a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line of least dimension.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot, Minimum Area: The required area within a District for a single lot or use.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are recorded on a document or
map on file in the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds.
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, goods, or property of any kind,
together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive of fences. The term
includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks and satellite receiving dishes, but in land areas
outside of shoreland areas, signs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, and parking lots are not defined as structures.
Historical Note: Section 13-205 was amended March 10, 2008.
782
Dimensional Requirements Table – See Attached
Sec. 13-206 Non-Conformance.
1. General.
A. Continuance, Enlargement, Reconstruction: Any non-conforming use, non-conforming lot of record, or nonconforming
structure may continue to exist, but may not be extended, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered
except as specified below.
B. Transfer of Ownership: Non-conforming structures, non-conforming lots of record, and non-conforming uses may
be transferred, and the new owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to use the non-conforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Restoration or Replacement: This Ordinance allows the normal upkeep and maintenance of non-conforming uses
and structures; repairs, renovations, or modernizations which do not involve expansion of the non-conforming use or
structure and the value of which is less than 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the repair is
started; and such other changes in a non-conforming use or structure as Federal, State, or local building and safety
codes may require. Any non-conforming use or structure which is hereafter damaged or destroyed by fire or any
cause other than the willful act of the owner or their agent, may be restored or reconstructed within one (1) years of
the date of said damage or destruction, provided that:
1. The non-conforming dimensions of any restored or reconstructed structure shall not exceed the non-conforming
dimensions of the structure it replaces;
2. Any non-conforming structure shall not be enlarged except in conformity with this Ordinance and the Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules; and
3. Any non-conforming use shall not be expanded in area.
Nothing in this Section shall prevent the demolition of the remains of any building so damaged or destroyed.
D. Essential Service: Nothing within this Section shall restrict the extension, reconstruction, enlargement, or structural
alteration of essential services. All plans for the extension, reconstruction, enlargement, or structural alteration of
essential services shall be reviewed by the Planning Board.
E. Shoreland Areas: In designated shoreland areas, any non-conformance shall be required to meet the standards for
that non-conformance contained in the Caribou Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
2. Non-Conforming Use.
A. Resumption Prohibited: A lot, building, or structure in or on which a non-conforming use is discontinued for a
period exceeding one (1) year, or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a nonconforming
use, even if the owner has not intended to abandon the use.
B. A Structure Non-Conforming as to Use: Except for single-family dwellings, a building or structure non-conforming
as to use shall not be enlarged unless the non-conforming use is terminated. Except in a Resource Protection
District of the Caribou Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, single family dwellings, which are non-conforming uses, may
be enlarged as long as the dimensional requirements of the District in which they are located are met. A nonconforming
use of part of a building or structure shall not be extended throughout other parts of the building or
structure unless those parts of the building or structure were manifestly arranged or designed for such use prior to
the adoption of this Ordinance, or of any amendment making such use non-conforming.
C. Change of Use: An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use provided that the
proposed use is equally or more appropriate to the District than the existing non-conforming use, and the impact on
adjacent properties is less adverse than the impact of the former use as determined by the Board of Appeals. The
case shall be heard as an administrative appeal. The determination of appropriateness shall require written findings
on the probable changes in traffic (volume and type), parking, noise, potential for litter, wastes or by-products,
fumes, odors, or other nuisances likely to result from such change of use. Sec. 13-700 "General Requirements" of
these Ordinances shall apply to such requests to establish new non-conforming uses.
784
D. Use of Land: A non-conforming use of land may not be extended into any part of the remainder of a lot of land. A
non-conforming use of land which is accessory to a non-conforming use of a building shall be discontinued at the
same time the non-conforming use of the building is discontinued.
In the case of earth removal operations, the removal of earth may not be extended as a non-conforming use beyond
the required setback lines of the specific lot upon which such operations were in progress when such use became
non-conforming, as required by the performance standards for extractive industries. Adjacent lots in the same or
different ownership shall not be eligible for exemption under the non-conforming use provisions unless earth
removal operations were in progress on these lots before these provisions were enacted.
The provision of required off-street parking for an existing non-conforming use shall not be considered the
expansion of the use.
3. Non-Conforming Structures.
Pertaining to dimensional requirements. Applications regarding non-conforming use shall be reviewed under the
provisions above.
A. Enlargements Controlled: A non-conforming structure shall not be added to or enlarged unless: such addition or
enlargement conforms to all the regulations of the District in which it is located; the addition does not increase the
non-conformity of the structure; or a variance is obtained. In addition, state laws must be adhered to.
1. Exclusive of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance which regulates expansions of structures in Shoreland Districts
(See: Caribou Shoreland Zoning Ordinance), the addition of an open patio with no structures elevated above
ground level shall not constitute the expansion of a non-conforming structure. The addition of steps or the
enclosure of an existing deck shall not constitute the expansion of a non-conforming structure. But, the addition
of a deck shall constitute the expansion of a non-conforming structure and shall meet all the dimensional
requirements of this Ordinance.
2. The placing of a foundation below a lawfully existing non-conforming structure shall not constitute the
expansion of the structure so long as the first floor space of the structure is not increased. In shoreland areas,
the foundation cannot cause the structure to be elevated by more than three (3) additional feet.
3. Construction or expansion of a foundation under an existing dwelling which expands habitable space shall be
considered an expansion and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules, latest edition.
4. After January 1, 1989 if any portion of a structure is less than the required setback from the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, that portion of the structure shall not be expanded in floor area
or volume, by 30 percent or more, during the lifetime of the structure.
B. Discontinuance: Discontinuance of the use of a legally existing non-conforming structure shall not constitute
abandonment of the structure. Conforming use of the structure may be commenced at any time.
C. Lack of Required Parking or Loading Space: A building or structure which is non-conforming as to the
requirements for off-street parking and/or loading space shall not be enlarged, added to, or altered unless off-street
parking and/or loading space is provided to bring parking and/or loading space into conformance with the
requirements of this Ordinance for both the addition or alteration and for the original building or structure, or a
variance is obtained.
4. Non-Conforming Lots of Record.
A. Vacant Lots: A vacant non-conforming lot may be built upon provided that such lot is in separate ownership and
not contiguous with any other vacant lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance except lot
size and frontage can be met. Variance of setback or other requirements not involving area or width shall be
obtained only by action of the Board of Appeals.
785
B. Built Lots: A non-conforming lot that was built upon prior to the enactment or subsequent amendment of this
Ordinance is subject to the following restrictions. The structure(s) may be repaired, maintained, or improved, and
may be enlarged in conformity with all dimensional requirements of this Ordinance except lot area, lot width, or lot
frontage. If the proposed enlargement of the structure(s) cannot meet the dimensional requirements of this
Ordinance a variance shall be obtained from the Board of Appeals.
C. Contiguous Built Lots: If two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint ownership of record at the
time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this
Ordinance, and if a principle use exists on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed separately or together,
providing the State Minimum Lot Size Law and the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, latest edition, are
complied with. If two (2) or more principal uses existed on a single lot of record on the effective date of this
Ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot.
D. Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built: If two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint
ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, if any of those lots do not
individually meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if two (2) or more
of the lots are vacant or contain only an accessory structure, the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to
meet the dimensional standards, except where rights have vested, or the lots have frontage on parallel roads and state
laws are complied with.
E. Lot Width and Area Requirements: If a non-conforming lot of record or combination of lots and portions of lots
with continuous frontage in single ownership are on record as of the effective date of this Ordinance, the lands
involved shall be considered to be a single parcel for the purpose of this Ordinance, and no portion of said parcel
shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this Ordinance. No
division of the parcel shall be made which leaves remaining any lot width or area below the requirements stated in
this Ordinance.
5. Vested Rights.
Non-conforming use rights cannot arise by the mere filing of a notice of intent to build, an application for building
permits, or an application for required state permits and approvals. Such rights arise when substantial construction of
structures and development infrastructure improvements for City approved subdivisions began prior to or within twelve
(12) months of the adoption of this Ordinance, or in the case of pending applications when substantial review of an
application has commenced. Such construction must be legal at the time it is commenced and the owner must be in
possession of and in compliance with all validly issued permits, both state and local.
786
Sec. 13-300 Site Design Review Ordinance.
1. Title.
This Section shall be known and may be cited as the "Site Design Review Ordinance of the City of Caribou".
2. Administration.
The Planning Board of the City of Caribou shall administer this Section.
Sec. 13-301 Applicability of Site Design Review.
1. Site Design Review in conformity with the criteria and standards of this Section shall be required for the following:
A. Uses in each District which require Site Design Review as identified in the land use chart, above;
B. A change in use when the new use is subject to Site Design Review;
C. Resumption of conforming uses which have been discontinued for at least one (1) year which would require Site
Design Review if being newly established;
D. The construction of a commercial building, industrial building, or other non-residential building when the gross
impervious surface is 6000 square feet or greater;
E. The addition(s) to a commercial building, industrial building, or other non-residential building, having a total gross
floor area in excess of four thousand (4000) square feet cumulatively within a three (3) year period;
F. The construction of any parking area(s) in excess of ten (10) parking spaces;
G. The construction of any impervious surface in excess of four thousand (4000) square feet cumulatively within a
three (3) year period;
H. The alteration of a water course, ditch, or swale;
I. The change of use of any portion of any existing building or structure in excess of four thousand (4000) square feet
cumulatively within any three (3) year period;
J. The change in on-site vehicle access of any existing parking lot or driveway; or
K. Filling, grading, or excavation projects which move in excess of one thousand (1000) cubic yards of materials.
2. Site Design Review shall not be required for:
A. Single-family and two-family (duplex) residential dwelling unit development, including their basement excavations.
B. Multi-family, cluster, and mobile home park development, including their basement excavations. (It shall be noted
that multi-family, cluster, and mobile home park development, including their basement excavations will require
subdivision review. )
C. The normal and customary repairs, replacement, and/or maintenance not requiring structural elements, decorative
changes in existing structures or buildings, provided that the activity is in conformance with federal, state, and/or
local laws and does not involve any other physical modifications or changes requiring a permit under this
Ordinance.
D. The normal and customary practices and structures associated with agriculture and borrow pits approved or
established prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
Sec. 13-302 Site Design Review Procedure and Requirements.
1. Site Design Approval.
A. All applicable development projects shall require the review and approval of the Planning Board or CEO as
provided by this Ordinance.
B. A public hearing may be scheduled for any application if the proposed development poses the potential for
significant impacts to municipal facilities or natural resources. Said hearing shall be conducted prior to final action
on the application.
C. All site design approvals shall expire within one (1) year of the date of final approval, unless work thereunder is
787
commenced and 50 percent of the approved Plan is completed and an extension is approved by the CEO for an
additional year. If work is not completed within two (2) years from the date of final approval, a new application
must be made. There will be no additional charge.
D. In the event that a site design is recorded with the Registry of Deeds without final approval, the design shall be
considered null and void, and the CEO shall institute proceedings to have the design stricken from the records of the
Registry of Deeds. Any site design not recorded in the Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date of final
approval shall become null and void.
E. Final approval of a site design shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the
municipality of any street, easement, or other open space shown on such plan. When a park, playground, or other
recreation area shall have been shown on the Plan to be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the design shall
not constitute an acceptance by the municipality of such areas. The CEO or Planning Board shall require the design
to contain appropriate notes to this effect. The CEO or Planning Board may also require the filing of a written
agreement between the applicant and the municipal officers covering future deed and title dedication, and provision
for the cost of grading, development, equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
2. Site Design Notification.
A. The City Clerk shall notify all property owners within (500) feet of the property involved and such other property
owners as the CEO or Planning Board may deem necessary. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to supply
the names and mailing addresses of the abutting or other identified property owners. Failure to provide full
documentation could delay the application. The notice shall include a description of the nature of the applicant's
proposal and the time and place of any meeting or the public comment time period required.
B. The City Clerk shall notify the identified property owners of the application at least fourteen (14) days before the
first workshop meeting and first public meeting, if a public meeting is necessary, where the application will be
discussed. A final decision shall not be made on the application for a period of thirty (30) days after the date the
CEO or Planning Board has determined that the application is complete to provide an opportunity for public
comment.
C. The agenda of any meetings shall be published in a local newspaper at least seven (7) days before the date of the
meeting and displayed in two (2) places of general public access. The agenda notice shall include a brief description
of the application and the Ordinance(s) by which the proposal is to be reviewed.
3. Fees and Guarantees.
A. An application for site design approval shall be accompanied by a fee of ninety dollars ($90) plus ten dollars ($10)
per 2,000 square feet of total gross floor area for commercial, industrial, or other non-residential applications. This
application fee shall be made payable to the "City of Caribou" and shall not be refundable.
B. The CEO or Planning Board may request the City Council require that an expert consultant(s) review one or more
submissions of an application and report as to compliance or non-compliance with this Ordinance, and advise if
necessary, of procedures which will result in compliance. The consultant shall estimate the cost of such review and
the applicant shall deposit with the municipality the full estimated cost which the municipality shall place in an
escrow account. The municipality shall pay the consultant from the escrow account. If the balance in the escrow
account is drawn down by 75 percent, the CEO shall notify the applicant and require an additional amount. Any
balance in the account remaining after a final decision on the application has been rendered shall be returned to the
applicant. The consultants shall be fully qualified to provide the required information and shall be mutually
acceptable to the municipality and the applicant.
C. At the time of final approval, the applicant may be required to tender a performance guarantee (See: Sec. 13-750,
"Performance Guarantees") adequate to cover the total costs of all required improvements, taking into account the
time-span of the guarantee and the effects of inflation upon costs. The conditions and amount of the guarantee shall
be reasonably necessary to ensure the completion of all improvements required as condition of approval of the
application, in such form as approved by the CEO or Planning Board and the City Council. The municipality shall
have access to the site to review the progress of the work and shall have the authority to review all records and
documents related to the project.
788
D. The applicant shall provide a one year defect bond upon completion of all public improvements. The amount of the
defect bond shall be ten percent (10%) of the amount of those public improvements approved as part of the site
design. The bond shall be placed in an account in the municipality's name. The bond, including accrued interest,
remaining in the account and which has not been spent or appropriated shall be returned to the applicant within
three-hundred and sixty-five (365) days from date of final approval.
E. Irrespective of any other provision of this Ordinance, the application shall not be considered complete if the
applicant fails to pay any of the fees, bonds, or guarantees, or appeals any fee, bond, or guarantee determination. If
the applicant appeals the payment of any fees, bonds, or guarantees to the Board of Appeals, the Board shall decide
whether the fee, bond, or guarantee is reasonable for the purpose found necessary. The fee, bond, or guarantee shall
be placed into an appropriate account in the municipality's name. The money, including any accrued interest,
remaining in the account and which has not been spent or appropriated, shall be returned to the applicant within
thirty (30) days from date of final approval.
4. Site Design Application and Review Process.
A. A person informed by the CEO that they require site design review approval shall file a site design review
application with the CEO on forms provided for the purpose. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
demonstrate that the proposed use meets all of the design criteria and standards, herein.
B. All applications shall be made by the owner of the property or their agent, as designated in writing by the owner. A
site design application must be diligently pursued from the date of submission.
C. The CEO shall make an initial determination of the completeness of all applications. An application requiring
review and approval by the Planning Board shall be subject to the final determination by the Planning Board. An
application requiring review and approval by the CEO shall be subject to the final determination by the CEO. Any
application which the CEO initially determines to be incomplete shall be returned to the applicant by the CEO with a
written notice of the additional information required. The written notice shall set forth those items which need to be
submitted and that the applicant will have one hundred and twenty (120) days to complete the application. If the
applicant fails to submit any item specified within the one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of said notice from
the CEO, the application shall expire and shall be deemed null and void. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the
CEO from requiring additional information as otherwise permitted or required by the terms of this Ordinance. At
such time that the additional information has been supplied, the CEO shall pass the application on for review and
final determination of completeness.
D. An application shall not be considered as having pending status and shall be subject to changes in local, state, or
federal laws until at which time it has been determined to be a complete application.
E. The CEO or Planning Board may require the applicant to undertake any study which it deems reasonable and
necessary to insure that the requirements of the Ordinance are met. The cost of all such studies shall be borne by the
applicant.
F. The following application process shall be followed to facilitate site design review.
1. Upon receipt of an application for site design review, the CEO shall determine and schedule the development
for either concept or Final Plan review. The CEO may advise the applicant whether Concept Plan review is
appropriate prior to submission of a Final Plan; however, the applicant shall determine whether to seek concept
or Final Plan review prior to submitting an application for Final Plan review. Neither concept or Final Plan
review shall occur unless there is evidence that the required public notice has been given and the material
required by this Ordinance is filed in a timely manner. The application is distributed to the appropriate
municipal departments. Final determination as to the completeness of applications for Concept Plan and Final
Plan review shall be made by the CEO or Planning Board, whichever is the reviewing authority.
789
2. Concept Plan Review.
Concept Plan review is intended to provide the applicant with an opportunity to discuss the proposed
development; obtain CEO or Planning Board comments prior to expending significant resources in furtherance
of specific development plans; and gain an understanding of the review procedures, requirements, and
standards. The CEO or Planning Board may identify issues that are to be addressed in the Final Plan
application. No decision is made during Concept Plan review.
3. Final Plan Review.
Within sixty (60) days after determining that an application is a complete, a public hearing on the proposed
development may be called if the development poses the potential for significant impacts to municipal facilities
or natural resources, or either the applicant, CEO, or the Planning Board determines that additional workshops
are necessary. The CEO or Planning Board shall issue a written decision approving, approving with conditions,
denying, or tabling the Final Plan,. If the CEO or Planning Board tables the item, an additional public hearing
must be held. If the CEO or Planning Board shall vote to approve the site design application, the CEO shall
issue a permit, provided that all other requirements of the Ordinance are met.
4. Statement of Findings.
All findings and decisions by the CEO or Planning Board denying or conditionally approving any site design
shall be made in writing or reduced to writing within thirty (30) days of the decision and shall state the reason(s)
therefore sufficient to appraise the applicant and any interested member of the public of the basis for the
decision. The decisions regarding site designs are appealable by the applicant or an abutter to the Board of
Appeals. Decisions of the Board of Appeals are appealed to the Superior Court.
5. Applications Requiring Other Public Agency Review.
a. The CEO or Planning Board may approve complete final applications subject to the condition that all
necessary permits be received from agencies such as, but not limited to, the Army Corps of Engineers,
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, Maine Department of Transportation, or Maine
Department of Human Services. However, the CEO or Planning Board may require that approvals required
by state or federal law be submitted to the municipality prior to final approval upon finding that the permits
from state or federal agencies may have a significant effect on the site design application.
b. The CEO or Planning Board may request copies of the application to be forwarded to other municipal
committee(s). The comments of the committee(s) are advisory to the CEO or Planning Board and shall
pertain to the application's conformance with the review criteria of this Ordinance. The CEO or Planning
Board may postpone final decisions regarding the application until such time as the comment from the
municipal committee(s) has been submitted.
5. Site Design Application Requirements.
A. Required Number of Copies.
Final application for site design review shall consist of five (5) copies of the required information. The applications
are to be submitted to the CEO no later than twenty-one (21) days prior to the meeting at which the item is to be
heard.
B. Concept Plan.
1. The CEO or Planning Board may review applications as a Concept Plan. These are applications that do not
meet the Final Plan requirements. At a minimum, Concept Plan applications shall include the following
information:
a. Concept Plan Requirements.
790
1. Name and address of the owner of record and applicant (if different);
2. Name of the proposed development;
3. Names and addresses of all property owners within 500 feet of the edge of the property line and others
indicated by the Planning Board as being impacted;
4. Names and addresses of all consultants working on the project;
5. Graphic scale and north arrow;
6. A copy of the deed to the property, option to purchase the property, or other documentation to
demonstrate right, title, or interest in the property on the part of the applicant;
7. Location and dimensions of any existing or proposed easements and copies of existing covenants or
deed restrictions;
8. Name, registration number, and seal of the land surveyor, architect, engineer, and/or similar
professional who prepared the Plan;
9. All property boundaries, land area, and zoning designations of the site, regardless of whether all or part
is being developed at this time;
10. Size, shape, and location of existing and proposed buildings on the site including dimensions of the
buildings and setbacks from property lines;
11. Location and layout design of vehicular parking, circulation areas, loading areas, and walkways
including curb cuts, driveways, parking space and vehicle turn around area dimensions;
12. Location and names of streets and rights-of-way within and within 200' adjacent to the proposed
development;
13. Proposed finish grades and graphic arrows indicating the direction of storm water runoff;
14. Conceptual treatment of on and off site storm water management facilities;
15. Location and sizes of existing and proposed sewer and water services including connections;
16. Conceptual treatment of landscaping buffers, screens, and plantings;
17. Location of outdoor storage areas, fences, signs (front view and dimensions) , advertising features, and
solid waste receptacles;
18. Context map illustrating the area surrounding the site which will be affected by the proposal including
all streets, sidewalks, intersections, storm water drainage ways, sanitary sewer lines and pump stations,
nearby properties and buildings, zoning Districts, and geographic features such as, but not limited to,
wetlands, natural features, historic sites, flood plains, significant scenic areas, and significant wildlife
habitats as provided in the Comprehensive Plan; and
19. Plans for all proposed exterior lighting including the location, type of light, radius of light,
manufacturer's specifications sheet, and the ground level intensity in foot-candles.
b. Project Description.
The project description is to describe the proposal, its scheme of development, and proposed land uses.
The project description shall also include estimates from qualified professionals as to the anticipated
gallons per day of wastewater, the number of vehicles entering and leaving the site during the day (and at
peak traffic hours), the increased amount of stormwater runoff, and the rate of the stormwater runoff of the
post-development site.
C. Final Site Design Plan.
The Final Site Design Plan application shall include all information required in the Concept Plan requirements,
above and in addition shall require the following information:
1. Boundary Survey. Prepared by a licensed Maine surveyor indicating the boundaries, artificial monuments,
encumbrances, and topography of the site.
2. Stormwater Management Plan. Prepared by a Maine Registered Engineer analyzing the proposal's impact on
existing stormwater facilities and watersheds. The stormwater management plan shall include a map of all
watersheds significantly impacted by the proposal and identify all areas of existing or anticipated flooding,
locations of existing and proposed culverts, pipes, detention ponds, and flow restrictions to be affected by the
proposal. The stormwater management plan shall comply with the review criteria found in this Ordinance.
791
3. Finish Grading Plan. Prepared by a Maine Registered Engineer or landscape architect indicating the final
grading of the site, the amount of fill to be imported to or exported from the site, and graphic arrows indicating
the direction of storm water run off.
4. Site Improvement Details. Including sufficient information to enable the creation of an itemized cost estimate
for all required on/or off site improvements.
5. Building Elevations. Scale plans of exterior building surfaces including materials, doorways, and advertising
features.
6. Additional Information. Additional information as deemed necessary to review the proposal's conformance
with the site design review criteria and Sec. 13-700, "General Requirements". Additional information may
address items such as, but not be limited to, traffic, wetlands, high intensity soils, environmental analyses, or the
interpretation of the data by municipal consultants. Additional information shall be financed pursuant to the
consulting fees of this Ordinance.
7. General topography of the site.
8. High intensity soils classifications of the soils located on the site.
9. A copy of any variances granted or deed restrictions on the subject use or property. Such variances and/or
restrictions shall be noted on the final (recording) copy of the plan.
D. Waiver of Required Information.
The CEO or Planning Board may waive the submittal of required application materials upon finding that the specific
information is unnecessary in order to review the application's conformance. Such waiver(s) shall be noted on the
final (recording) copy of the plan.
E. Final Copies of the Plan.
The applicant shall submit three (3) signed copies of the final approved plan to the CEO. One copy shall be
forwarded to the Planning Board as part of its permanent records. One copy shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor.
One copy shall be kept by the CEO.
Historical Note: Section 13-302 §3A as amended April 24, 2006.
Sec. 13-303 Site Design Review Criteria.
The following criteria shall be utilized by the CEO or Planning Board in reviewing applications for site design approval.
The standards are not intended to discourage creativity, invention, or innovation. The CEO or Planning Board may
waive the criteria presented in this subsection upon a determination by the CEO or Planning Board that the criteria are
not applicable to the proposed development or are not necessary to carry out the intent of this subsection. The CEO or
Planning Board shall approve or approve with conditions the site design plan, unless the plan does not meet the intent of
the following criteria and standards.
A. Conformance with Comprehensive Plan. The proposed development shall be located and designed in such a manner
as to be in conformance with the municipality's comprehensive plan.
B. Traffic. The proposed development will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe
conditions with respect to use of the highways, public roads or pedestrian walkways existing or proposed. Vehicular
access to the site shall be on roads which have adequate capacity to accommodate the additional traffic generated by
the development. The Planning Board may require mitigation when the proposed development is anticipated to
result in a decline in service, below Level of Service "C", of nearby roadways of intersections. Levels of service are
defined by the Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report #209, published by the Research Board, National
Research Council, Washington DC, 1985. If an existing intersection is functioning at a Level of Service of "D" or
lower prior to the development, the project shall not reduce the current level of service. A copy of the application
shall be provided to the appropriate municipal authority(s), and to the Maine Department of Transportation if on a
state maintained road, for timely review and comment. The Planning Board may approve a development not
meeting this requirement if the applicant demonstrates that:
792
1. A public agency has committed funds to construct the improvements necessary to bring the level of access to
this standard; or
2. The applicant will assume financial responsibility for the improvements necessary to bring the level of service
to this standard and will guarantee the completion of the improvements within one (1) year of project approval.
C. Site Access. Vehicular access to the development shall provide for safe and convenient access and shall be in
conformance with Sec. 13-710, "Access Management,…". A copy of the application shall be provided to the
appropriate municipal authority(s), and to the Maine Department of Transportation if on a state maintained road, for
timely review and comment.
D. Parking and Vehicle Circulation. The proposed development provides for adequate parking and vehicle circulation
and shall be in conformance with Sec. 13-710, "Access Management,…". A copy of the application shall be
provided to the appropriate municipal authority(s) for timely review and comment. The layout of the site shall
provide for the safe movement of passenger, service, and emergency vehicles throughout the site.
1. Projects shall provide a clear route for delivery vehicles with appropriate geometric design to allow turning and
backing for vehicles expected to use the facility.
2. Clear routes of access shall be provided and maintained for emergency vehicles to all portions of the site and
shall be posted with appropriate language.
3. The layout and design of dedicated parking areas provided on-site or within a reasonable walking distance from
the site shall provide for safe and convenient circulation of vehicles throughout the lot, shall prohibit vehicles
from backing out onto a street.
4. All streets and accessways shall be designed to follow the topographic and natural features of the site. The road
network shall provide for vehicular and pedestrian safety, all season emergency access, snow storage, delivery
and collection services.
E. Pedestrian Circulation. The development plan should provide for a system of pedestrian circulation within the
development. The system shall connect with existing sidewalks if they exist in the vicinity of the project. The
pedestrian network may be located either in the street right-of-way or outside of the right-of-way in open space or
recreation areas. The system shall be designed to link residential units with recreational and commercial facilities,
other common facilities, school bus stops, existing sidewalks in the neighborhood, and shall be in conformance with
Sec. 13-710, "Access Management,…" and Sec. 13-700 (28), when applicable. A copy of the application shall be
provided to the appropriate municipal authority(s) for timely review and comment.
F. Site Conditions.
1. During construction, the site shall be maintained and left each day in a safe and sanitary manner. The site area
shall be regularly sprayed to control dust from construction activity.
2. Developed areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, roots and
debris, and excess or scrap building materials shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon request and to
the satisfaction of the CEO.
3. No changes in elevation shall be made of any lot or site by the removal of earth to another lot or site other than
as shown on an approved site design plan. Minimal changes in elevations or contours necessitated by field
conditions may be made only after approval has been obtained from the CEO.
G. Open Space.
1. Common open space shall be contiguous, where possible.
2. Common open space as shown on any approved development plan shall contain a notation that common open
space areas shall not be further developed for any other use.
3. When reviewing the location and type of open space designated in an application, the Planning Board shall
require:
a. Individual lots, buildings, streets, and parking areas shall be designed and situated:
1. To minimize alterations of the natural site;
793
2. To avoid the adverse effects of shadows, noise, and traffic on the residents of the site; and
3. To relate to the surrounding properties, to improve the view from and of buildings.
b. Diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building, street, parking, and lot layout shall be
encouraged.
c. Open space shall include irreplaceable natural features located on the tract (such as, but not limited to,
stream beds, significant stands of trees, individual trees of significant size, and rock outcroppings).
d. Open space intended for recreation or public use shall be determined by the size, shape, topographic, and
location requirements of the site.
H. Sanitary Sewage. A sanitary sewer system shall be installed at the expense of the developer, or, if in the opinion of
the Planning Board, service by a sanitary sewer system is not feasible, the Board may allow individual subsurface
wastewater disposal systems to be used. The proposed development will not cause an unreasonable adverse effect to
the municipal sewerage treatment facilities and will not aggravate an existing unhealthy situation. A copy of the
application shall be provided to the sewer authority for timely review and comment. (See: Sec. 13-700 (27))
1. Upstream sewage flows shall be accommodated by an adequately sized system through the proposed
development for existing conditions and potential development in the upstream area or areas tributary to the
proposed development.
2. When not serviced by a public sewerage system, the approval of a application shall be subject to presentation of
a completed site evaluation form (HHE-200) which evidences adequate soil conditions for on-site waste water
disposal. All individual on-site systems shall be designed by a Maine licensed soil evaluator in full compliance
with the Maine State Plumbing Code, as amended. Upon the recommendation of the local Plumbing Inspector,
the Planning Board may require the location on the individual lots of reserve areas for replacement systems.
I. Water. The development shall be provided with a system of water supply that provides each use with an adequate
supply of water meeting the standards of the State of Maine for drinking water. The proposed development will not
cause the depletion of local water resources or be inconsistent with the service plan of the Caribou Utilities District.
A copy of the application shall be provided to the District for timely review and comment. (See: Sec. 13-700 (37))
J. Emergency Vehicle Access. All site design applications shall be reviewed by the Fire Chief or their designee and
shall receive the approval for conformance with Sec. 13-710, "Access Management,…". The proposed
development shall be located and designed in such a way as to provide and maintain convenient and safe access and
response time for emergency vehicles or mitigates inadequate access or response time by providing adequate safety
features as part of the proposed development.
K. Waste Disposal. The proposed development shall provide for adequate disposal of solid wastes and hazardous
wastes. A copy of the application shall be provided to the solid waste coordinator for timely review and comment.
(See: Sec. 13-700 (6))
1. All solid waste shall be disposed of at a licensed disposal facility having adequate capacity to accept the
project's wastes.
2. All hazardous waste shall be disposed of at a licensed hazardous waste disposal facility and evidence of a
contractual arrangement with the facility shall be submitted.
3. All commercial and industrial developments shall devote floor space suitable to accommodate two (2)
recycling containers designed to hold at least one cubic yard of recyclable materials.
L. Buffering. The proposal provides for adequate on-site buffering in the vicinity of property boundaries, when
required. On-site buffering is required:
1. Wherever commercial, industrial, or other non-residential development is proposed adjacent to or across a street
from residential or agricultural uses or Districts; and
2. As required by Sec. 13-700, (5).
M. Natural Areas. The proposal does not cause significant adverse impacts to natural resources or areas such as
wetlands, significant geographic features, significant wildlife and marine habitats, and natural fisheries. A copy of
the
794
application shall be provided to the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and to the local office of the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection for timely review and comment. The proposal shall be consistent
with the recommendations of the Departments. (See: Sec. 13-700 (14))
N. Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed to encourage energy conservation and efficiency,
to ensure the safe movement of people and vehicles, to minimize adverse impact on neighboring properties and
public ways. Adverse impact is to be judged in terms of hazards to people and vehicular traffic and potential
damage to the value of adjacent properties. Lighting shall be arranged to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent
properties and the traveling public and shall be in conformance with Sec. 13-700 (11).
O. Stormwater Management. The plan provides for adequate storm water management facilities so that the post
development runoff rate will be no greater than the predevelopment rate, the removal of storm water will not
adversely affect neighboring properties, and that there is no adverse downstream impact. Proposed storm water
detention facilities and calculations shall provide for the control of twenty-five year storm frequency rates. On-site
absorption shall be utilized to minimize discharges whenever possible. The design, construction, and maintenance
of private facilities are not anticipated to cause the expenditure of additional municipal resources for maintenance of
private storm water management facilities. Maintenance responsibilities shall be reviewed to determine their
adequacy. Emphasis shall be placed on the protection of floodplains and wetlands; preservation of stream corridors;
establishment of drainage rights-of-way; and the adequacy of the existing system; and the need for improvements,
both on and off site, to adequately control the rate, volume, and velocity of storm drainage. (See: Sec. 13-700 (30))
P. Erosion and Sedimentation Control. The proposed development includes adequate measures to control erosion and
sedimentation and will not contribute to the degradation of nearby streams, water courses, or lowlands by virtue of
soil erosion or sedimentation. The erosion control measures are to be in conformance with the most current
standards of the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission. The following measures shall be included where
applicable as part of any site design review and approval. (See: Sec. 13-700 (10))
1. Stripping of vegetation, regarding or other development shall be done in such a way as to minimize erosion.
2. Development shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut-fill operations to a minimum, and ensure
conformity with the topography so as to create the least amount of erosion potential, and so as to adequately
handle surface water run-off.
3. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall be kept to a practical minimum.
4. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practical.
5. Temporary vegetation, mulching, or other acceptable measures shall be used to protect exposed critical areas
during development.
6. The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measure shall be installed as soon as practical
on the site.
7. Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the run-off water shall be trapped by the use of debris basins,
sediment basins, silt traps, or other acceptable measures.
8. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regarding or other development, it shall be the
responsibility of the developer causing such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage
systems and watercourses, and to repair any damage at their expense as quickly as possible.
9. Any activity on a stream, watercourse, or swale or upon a floodway or right-of-way shall comply with the
Caribou Shoreland Zoning Ordinance and the State's Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38 MRSA,
§480A-480S. Any such activity shall be conducted in such a manner so as to maintain as nearly as possible the
present state of the stream, watercourse, swale, floodway, or right-of-way for the duration of the activity and
shall be returned to its original or equal condition after such activity is completed.
10. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and completely on private property is the
responsibility of the owner to the point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse
within the property.
Q. Buildings. The bulk, location, and height of proposed buildings or structures will not cause health or safety
problems to existing uses in the neighborhood, including without limitation those resulting from any substantial
reduction in light and air or any significant wind impact.
795
R. Existing Landscaping. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing to
the greatest extent feasible any disturbance or destruction of significant existing vegetation, including mature trees
over four (4) inches in diameter measured at 4.5 feet from ground level, soils, and significant vegetation buffers. If
a site includes a ridge or ridges above the surrounding areas and provides for scenic vistas for surrounding areas,
special attempts shall be made to preserve the natural environment of the skyline of the ridge. Existing vegetation
and buffering landscaping are potential methods of preserving scenic vistas.
S. Infrastructure. The proposed development shall be designed so as to be consistent with off premises infrastructure,
such as but not limited to, sanitary and storm sewers, waste water treatment facilities, roadways, sidewalks, trail
systems, and street lights, existing or planned by the municipality.
T. Advertising Features. The size, location, design, color, texture, material, and lighting of all permanent signs and
outdoor lighting fixtures shall not detract from the design of proposed buildings or neighboring properties and shall
be in conformance with the requirements for signs within these Ordinances. (See: Sec. 13-700 (29))
U. Design Relationship to Site and Surrounding Properties. The proposed development provides a reasonably unified
response to the design constraints of the site and is sensitive to nearby developments by virtue of the location, size,
design, and landscaping of buildings, driveways, parking areas, storm water management facilities, utilities storage
areas, and advertising features.
V. Scenic Vistas and Areas. The proposed development shall not result in the loss of scenic vistas or visual connection
to scenic areas as identified in the municipality's comprehensive plan.
W. Utilities. Utilities such as natural gas, propane, electric, telephone, and cable TV services located above ground
shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public and shall be landscaped or otherwise buffered so
as to screen the components from public view. The underground placement of utilities is encouraged. (See: Sec.
13-700 (35))
X. Mineral Exploration. Mineral exploration to determine the nature and extent of mineral resources shall be
accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal disturbance. A permit from the
Planning Board shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above limitations. (See: Sec. 13-730)
Y. General Requirements. The proposed development meets the requirements of Sec. 13-700, "General
Requirements"., except as may be waived by the CEO or Planning Board.
Z. Phosphorus Export. Proposed development within the watershed of a lake or pond shall be designed to limit
phosphorous runoff. The Planning Board shall keep an accurate record of permits issued by watershed using an
appropriate record keeping system, and shall review actual development rates and recommend adjustments at five
year intervals, subject to a reasonable appropriation by the municipality to conduct such an assessment, or the
availability of adequate state or regional grant programs or technical assistance programs. Phosphorus export from a
proposed development shall be calculated according to the procedures defined in "Phosphorus Control in Lake
Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development", (Maine DEP et. Al., 1989, as amended).
Phosphorus control measures shall meet the design criteria contained in "Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds:
A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development", (Maine DEP et. Al., 1989, as amended). The Planning Board
shall require the reasonable use of vegetative buffers, limits on clearing, and minimizing road lengths, and shall
encourage the use of non-structural measures prior to allowing the use of high-maintenance structural measures such
as infiltration systems and wet ponds. (See: Sec. 13-700 (16))
Sec. 13-304 General Requirements for Site Designs.
The "General Requirements" contained in Sec. 13-700 and the "Access Management, Off-Street Parking, Loading, and
Road Design and Construction" contained in Sec. 13-710, as applicable, shall apply to all proposed development. The
term "development" used within these Sections shall mean both site design and subdivision proposals. Where the CEO
or Planning Board finds that due to special circumstances of a particular plan, the provision of a technical standard,
which is not requisite in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare, may be waived.
796
Sec. 13-305 Conditional Approval of Site Designs.
A. The CEO or Planning Board may impose any condition upon approval of any site design for the following reasons:
1. To minimize or abate, to the extent feasible, any adverse impact of the proposed development on the value or
utility of other private property, or on public property or facilities; or
2. To bring the development into compliance with the requirements of these Ordinances; or
3. To mitigate any other adverse effects of the proposed development.
B. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the imposition of a time limit for the conditional use; the
employment of specific engineering, construction, or design technologies; modes of operation or traffic patterns; and
may also include the construction of on or off site improvements including, without limitation, roads, intersection
improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and drainage courses. All such conditions shall be consistent with the purposes
set forth in this Ordinance.
Sec. 13-306 Revisions to Approved Site Plans.
The site shall be developed and maintained as depicted in the approved site design and the written submission of the
applicant. Modification of any approved site design shall require the prior approval of a revised site design by either the
CEO or Planning Board, whomever conducted the initial review, pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance. Any such
parcel lawfully altered prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be further altered without approval as
provided herein. Modification or alteration shall mean and include any deviations from the approved site design,
including but not limited to, topography, vegetation, and impervious surfaces shown on the site design. Field changes
for site designs may be made by the CEO and are limited to minor variations necessary to deal with unforeseen
difficulties that arise during the course of construction involving such technical detail as utility location and substitution
of equivalent plantings and shall not include any substantial alteration of the approved plan or change any condition
imposed by the Planning Board.
Sec. 13-307 Post Application Submissions.
Following site design approval and prior to issuance of any permit, the applicant shall submit copies of the contract plans
and specifications, in reproducible form, showing the design of all infrastructure improvements, including without
limitation all streets, sewers, drainage structures, and landscaping, to the CEO for review and approval for compliance
with the municipality's construction standards. Thereafter, all departures from such plans may be approved by the CEO
as "field changes", subject to Revisions of Approved Site Designs, above. Nothing herein shall diminish the obligation of
the applicant to supply plans or specifications as provided in this Ordinance.
797
Sec. 13-400 Subdivision Ordinance.
1. Title.
This Section shall be known and may be cited as "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Caribou."
2. Administration.
The Planning Board of the City of Caribou shall administer this Section.
Sec. 13-401 Applicability of Subdivision Review.
1. Subdivision review, in conformity with the procedures, criteria, and standards of this Section, shall be required for all
developments that meet the definition of "Subdivision" as contained within Sec. 13-900, "Definitions".
2. Subdivision review does not apply to:
A. Proposed subdivisions approved by the Planning Board or City Council before September 23, 1971 in accordance
with laws then in effect;
B. Subdivisions in actual existence on September 23, 1971 that did not require approval under prior law; or
C. A subdivision, a plan of which had been legally recorded in the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, before
September 23, 1971.
Sec. 13-402 Procedures for Subdivision Review.
1. Introduction. Every applicant for subdivision approval shall submit a written application to the Code
Enforcement Officer (CEO). Applications can be obtained from the CEO. The Planning Board shall review all requests
for subdivision approval. On all matters concerning subdivision review the Planning Board shall maintain a permanent
record of all its meetings, proceedings, and correspondences. In order to establish an orderly, equitable, and expeditious
procedure for reviewing subdivisions and to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications for subdivision review,
the Planning Board shall prepare a written agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting. The agenda shall be prepared
no less than seven (7) days in advance of the meeting, be distributed to the Planning Board members, and be posted at
the City Office. Applicants shall request to be placed on the Planning Board’s agenda at least ten (10) days in advance
of a regularly scheduled meeting by contacting the CEO. Applicants who attend a meeting, but who are not on the
Planning Board’s agenda may be heard but, only after all agenda items have been completed, and then only if a majority
of the Planning Board so votes. However, the Planning Board shall take no action on any application not appearing on
the Planning Board’s written agenda.
2. Joint Meetings. If any portion of a subdivision crosses City boundaries, the Planning Board from each municipality
shall meet jointly to discuss the application.
3. Resubdivision. The further division of a lot within a subdivision, as defined herein, existing after September 23, 1971,
or the change of a lot size therein, or the relocation of any road or lot line within a subdivision shall require the written
approval of the Caribou Planning Board. Such resubdivision activity shall comply with all provisions of this Ordinance.
4. Additional Regulation. The Planning Board may, after a public hearing, adopt, amend, or repeal additional reasonable
regulation governing subdivisions which shall control until amended, repealed, or replaced by an Ordinance adopted by
the City Council. The Planning Board shall give at least seven (7) days notice of this hearing.
5. Review Procedure. This Ordinance shall provide for a multi-stage application review procedure consisting of three (3)
stages:
a. Pre-application and sketch plan,
b. Preliminary Plan, and
c. Final Plan.
798
Sec. 13-403 Pre-Application Meeting and Sketch Plan Procedures.
1. Purpose. The purpose of the pre-application meeting and on-site inspection is for the applicant to present general
information regarding the proposed subdivision to the Planning Board and receive the Planning Board’s comments prior
to the expenditure of substantial sums of money on surveying, soils identification, and engineering by the applicant.
2. Procedure.
A. Application: All applications for sketch plan review of a subdivision shall be obtained from and be made through
the CEO.
B. Sketch Plan: The sketch plan shall show, in simple sketch form, the proposed layout of roads, lots, buildings, and
other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan, which does not have to be engineered and may be
a free-hand penciled sketch, should be supplemented with general information to describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development. It shall be most helpful to both the applicant and the Planning
Board for site conditions such as steep slopes, wet areas, and vegetative cover to be identified in a general manner.
The sketch plan shall be accompanied by:
1. A copy of a portion of the USGS topographic map of the area showing the outline of the proposed subdivision,
unless the proposed subdivision is less than ten (10) acres in size; and
2. A copy of that portion of the Aroostook County Soil Survey covering the subdivision, showing the outline of
the proposed subdivision.
C. Inspection: Within thirty (30) days of the pre-application meeting, the Planning Board shall hold an on-site
inspection of the property. The applicant shall place “flagging” at the centerline of any proposed roads, and at the
approximate intersections of the road centerlines and lot corners, prior to the on-site inspection. Lot line flags shall
be different colors from the centerline flags. The Planning Board reserves the right to postpone the on-site
inspection if the Planning Board determines that the on-site inspection is not possible due to surface conditions of
the site, such as, but not be limited to, snow cover, flooding rains, and frozen ground.
D. The applicant shall present the sketch plan and make a verbal presentation regarding the proposed subdivision at the
first regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting when time is available. Following the applicant's presentation, the
Planning Board may ask questions and make suggestions to be incorporated by the applicant into the Preliminary
Plan application.
E. Contour Interval: At the pre-application meeting or when the applicant decides to proceed to the next stage of
subdivision review, the Planning Board shall inform the applicant in writing of the required contour interval on the
Preliminary Plan. Contour lines shall be drawn at 10' intervals, unless indicated otherwise by the Planning Board.
3. Rights Not Vested. The pre-application meeting, the submittal for review of the sketch plan, or the on-site inspection
shall not be considered the initiation of the review process for the purposes of bringing the plan under the protection of
Title 1, MRSA, §302.
4. Establishment of File. Following the pre-application meeting, the Planning Board and the CEO shall establish a
file for the proposed subdivision. All correspondence and submissions regarding the pre-application meeting and
application shall be maintained in the file.
799
Sec. 13-404 Preliminary Plan Procedure and Requirements.
1. Preliminary Plan Procedure.
A. Within six (6) months after the pre-application sketch plan meeting by the Planning Board, the applicant shall
submit an application for approval of a Preliminary Plan at least ten (10) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the
Planning Board. Applications shall be submitted to the CEO for review for completeness and passed on to the
Planning Board for final determination of completeness. All applications for Preliminary Plan approval for a
subdivision shall be accompanied by an application fee of one hundred eighty dollars ($180) for three (3) lots, plus
ten dollars ($10) for each additional lot, payable by check to the "City of Caribou". The Preliminary Plan shall
approximate the layout shown on the sketch plan, plus any recommendations made by the Planning Board. Failure
to do so shall require resubmission of a sketch plan to the Planning Board.
B. A copy of all application materials shall also be forwarded to the Chair of the City Council for review and comment.
C. The Planning Board may require that an expert consultant(s) be hired to assist in its review of an application. The
applicant shall pay a reasonable fee necessary for such services. The Planning Board shall provide the applicant
with notice of its intent to require such a fee, the purpose of the fee, and its approximate amount. The applicant shall
be given an opportunity to be heard on the purpose and the amount before the Planning Board. After either being
heard or waiving the right, the applicant shall pay the fee or appeal payment of the fee to the Board of Appeals.
D. Irrespective of any other provision of this Ordinance or any other ordinance, the Planning Board shall not accept the
application as complete if the applicant fails to pay the fee(s) or appeals the fee(s) determination. If the applicant
appeals the payment of the fee(s) to the Board of Appeals, the Board shall decide whether the fee(s) is/are
reasonable for the purpose found necessary by the Planning Board. The fee(s) shall be placed in an interest bearing
escrow account in the "City of Caribou'" name. The money, including accrued interest, remaining in the account
and which has not been spent or appropriated shall be returned to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the
Planning Board issues its final decision.
E. The applicant, or their duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning Board to present the
Preliminary Plan application.
F. Within thirty (30) days of receiving the Preliminary Plan application, the Planning Board shall determine whether
the application is complete and notify the applicant in writing of its determination. If the application is not
complete, the Planning Board shall notify the applicant in writing of the specific material needed to complete the
application.
G. Upon receiving an application for review, whether the application is complete or not, the Planning Board shall:
1. Issue a dated receipt to the applicant.
2. Determine whether to hold a public hearing on the Preliminary Plan application.
3. Have the City Clerk notify in writing all owners of abutting property, or those property owners determined by
the Planning Board to be impacted by the proposal, that an application for subdivision approval has been
submitted, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision and including a general description of the
project.
4. Have the City Clerk notify the Municipal Clerk and the Chair of the Planning Board of the neighboring
municipality(ies) if any portion of the proposed subdivision includes or crosses the City boundary.
H. If the Planning Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing within thirty (30) days of
determining it has received a complete application, and shall post a notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing
in the Aroostook Republican seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing or at three (3) prominent locations within
the City at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the applicant.
I. Within thirty (30) days from the public hearing or within sixty (60) days of determining a complete application has
been received, if no hearing is held, or within another time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the
Planning Board and the applicant, the Planning Board shall make findings of fact on the application, and approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the Preliminary Plan application. The Planning Board shall specify in writing its
findings of facts and reasons for any conditions or denial.
800
J. When granting approval to a Preliminary Plan, the Planning Board shall state the conditions of such approval, if any,
with respect to:
1. The specific changes which the Planning Board shall require in the Final Plan;
2. The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may have been requested and which
the Planning Board finds may be waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety, and general welfare; and
3. The construction items for which cost estimates and performance guarantees shall be required as prerequisite to
the approval of the Final Plan. (See: Sec. 13-750)
K. Approval of a Preliminary Plan by the Planning Board shall not constitute approval of the Final Plan or intent to
approve the Final Plan, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the design of the Preliminary Plan
as a guide to the preparation of the Final Plan. The Final Plan shall be submitted for approval to the Planning Board
upon fulfillment of the requirements of this Ordinance and the conditions of preliminary approval, if any. Prior to
the approval of the Final Plan, the Planning Board may require additional changes as a result of the further study of
the subdivision or as a result of new information received.
2. Preliminary Plan Requirements.
The Preliminary Plan application shall consist of the following items.
A. Application Form.
B. Location Map. The location map shall be drawn at a size adequate to show the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to the adjacent properties, and to allow the Planning Board to locate the subdivision within the City.
The location map shall show:
1. Existing subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed subdivision.
2. Locations and names of existing and proposed roads.
3. Boundaries and designations of shoreland zoning Districts.
4. An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the owner’s property if the Preliminary
Plan submitted covers only a portion of the owner’s entire contiguous holding.
C. Ten (10) full size sets (no greater than 24" X 36") of the Preliminary Plan and application shall be submitted to the
CEO. These maps or drawings may be printed or reproduced on paper, with all dimensions shown in feet or
decimals of a foot. The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn to a scale of not more than one hundred feet (100') to the
inch. Plans for subdivisions containing more than one hundred (100) acres can be drawn at a scale of not more than
two hundred feet (200') to the inch provided all necessary detail can easily be read. The CEO shall distribute to each
Planning Board member a set of the Preliminary Plan(s) and application no less than seven (7) days prior to the
meeting for their review and comment.
D. The application for Preliminary Plan approval shall include the following information. The Planning Board may
require additional information to be submitted, where it finds it necessary in order to determine whether the criteria
of Title 30-A MRSA, §4404 are met.
1. Proposed name of the subdivision and the City in which it is located, plus the tax map(s) and lot number(s).
2. Verification of right, title, or interest in the property.
3. A standard boundary survey of the parcel, giving complete descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and
bearing the seal and signature of the Maine Licensed Professional Surveyor. The corners of the parcel shall be
located on the ground and marked by artificial monuments (See: Sec. 13-700 (19).
4. A copy of the most recently recorded deed for the parcel. A copy of all deed restrictions, easements, rights-ofway,
or other encumbrances currently affecting the property.
5. A copy of any future covenants or deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots in the subdivision.
6. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision. When sewage disposal is to be
accomplished by subsurface wastewater disposal systems, test pit analyses, prepared by a Maine Licensed Site
Evaluator or Registered Soil Scientist shall be provided. A map showing the location of all test pits dug on the
site, the location of subsurface wastewater disposal systems within 100 feet of the property lines on adjacent
801
parcels, and the locations of the proposed subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall be submitted.
7. Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision and the location of drinking water
wells within 100 feet of the property lines on adjacent properties. When water is to be supplied by private
wells, evidence of adequate ground water supply and quality shall be submitted by a well driller or a
hydrogeologist familiar with the area.
8. The date the plan was prepared, North point, and graphic map scale.
9. The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, adjoining property owners, and individual or company
who prepared the plan.
10. A high intensity soil survey by a Maine Registered Soil Scientist.
11. Wetland areas shall be identified, regardless of size.
12. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines, existing buildings, vegetative
cover type, and other essential existing physical features. The location of any trees larger than 24 inches in
diameter at breast height (DBM) shall be shown on the plan. On wooded sites, the plan shall indicate the area
where clearing for lawns and structures shall occur.
13. The location of all rivers, streams, and brooks within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
14. Contour lines at the interval specified by the Planning Board, showing elevations in relation to the Mean Sea
Level.
15. The shoreland zoning District, if applicable, in which the proposed subdivision is located and the location of
any shoreland zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
16. The location of existing and proposed culverts and drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be
subdivided.
17. The location, names, and present widths of existing roads, highways, easements, building lines, parks ,and other
usable open spaces on or adjacent to the subdivision.
18. The width and location of any roads, public improvements, or usable open space shown within the
comprehensive plan within the subdivision.
19. The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot areas.
20. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication.
21. The location of any usable open space to be preserved and a description of proposed ownership, improvement,
and management or usable open space shown within the comprehensive plan.
22. If any portion of the subdivision is in a floodprone area, the boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the 100-
year flood elevation shall be delineated on the plan.
23. A hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a Maine Certified Geologist or Registered Professional Engineer,
experienced in hydrogeology, when the subdivision is not served by public sewer and any part of the
subdivision is located over a sand and gravel aquifer, as shown on “Hydrogeologic Data for Significant Sand
and Gravel Aquifers” maps of the Maine Geological Survey.
The Planning Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment in other cases where site considerations or
development design indicate greater potential of adverse impacts on ground water quality. These cases include
extensive areas of shallow to bedrock soils and where the proposal intends to use a shared or common
subsurface waste water disposal system.
24. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated on a daily basis and at peak hours. Trip
generation rates used shall be taken from "Trip Generation Manual", latest edition, published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers. Trip generation rates from other sources may be used if the applicant demonstrates
that these sources better reflect local conditions.
25. Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have been identified as high or moderate value
wildlife habitat by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or within the comprehensive plan.
26. If any portion of the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed of a Great Pond and qualifies for the
simplified review procedure for phosphorus control the plan shall indicate the location and dimensions of
vegetative buffer areas or infiltration systems and the application shall include a long-term maintenance plan for
all phosphorus control measures.
If any portion of the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed of a Great Pond, and does not qualify for
the simplified review procedure for phosphorus control, the following shall be submitted or indicated on the
plan.
802
a. A Phosphorus Impact Analysis and Control Plan conducted using the procedures set forth in "Phosphorus
Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development," published by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, latest edition. The Analysis and Control Plan shall
include all worksheets, engineering calculations, and construction specifications and diagrams for control
measures, as required by the Technical Guide.
b. A long-term maintenance plan for all phosphorus control measures.
c. The contour lines shown on the plan shall be at an interval of no less than ten (10) feet.
d. Areas with sustained slopes greater than 25 percent covering more than one acre.
27. A list of construction and maintenance items, with both capital and annual operating cost estimates, that must be
financed by the City, or quasi-municipal districts. These lists shall include, but not be limited to:
Schools, including busing Recreation facilities Stormwater drainage
Police and fire protection Wastewater treatment Solid waste disposal
Water supply Road maintenance and snow removal
28. The applicant shall provide an estimate of the net increase in taxable assessed valuation at the completion of the
construction of the subdivision.
Historical Note: Section 13-404 §1A as amended April 24, 2006.
803
Sec. 13-405 Final Plan Procedure and Requirements.
1. Final Plan Procedure.
A. Within twelve (12) months after the approval of the Preliminary Plan by the Planning Board, the applicant shall
submit an application for approval of the Final Plan to the CEO at least seven (7) days prior to a scheduled meeting
of the Planning Board. Final Plan applications shall be submitted to the CEO. If the application for the Final Plan is
not submitted within twelve (12) months after Preliminary Plan approval, the Planning Board shall require
resubmission of the Preliminary Plan, except as stipulated below. The Final Plan shall approximate the layout
shown on the Preliminary Plan, plus any changes required by the Planning Board.
B. If an applicant cannot submit the Final Plan within twelve (12) months, due to delays caused by other regulatory
bodies, or for other reasons, the applicant may request an extension from the Planning Board. Such a request for an
extension to the filing deadline shall be made, in writing, to the CEO who shall pass the request along to the
Planning Board for discussion at their next regularly scheduled meeting prior to the expiration of the filing period.
In considering the request for an extension the Planning Board shall make findings of fact that the applicant has
made due progress in preparation of the Final Plan and in pursuing approval of the plans before other agencies, and
that City ordinances or regulations which may impact on the proposed development have not been amended.
C. Irrespective of any other provision of this Ordinance or any other ordinance, the Planning Board shall not accept the
application as complete if the applicant fails to pay the fee(s) or appeals the fee(s) determination. If the applicant
appeals the payment of the fee(s) to the Board of Appeals, the Board shall decide whether the fee(s) is/are
reasonable for the purpose found necessary by the Planning Board. The fee(s) shall be placed in an interest bearing
escrow account in the "City of Caribou'" name. The money, including accrued interest, remaining in the account
and which has not been spent or appropriated shall be returned to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the
Planning Board issues its final decision on the proposal.
D. Prior to submittal of the Final Plan application, the following approvals shall be obtained in writing, where
applicable:
1. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Site Location of Development Act, Natural
Resources Protection Act, or if a Wastewater Discharge License is needed;
2. Maine Department of Human Services, if the applicant proposes to provide a public water system;
3. Maine Department of Human Services, if an engineered subsurface wastewater disposal system(s) is to be
utilized; and
4. US Army Corps of Engineers, if a permit under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act is required.
E. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the Final Plan application, the Planning Board shall determine whether the
Final Plan application is complete and notify the applicant in writing of its determination. If the application is not
complete, the Planning Board through the CEO, shall notify the applicant of the specific material needed to
complete the application.
F. Upon receiving an application for review, whether the application is complete or not, the Planning Board shall issue
a dated receipt to the applicant. The Planning Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing on the Final
Plan application.
G. The applicant, or their duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning Board or public
hearing to discuss the Final Plan.
H. If the Planning Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing within thirty (30) days of
determining it has received a complete application, and shall post a notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing
in the Aroostook Republican seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing or at three (3) prominent locations within
the City at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the applicant.
I. The Planning Board, through the CEO, shall notify the Chair of the City Council, Highway Department Foreman,
School Superintendent, Police Chief, and Fire Chief of the proposed subdivision, the number of units proposed, the
length of roadways, and the size and construction characteristics of any multi-family, commercial, or industrial
804
buildings. The Planning Board shall request that these officials respond in writing upon the adequacy of existing
capital facilities to service the proposed subdivision.
J. Before the Planning Board grants approval of the Final Plan, the applicant shall meet the performance guarantee
requirements of Sec. 13-750, if applicable.
K. Within thirty (30) days from the public hearing or within sixty (60) days of having determined a complete
application was submitted, if no public hearing is held, or within another time limit as may be otherwise mutually
agreed to by the Planning Board and the applicant, the Planning Board shall make findings of fact, and conclusions
relative to the review criteria for approval contained in Title 30-A MRSA, §4404 (Statute) and this Ordinance. If the
Planning Board finds that all the criteria of the Statute and the standards of this Ordinance have been met, they shall
approve the Final Plan. If the Planning Board finds that any of the criteria of the Statute or the standards of this
Ordinance have not been met, the Planning Board shall either deny the application, or approve the application with
conditions to ensure all of the standards shall be met by the subdivision. The reasons for any conditions shall be
stated in the records of the Planning Board.
2. Final Plan Requirements.
A. The Final Plan shall consist of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of not more than one hundred feet
(100') to the inch. Plans for subdivisions containing more than one hundred (100) acres may be drawn at a scale of
not more than two hundred feet (200') to the inch provided all necessary detail can easily be read. Plans shall be no
larger than 24" X 36" in size. Space shall be reserved on the plan for endorsement by the Planning Board. Two
recording plans on Mylar transparencies, one to be recorded at the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, Northern
Office and the other to be filed at the City Office, and three paper copies of the Mylar transparencies of the
recording plan shall be submitted. In addition, seven (7) copies of the plan(s) reduced to a size of 8 1/2 by 11 inches
or 11 by 17 inches, and all accompanying information, shall be submitted to the CEO and mailed to each Planning
Board member no less than seven (7) days prior to the meeting for their review and comment.
B. The Final Plan shall include all of the required information contained in the above Preliminary Plan Requirements,
and be accompanied by the following information:
1. If different than those submitted with the Preliminary Plan, a copy of any proposed deed restrictions intended to
cover all or part of the lots or dwellings in the subdivision.
2. If different than those submitted with the Preliminary Plan, the location, names, widths, and geometrics of
existing and proposed roads, assess points, highways, easements, buildings, parks, and other usable open spaces
on or adjacent to the subdivision. The plan shall contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing, and
length of every road line, lot line, and boundary line to be readily determined and be reproduced upon the
ground. These lines shall be tied to reference points previously established. The location, bearing, and length
of road lines, lot lines, and parcel boundary lines shall bear the seal and signature of a Maine Licensed
Professional Surveyor.
3. An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with the "Environmental Quality Handbook",
latest edition, published by the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission or appropriate "Best
Management Practices". The Planning Board may waive submission of the erosion and sedimentation control
plan only if the subdivision is not in the watershed of a Great Pond, and upon a finding that the proposed
subdivision shall not involve road construction, and that no driveway or house construction shall occur on sites
with slopes steeper than 10 percent.
4. A storm water management plan, prepared by a registered professional engineer in accordance with "Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, T.R. 55 or T.R. 20", latest edition, published by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service. Another methodology may be used if the applicant can demonstrate it is equally
applicable to the site. The Planning Board may waive submission of the storm water management plan only if
the subdivision is not in the watershed of a Great Pond, and upon a finding that the proposed subdivision shall
not involve road construction or grading which changes drainage patterns and if the addition of impervious
surfaces such as roofs and driveways is less than 10 percent of the area of the subdivision.
805
5. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication. A Phase I
Environmental Site Assessment Review statement. Written offers to convey title to the City of all public ways
and usable open spaces shown on the plan, and copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in
which usable open spaces to be retained by the developer or lot owners are to be maintained shall be submitted.
If proposed roads and/or usable open spaces or other land is to be offered to the City, written evidence that the
City Council is satisfied with the legal sufficiency of the written offer to convey title shall be included.
6. A list of construction items, with cost estimates, that shall be completed by the developer prior to the sale of
lots, and evidence that the developer has financial commitments or resources to cover these costs.
7. A performance bond may be required to secure completion of all public improvements required by the Planning
Board, and written evidence that the City Council is satisfied with the legal sufficiency of the bond.
8. The Final Plan shall be accompanied by certification either by a duly authorized Maine Registered Engineer or
by the Building Inspector of Caribou or by both, as required by the Planning Board, that the design of sewer and
water facilities and roads and utilities in the proposed subdivision conform to the requirements of all applicable,
federal, state, and local rules, laws, and regulations. The cost of inspection shall be borne by the applicant or
subdivider.
9. Suitable space to record on the approved plan, the date, and conditions of approval, if any. This space shall be
similar to the following example:
City of Caribou
Approved by the Caribou Planning Board
Signed: __________________________ Chair of the Planning Board
__________________________ (space for all Planning Board
__________________________ members to sign)
__________________________
__________________________
Date: __________________________
Conditions: __________________________
__________________________
3. Final Approval and Filing.
A. A plan may be reviewed by the Planning Board, however, no plan shall be approved by the Planning Board as long
as the applicant is in violation of provisions of federal, state, or local laws, rules, and regulations and a previously
approved plan within the City.
B. Upon findings of fact and determination that all standards in Title 30-A MRSA, §4404, and this Ordinance have
been met, and upon voting to approve the subdivision, the Planning Board shall sign the Final Plan(s). The Planning
Board shall specify in writing its findings of fact and reasons for any conditions or denial. One copy of the signed
recording plan on Mylar transparency shall be forwarded to the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, Northern
Office, one copy of the signed Final Plan on Mylar transparency shall be retained by the City as part of the
permanent records, and one paper copy of the Mylar transparency of the recording plan shall be retained by the
Planning Board. Any subdivision not recorded in the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, Northern Office within
ninety (90) days of the date upon which the plan is approved and signed by the Planning Board shall become null
and void.
C. At the time the Planning Board grants Final Plan approval, it may permit the plan to be divided into two or more
sections subject to any conditions the Planning Board deems necessary in order to ensure the orderly development of
the plan. If any City or quasi-municipal department head notified of the proposed subdivision informs the Planning
Board that their department or district does not have adequate capital facilities to service the subdivision, the
Planning Board shall require the plan to be divided into two or more sections subject to any conditions the Planning
806
Board deems necessary in order to allow the orderly planning, financing, and provision of public services to the
subdivision. If the expansion, addition or purchase of the needed facilities is included in the City's capital
improvements program, the time period of the phasing shall be no longer than the time period contained in the
capital improvements program for the expansion, addition, or purchase.
If the Superintendent of Schools indicates that there is less than 20 percent excess classroom capacity existing in the
school(s) which shall serve the subdivision, considering previously approved but not built subdivisions, the Planning
Board shall require the plan to be divided into sections to prevent classroom overcrowding.
D. Whenever the initial approval or any subsequent amendment of a subdivision is based in part on the granting of a
waiver from any applicable subdivision standard, that fact must be expressly delineated on the face of the final
recording plans.
1. In the case of an amendment, if no amended plan is to be recorded, a certificate must be prepared in recordable
form and recorded with the City Clerk and the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, Northern Office. This
certificate must:
a. Indicate the name of the property owner;
b. Identify the property by reference to the last recorded deed in its chain of title; and
c. Indicate the fact that a waiver, including any conditions on the waiver, has been granted and the date of
granting.
2. The waiver is not valid until it is recorded as provided in this paragraph. Recording of the plan must occur
within ninety (90) days of the final subdivision approval or approval under Title 38, where applicable,
whichever date is later, or the waiver is null and void.
E. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any Final Plan after approval has been given by
the Planning Board and endorsed in writing on the plan, unless the revised Final Plan is first submitted and the
Planning Board approves any modifications. The Planning Board shall make findings that the revised plan meets
the criteria of Title 30-A MRSA, §4404, and the standards of this Ordinance. In the event that a plan is recorded
without complying with this requirement, the City shall provide to the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds,
Northern Office an affidavit to be recorded over or attached to the plan. The Planning Board may institute
proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, Northern Office.
F. The approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of any
acceptance by the City of any road, easement, or other usable open space shown on such plan. When a park,
playground, or other recreation area shall have been shown on the plan to be dedicated to the City, approval of the
plan shall not constitute an acceptance by the City of such areas. The acceptance of dedicated lands shall be made
only by the City Council The Planning Board shall require the plan to contain appropriate notes to this effect. The
Planning Board may also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the City covering
future deed and title dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment, and maintenance of
any such dedicated area.
G. Except in the case of a phased development plan, failure to complete substantial construction of the subdivision
within three (3) years of the date of approval and signing of the plan shall render the plan null and void. Upon
determining that a subdivision’s approval has expired under this paragraph, the Planning Board shall have a notice
placed in the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, Northern Office to that effect.
807
Sec. 13-406 Subdivision Review Criteria.
1. Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships may result from the strict compliance with
this Ordinance, or where there are special circumstances of a particular plan, the Planning Board may waive, in writing,
any of the application requirements or non-statutory performance standards or general requirements---provided that such
waiver shall not have the effect of nullifying the purpose of these Ordinances, the comprehensive plan, the Shoreland
Zoning Ordinance, or any other federal, state, and local rule, law, ordinance, or regulation. Any such wavier shall be
duly noted on the final recording Plan. In granting any waiver, the Planning Board shall require such conditions as shall,
in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so waived.
2. When reviewing a proposed subdivision, the Planning Board shall review the application for conformance with the
following review criteria and shall make findings of fact that each criteria has been met prior to the approval of the Final
Plan. The following review criteria shall not be wavered. The Planning Board shall determine that:
A. Pollution. The proposed subdivision shall not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this determination,
it shall at least consider:
1. The elevation of land above sea level and its relation to the flood plains,
2. The nature of the soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal,
3. The slope of the land and its effect on effluents,
4. The availability of streams for disposal of effluents, and
5. The applicable of state and local health and water resource rules and regulations;
B. Sufficient Water. The proposed subdivision has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of
the subdivision;
C. Municipal Water Supply. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water
supply, if one is to be used;
D. Erosion. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or a reduction in the capacity of the
land to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results;
E. Traffic. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe
conditions with respect to the use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed;
F. Sewage Disposal. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal and not cause an
unreasonable burden on City services, if they are to be utilized;
G. Solid Waste Disposal. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on the ability of the City to
dispose of solid waste, if City services are to be utilized;
H. Aesthetic, Cultural, and Natural Values. Will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of
the area, aesthetics, historic sites, significant wildlife habitat identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife or the City, rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical or visual access to the
shoreline;
I. Conformity with Local Ordinances and Plans. The proposed subdivision is in conformance with a duly adopted
subdivision regulation or ordinance, comprehensive plan, development plan, or land use plan, if any. In making this
determination, the Planning Board may interpret these ordinances and plans;
J. Financial and Technical Capacity. The developer has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet all criteria
contained within these regulations;
K. Surface Waters and Outstanding River Segments. Whenever situated entirely or partially within the watershed
of any pond or lake or within 250 feet of any wetland, Great Pond, or river as defined in Title 38, chapter 3,
subchapter I, article 2-B, §435-449, will not adversely affect the quality of that body of water or unreasonably affect
the shoreline of that body of water.
808
1. When lots in a subdivision have frontage on an outstanding river segment, as defined in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A.,
§4401, subsection 7, the proposed subdivision plan shall require principal structures to have a combined lot
shore frontage and setback from the normal high-water mark of 500 feet.
a. To avoid circumventing the intent of this provision, whenever a proposed subdivision adjoins a shoreland
strip narrower than 250 feet which is not lotted, the proposed subdivision shall be reviewed as if lot lines
extended to the shore.
b. These frontage and set-back provisions shall not apply either within areas zoned as general development or
its equivalent under Shoreland Zoning, Title 38, chapter 3, subchapter I, article 2-B, §435-449, or within
areas designated by ordinance as densely developed. The determination of which areas are densely
developed must be based on a finding that existing development met the definition requirements of §4401,
subsection 1, on September 23, 1983;
L. Groundwater. The proposed subdivision will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect
the quality or quantity of groundwater;
M. Flood Areas. Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information presented by the applicant, whether the subdivision is in a floodprone
area. If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in such an area the applicant shall determine the 100-year flood
elevation and flood hazard boundaries within the subdivision. The proposed subdivision plan shall include a
condition of plat approval requiring that principal structures on lots in the subdivision shall be constructed with their
lowest floor, including the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation;
N. Freshwater Wetlands. All freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision have been identified on any maps
submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of these wetlands. Any mapping of freshwater wetlands
may be done with the help of the local soil and water conservation district;
O. River, Stream, or Brook. Any river, stream, or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision has been
identified on any maps submitted as part of the application. For purposes of these Ordinances, "river, stream, or
brook" has the same meaning as in Title 38, §480-B, subsection 9;
P. Stormwater. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate stormwater management; and,
Q. Spaghetti Lots Prohibited. The proposed subdivision shall not create lots with a lot depth to front frontage ratio of
greater than 5:1.
809
Sec. 13-407 General Requirements for Subdivisions.
The General Requirements contained within this Section and the applicable standards in Sec. 13-700, "General
Requirements"; Sec. 13-710, "Access Management, Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Road Design and Construction
Standards"; Sec. 13-200, "Zoning Ordinance"; and Sec. 13-408, "Mobile Homes" shall be met by all subdivisions. The
applicable standards of these Sections are intended to clarify the review criteria and provide guidance. In reviewing a
proposed development, the Planning Board shall review the application for conformance to these standards and make
findings of fact prior to approval of the Final Plan. The burden of proof of conformance is with the applicant and they shall
provide clear and convincing evidence that the proposed Final Plan meets these standards and the review criteria.
1. Blocks.
A. The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the needs of the proposed use.
2. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
3. Needs for access, circulation, control, and safety of traffic.
4. Limitations and opportunities of topography.
5. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,800 feet or be less than 500 feet and no block shall be less than 200 feet in
width for residential use. These restrictions shall not apply in any rural District, except when a development
proposal reflects the creation of blocks.
2. Relation of Subdivision to Community Facilities.
A proposed subdivision shall, in the opinion of the Planning Board, be suitably located with respect to community
facilities such as schools, playgrounds, and parks.
3. Performance Guarantees.
When it has been determined that a performance guarantee is required, the standards contained Sec. 13-750 shall be
used.
4. Parking, Driveways, Roads, and Sidewalks.
Parking, driveways, roads, and sidewalks within a subdivision shall conform to Sec. 13-700 (28) and Sec. 13-710.
810
Sec. 13-408 Manufactured Housing Ordinance.
1. Mobile Home Parks & Manufactured Housing Administration
a) A mobile home park shall comply with the standards contained within this Ordinance, the Maine Manufactured
Housing Board and all other applicable state statutes regarding the establishment and maintenance of a mobile
home park.
b) The owner of a mobile home park must maintain a list of all tenants containing the following information: name
and mailing address of each owner of manufactured housing located within the park, manufacturer’s name,
model number, year, serial number and lot identification/number. This list must be submitted annually to the
Assessor’s Office by April 15 with information current as of April 1.
c) No manufactured housing may be moved into a mobile home park nor any Certificate of Occupancy issued for
any mobile home park which does not have a current license with the State of Maine to operate as a mobile
home park or a park which has been determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be out of compliance with
this ordinance.
d) Mobile home parks constructed after the effective date of this ordinance are required to undergo City of Caribou
subdivision and site design review with all plans prepared by a certified engineer.
e) Upon the effective date of this ordinance, owners of mobile home parks must obtain a permit from City Code
Enforcement Officer before any manufactured housing unit is allowed to enter the mobile home park.
f) A mobile home park owner wishing to appoint an agent who can act on the park owner’s behalf must complete
the City of Caribou Property Management Application form. Only agents duly appointed through the approved
Property Management Application process shall be authorized to act on behalf of the park owner.
g) Mobile home park owners are responsible for compliance with the City of Caribou Property Maintenance Code
for all lots within the park regardless of the ownership of the manufactured housing unit.
h) No manufactured housing may be occupied until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer or at his/her discretion the Building Inspector.
i) No manufactured housing may be brought into Caribou or moved within the City without written proof of
property tax being paid for the current tax year and all previous years from Caribou or the municipality where
the housing unit was last assessed.
j) No mobile homes shall be brought into the City that are not manufactured according to the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.; 24 CFR Part
3280 and Part 3282.
2. Manufactured Housing Design Standards
Manufactured Housing Design Requirements- All manufactured housing to be located within the City from outside of
the City or all manufactured housing relocated from within the City after the effective date of this Ordinance must
comply with the following:
a) Maine Manufactured Housing Board Standards for installation for newly constructed units.
b) Shall be placed on a permanent foundation.
c) All manufactured housing located on private lots or in mobile home parks whether rented, leased or owned are
required to have siding that is residential in appearance or the original factory installed siding.
d) All manufactured housing is required to be enclosed between the bottom of the home and the ground with
material that is residential in nature or the original factory installed siding.
e) A pitched shingled roof or the factory installed roof.
f) Accessory structures, including but not limited to decks, porches, car ports, garages, steps, ramps, entry ways,
covered entry ways, which are not part of the original manufactured housing as approved by the State of Maine
are subject to City building and zoning codes including, but not limited to, land use ordinances and the Maine
Uniform Building and Energy Code.
3. Definitions
The terms “Manufactured Housing”, “Mobile Home Park”, “Mobile Home Park Lot”, “Mobile Home Subdivision or
Development”, “Permanent Foundation”, and “Pitched, Shingled Roof” shall have the same definition as set forth in
Title 30-A MRSA Section 4358 as it may be amended, from time to time.
811
4. Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective in accordance with the Caribou City Charter Section 2.12(d).
Historical Note: Section 13-408 as amended by the City Council on March 23, 2015.
812
(This page was intentionally left blank.)
813
Sec. 13-409 Cluster Development.
Cluster development is an option for parcels of 10 acres or greater. The following cluster development standards should be
used as a means to preserve open space, including farm and forestland. Cluster development is one of the most important
ways of controlling sprawl and minimizing the conversion of open space to residential use, while allowing residential
development to take place. Commercial and industrial uses can also be clustered but, under different standards.
A. Purposes.
The purposes of this Section are:
1. To provide for efficient use of land not possible under traditional lot-by-lot size requirements, provided that the net
density shall be no greater than is permitted, unless a density bonus is granted to the applicant;
2. To provide for the preservation of parks, recreation, and open space areas;
3. To provide for a more attractive, varied arrangement of dwelling units and open space on a particular parcel;
4. To provide for the location of housing units and other uses where they are least visible and hidden by topography or
vegetation, therefore minimizing perceived densities;
5. To provide for orderly development in the rural areas and maintain the rural character of the community by
preserving tree masses, stream valleys, woodlands, of views and scenic vistas, and other significant natural features;
6. To provide for reasonable standards for the perpetual maintenance of community or privately owned facilities
necessary to service the development;
7. To preserve and protect environmentally sensitive areas; and
8. To allow for new and innovative approaches to housing development and discourage the location of housing units in
strip fashion along rural roads.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this and other ordinances relating to dimensional requirements, the Planning Board,
in reviewing and approving proposed residential developments, may modify said provisions related to dimensional
requirements to permit innovative approaches to housing and environmental design in accordance with the following
standards. This shall not be construed as granting variances to relieve hardship.
B. Application Procedures.
An application for cluster development shall follow the same procedures as for a standard subdivision and address the
following additional requirements:
1. The Planing Board may allow subdivided development on reduced lot sizes in return for open space where the
Planning Board determines that the benefits of the cluster approach will prevent the loss of natural features without
increasing the net density of the development. Where a applicant elects or is required to cluster, a written
application shall be submitted to the Planning Board. Two sketch plans shall be submitted with one layout as a
standard traditional subdivision and the other as a cluster development indicating open space and significant natural
features. Each lot in the standard traditional subdivision shall meet the minimum lot size and lot width
requirements, and if not serviced by public sewer have an area suitable for subsurface wastewater disposal according
to the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. The number of lots in the cluster may exceed the number of
lots in the standard subdivision (density bonus), with approval from the Planning Board.
2. A written statement shall describe the natural features which will be preserved or enhanced by the cluster approach.
Natural features include, but are not limited to, moderate to high value wildlife and waterfowl habitats, moderate to
high yield aquifers, preserving prime agricultural and forestland areas and soils, large trees, woods, ponds, rock
outcrops, and other important natural or historic sites. The statement shall also compare the impact upon the
community by both proposals. Examples of impacts are, municipal costs for roads, schools, school busing, solid
waste management, utility efficiency, recreational opportunities, protection of flood water storage areas, and
environmental impacts on sensitive lands.
3. For purposes of this Section, the tract or parcel to be developed shall be in single ownership, or the subject of an
application filed jointly by the owners of all the property included.
4. Estimated costs of infrastructure development (roads, utilities, etc.) shall accompany the plan. The applicant shall
file with the City, at the time of submission of the Final Plan for subdivision approval, a performance guarantee
(See: Sec. 13-750).
814
5. Within thirty (30) days of determining that the application is complete, the Planning Board shall determine whether
to allow the subdivision to be developed in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance based upon findings
that:
a. The site contains natural features of the type worthy of preservation; and
b. Those natural features could not adequately be preserved in a standard subdivision layout; or
c. A clustered development will permit more efficient creation and utilization of infrastructure and provision of
municipal and quasi-municipal services than would a standard subdivision layout.
C. Basic Requirements for Cluster Development.
1. Cluster development shall be a minimum of 10 acres and shall meet all requirements for a subdivision, the City's
road design and construction standards, all other applicable federal, state, and local rules, laws, ordinances or
regulations.
2. Each building shall be an element of an overall plan for site development. Only developments having a total site
plan for structures will be considered. The applicant shall illustrate the placement of buildings and the treatment of
spaces, paths, roads, service, and parking and in so doing shall take into consideration all requirements of this
Section and these Ordinances.
3. The maximum allowed reduction in the size of individual lots is 25 percent. However, a larger reduction can be
made if site conditions can be proven by the applicant to support smaller lot sizes.
4. The maximum net density allowed in cluster developments shall be calculated on the basis of the "Qualifying Land
Area" standards contained below.
5. Unless a public sewer or community sewage collection and treatment system is provided, no lot shall be smaller than
20,000 square feet. No unit shall be constructed on any lot with soil considered as being "very poorly" drained.
6. The total area of open space within the development shall equal or exceed the sum of the areas by which any
building lots are reduced below the minimum lot area normally required, except where density bonuses are
permitted.
7. Every building lot that is reduced in area below the amount normally required should abut the open space area for a
distance of 50 feet, or be within 1000 feet distance from the open space area.
8. Distance between buildings shall not be less than 20 feet.
9. In rural areas, no individual lots shall have frontage on an existing road at the time of development. There shall be a
setback of 50 feet from the main public access road and from interior roads that are constructed as part of the cluster
development. Access from public ways, internal circulation, and parking shall be designed to provide for vehicular
and pedestrian safety and convenience, emergency and fire equipment maneuverability, snow removal, road
maintenance, and delivery and collection services.
10. In no case shall shore frontage and setback be reduced below the minimums normally required by the Caribou
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
11. Where a cluster development abuts a body of water, a usable portion of the shoreline, which shall be a minimum of
100 feet, as well as reasonable access to it, shall be a part of the open space land.
12. When individual wells are to be utilized, a drilled well with casing, shall be provided on each lot by the
developer/builder. The location of all wells shall be shown on the plan. The applicant shall demonstrate the
availability of water adequate in quantity and quality for domestic purposes, as well quantity for fire safety. The
Planning Board may require the construction of fire ponds and/or dry hydrants.
13. The location of subsurface sewage disposal systems and an equivalent reserve area for a replacement system(s) shall
be shown on the plan. The report of a licensed Site Evaluator shall accompany the plan. The reserve areas shall be
restricted so as not to be built upon. The report of a licensed Site Evaluator shall accompany the plan. If the
subsurface disposal system in an engineered system, approval from the Department of Human Services, Division of
Health Engineering, shall be obtained prior to Planning Board approval.
D. Siting and Buffering Standards.
1. Buildings shall be oriented with respect to views and scenic vistas, natural landscape features, topography, south
facing slopes (wherever possible), and natural drainage areas, in accordance with an overall plan for site
development and landscaping. A site inspection shall be conducted by the Planning Board prior to approval. Once
approved, the plan shall not be altered in any manner, without prior approval of the Planning Board.
2. Buildings shall be designed and planned to protect bedroom windows from light invasions by vehicle headlights or
glare from existing outdoor lighting or illuminated signs, where allowed, insofar as practical.
3. Where parking spaces or storage areas are located in areas abutting existing residential properties, a permanent wood
or masonry screen, at least 4 feet high, shall be erected along the property line, in addition to the "green" perimeter
strip described below.
815
4. Other than any land within shoreland zoning, a "green" vegetative perimeter strip, not less than 20 feet wide, shall
be maintained with grass, bushes, flowers, scrubs, and/or trees alongside all lot or rear lot lines of the property as a
whole, and (except for entrance and exit driveways) along the entire frontage of such lot. Such "green" strip shall
not be built upon, paved, or used for parking or storage. There shall be no removal of trees over 4" in diameter
within this buffer. In the shoreland zoning area, vegetation shall be retained in its natural state.
5. Except for normal thinning and landscaping, existing vegetation shall be left intact to prevent soil erosion. Adequate
provision shall be made for storm waters, with particular concern for the effects of erosion from the site. Erosion
resulting from any improvements to the site shall be prevented by landscaping or other means. The Planning Board
may require that an erosion and sedimentation control plan be made and that the developer take appropriate
measures to prevent and correct soil erosion in the proposed development.
6. All utilities shall be installed underground, whenever possible. Transformer boxes, pumping stations, and meters
shall be located so as to not to be unsightly, hazardous to the public, or detract from the natural beauty of the
development.
E. Preservation and Maintenance of Open Space and Facilities.
1. Common open space shall be dedicated upon approval of the project. There shall be no further subdivision of open
space. Open space shall be used for agriculture, non-commercial recreation, forestry, or conservation. However,
easements for public utilities may be permitted in the open space area, with prior approval of the Planning Board.
2. There shall be no land development within the open space without the prior approval of the Planning Board.
3. The open space(s) shall be shown on the development plan and with appropriate notation on the face thereof to
indicate that:
a. The open space shall not be used for future buildings lots or development; and
b. A part or all of the open space may, at the option of the City, be dedicated for acceptance by the City. Such
dedication shall take place after final approval of the project. Final acceptance by the City of dedicated open
space rests with the City.
4. If any or all of the open space is to be reserved as common open space for use by the residents, the by-laws of the
proposed homeowners association shall specify maintenance responsibilities and shall be submitted to the Planning
Board prior to approval. The developer shall maintain control of such open space(s) and be responsible for its
maintenance until development sufficient to support the association has taken place. Such determination shall be
made by the Planning Board upon the request of the homeowners association or the developer.
5. Covenants for mandatory membership in the association, setting forth the owner's rights and interest and privileges
in the association and the common land, shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and included in the deed for each
lot (i.e. annual fee to the association for lawn mowing, snow removal, solid waste management, municipal
assessments, neighborhood recreational facilities, etc..). A clause should be added to every deed that any unpaid
association fees, plus interest, shall be paid at the time of a deed transfer and the association will receive first "dibs".
6. Open space land may be leased for agriculture or forestry purposes provided that development rights for the open
space land are held by the homeowners association. The legal instruments for the development rights shall be
submitted to and reviewed by the Planning Board and approved by the homeowners association.
F. Qualifying Land Area.
To determine the number of lots/dwelling units permitted in a subdivision, the applicant shall perform the following
calculations and submit evidence in the form of plans and data to verify the calculations.
816
Net Buildable Acreage Calculation
A. From the gross acreage of the site ( ______ acres) subtract the following:
1. Existing road rights-of-way1. __________ acres
2. Proposed rights-of-way1. __________ acres
3. Noncontiguous land2. __________ acres
4. 100% of the RP and SP Districts3. __________ acres
5. 100% of the 100 year floodplain land4. __________ acres
6. 100% of the wetlands, NRPA Class I and II4 . __________ acres
7. 50% of the wetlands, NRPA Class III4. __________ acres
8. 100% of ponds or lakes. __________ acres
9. 50% of slopes from 15-25%. __________ acres
10. 85% of slopes over 85%. __________ acres
Net Buildable Acreage (NBA) __________ acres
1 Include shoulder and ditches in width calculation.
2 Land separated by roads or railroads, or land linked by a strip less than 50' wide.
3 Resource Protection and Stream Protection.
4 Where this overlaps, the overlapping acreage shall be counted only once.
Net Density Calculation:
A. Multiply the (NBA) by the minimum lot size requirement (SF). __________ lots
(This figure is determined by dividing 43,560 by the minimum lot size
requirement... i.e. 40,000 square feet = .9183)
B. Multiply the result by 10% (density bonus). __________ lots
C. Add the results of "A" and "B". Total Allowable Lots __________ lots
Dimensional Standards
A. Traditional Minimum Lot Size: _______ SF
B. Maximum reduction in size of individual lots is: (25%)
C. Clustered Minimum Lot Size: (25% of Traditional Minimum Size) _______ SF
D. Minimum Lot Width: _______ feet
E. Minimum Yards
Front (from ROW) __________ feet
Rear __________ feet
Side __________ feet
817
Sec. 13-500 Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
1. Purposes
2. Authority
3. Applicability
4. Effective Date
A. Effective Date of Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments
B. Repeal of Municipal Timber Harvesting Regulation
5. Availability
6. Severability
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances
8. Amendments
9. Districts and Zoning Map
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map
B. Scale of Map
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries
11. Land Use Requirements
12. Non-conformance
A. Purpose
B. General
C. Non-conforming Structures
D. Non-conforming Uses
E. Non-conforming Lots
13. Establishment of Districts
A. Resource Protection District
B. Limited Residential District
C. Limited Commercial District
D. General Development I District
E. General Development II District
F. Stream Protection District
14. Table of Land Uses
818
15. Land Use Standards
A. Minimum Lot Standards
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
C. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High-Water Line of a Water body or Within a Wetland
D. Campgrounds
E. Individual Private Campsites
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses
G. Parking Areas
H. Roads and Driveways
I. Signs
J. Storm Water Runoff
K. Septic Waste Disposal
L. Essential Services
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction
N. Agriculture
O. Repeal of Municipal Timber Harvesting Regulation
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other than Timber Harvesting
Q. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
R. Soils
S. Water Quality
T. Archaeological Site
16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
B. Permits Required
C. Permit Application
D. Procedure for Administering Permits
E. Special Exceptions
F. Expiration of Permit
G. Installation of Public Utility Service
H. Appeals
I. Enforcement
17. Definitions
819
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance for the Municipality of
Caribou, Maine
1. Purposes. The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to
prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife
habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect archaeological and
historic resources; to protect freshwater wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land
uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve
natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in shoreland
areas.
2. Authority. This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38 sections 435-449
of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
3. Applicability. This Ordinance applies to all land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
• normal high-water line of any great pond or river, or
• upland edge of a freshwater wetland,
and all land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
This Ordinance also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other structure
extending or located below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland.
4. Effective Date
A. Effective Date of Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments. This Ordinance, which was adopted by the
municipal legislative body on ______, 2009, shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner of
the Department of Environmental Protection. A certified copy of the Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment,
attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner for approval. If the
Commissioner fails to act on this Ordinance or Ordinance Amendment, within forty-five (45) days of his/her
receipt of the Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, it shall be automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day period shall be
governed by the terms of this Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, if the Ordinance, or Ordinance
Amendment, is approved by the Commissioner.
B. Repeal of Municipal Timber Harvesting Regulation. The municipal regulation of timber harvesting
activities is repealed on the statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5), at which time the
State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry shall administer timber harvesting standards
in the shoreland zone. On the date established under 38 M.R.S.A section 438-B(5), the following provisions
of this Ordinance are repealed:
• Section 14. Table of Land Uses, Item 3 (Forest management activities except for timber
harvesting) and Item 4 (Timber harvesting);
• Section 15(O) in its entirety; and
• Section 17. Definitions, the definitions of “forest management activities”, “residual basal area”,
“skid trail”, and “slash”.
820
NOTE: The statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5) is the effective date of state-wide
timber harvesting standards. That date is “the first day of January of the 2nd year following the year in which
the Commissioner of Conservation determines that at least 252 of the 336 municipalities identified by the
Commissioner of Conservation as the municipalities with the highest acreage of timber harvesting activity on
an annual basis for the period 1992-2003 have either accepted the state-wide standards or have adopted an
ordinance identical to the state-wide standards.” 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5) further provides that “the
Commissioner of Conservation shall notify the Secretary of State in writing and advise the Secretary of the
effective date of the state-wide standards.”
5. Availability. A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be
accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the
expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be posted.
6. Severability. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances. Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent
with another provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the
municipality, the more restrictive provision shall control.
8. Amendments. This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the legislative body. Copies of
amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the municipal legislative body and shall not
be effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on any amendment
within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day period shall be
governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
9. Districts and Zoning Map
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby divided
into the following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map(s) which is (are) made a part
of this Ordinance:
(1) Resource Protection
(2) Limited Residential
(3) Limited Commercial
(4) General Development I
(5) General Development II
(6) Stream Protection
B. Scale of Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of 1 inch = 2000 feet.
District boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the symbols for each district shall
be placed on the map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be certified
by the attested signature of the Municipal Clerk and shall be located in the municipal office. In the event
the municipality does not have a municipal office, the Municipal Clerk shall be the custodian of the map.
821
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map. If amendments, in accordance with Section 8, are
made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, such
changes shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within thirty (30) days after the amendment
has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection.
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries. Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map,
district boundary lines are property lines, the centerlines of streets, roads and rights of way, and the
boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of
district boundary lines, the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
11. Land Use Requirements. Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be
used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
12. Non-conformance.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that non-conforming
conditions that existed before the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto shall be allowed
to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 12. Except as otherwise provided in this
Ordinance, a non-conforming condition shall not be permitted to become more non-conforming.
B. General
(1) Transfer of Ownership. Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and the new
owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to use the non-conforming structure or lot,
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Repair and Maintenance. This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and
maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations that do not
involve expansion of the non-conforming use or structure, and such other changes in a nonconforming
use or structure as federal, state, or local building and safety codes may require.
NOTE: See Section 17 for the definitions of non-conforming structures, non-conforming uses and nonconforming
lots.
C. Non-conforming Structures
(1) Expansions. A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a permit from
the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or expansion does not
increase the non-conformity of the structure and is in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b)
below.
(a) After January 1, 1989 if any portion of a structure is less than the required setback from the
normal high-water line of a water body or tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland, that
portion of the structure shall not be expanded, as measured in floor area or volume, by 30% or
more, during the lifetime of the structure. If a replacement structure conforms with the
requirements of Section 12(C)(3), and is less than the required setback from a water body,
tributary stream or wetland, the replacement structure may not be expanded if the original
structure existing on January 1, 1989 had been expanded by 30% in floor area and volume since
that date.
822
(b) Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a non-conforming
structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the setback requirement is
met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its designee, basing its
decision on the criteria specified in Section 12(C)(2) Relocation, below. If the completed
foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure, except for expansion
in conformity with Section 12(C)(1)(a) above, and the foundation does not cause the structure to
be elevated by more than three (3) additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the
structure (from original ground level to the bottom of the first floor sill), it shall not be considered
to be an expansion of the structure.
(2) Relocation. A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel on
which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements
to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its designee, and provided that
the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements
of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new
system can be installed in compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be
relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more non-conforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical extent, the
Planning Board or its designee shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for
soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of
the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of
vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary to remove vegetation
within the water or wetland setback area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board shall
require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the
area from which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting
shall be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native tree,
three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no one species
of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be
planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or destroyed in
order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same size as the area
where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must be reestablished
within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native
vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the structure
shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof.
(3) Reconstruction or Replacement. Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed, or damaged
or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market value of the structure before
such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced provided that a permit is
obtained within eighteen (18) months of the date of said damage, destruction, or removal, and
provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the water body, tributary
stream or wetland setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board or its designee in accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case shall a structure
be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its non-conformity. If the reconstructed or replacement
823
structure is less than the required setback it shall not be any larger than the original structure, except
as allowed pursuant to Section 12(C)(1) above, as determined by the non-conforming floor area and
volume of the reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of floor area
and volume of the original structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback
area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than
the setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to
replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with Section 12(C)(2)
above.
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a water body,
tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value, or damaged or
destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and
repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer
within one year of such damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback to the greatest
practical extent the Planning Board or its designee shall consider, in addition to the criteria in Section
12(C)(2) above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any.
(4) Change of Use of a Non-conforming Structure. The use of a non-conforming structure may not be
changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a written application, determines
that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream, or wetland,
or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall require written
documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and safety, erosion
and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points
of public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and historic
resources, and functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Non-conforming Uses
(1) Expansions. Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that non-conforming
residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within existing
residential structures or within expansions of such structures as allowed in Section 12(C)(1)(a) above.
(2) Resumption Prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a non-conforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not
again be devoted to a non-conforming use except that the Planning Board may, for good cause shown
by the applicant, grant up to a one year extension to that time period. This provision shall not apply
to the resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the structure has been used or
maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five (5) year period.
(3) Change of Use. An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use
provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent properties
and resources than the former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no
greater adverse impact shall be made according to criteria listed in Section 12(C)(4) above.
E. Non-conforming Lots
(1) Non-conforming Lots: A non-conforming lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance or
amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is in
separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and that all
provisions of this Ordinance except lot area, lot width and shore frontage can be met. Variances
824
relating to setback or other requirements not involving lot area, lot width or shore frontage shall be
obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint ownership of
record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional
requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists on each lot, the nonconforming
lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size
Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections 4807-A through 4807-D) and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on the effective date of this
ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot provided that the above referenced law and rules are
complied with. When such lots are divided each lot thus created must be as conforming as possible to
the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
(3) Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or
joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, if any of
these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or subsequent
amendments, and if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal structure the lots shall
be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
13. Establishment of Districts
A. Resource Protection District. The Resource Protection District includes areas in which development
would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural
values. This district shall include the following areas when they occur within the limits of the shoreland
zone, exclusive of the Stream Protection District, except that areas which are currently developed and
areas which meet the criteria for the Limited Commercial or General Development I Districts need not be
included within the Resource Protection District.
(1) Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater wetlands, and wetlands
associated with great ponds and rivers, which are rated "moderate" or "high" value waterfowl and
wading bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data
layer maintained by either MDIF&W or the Department as of December 31, 2008. For the purposes
of this paragraph “wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers” shall mean areas characterized by
non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils that are contiguous with a great pond or river, and
have a surface elevation at or below the water level of the great pond or river during the period of
normal high water. “Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers” are considered to be part of that
great pond or river.
NOTE: The Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.S.R.A. sections 480-A through 480-Z, requires the
Department of Environmental Protection to designate areas of "significant wildlife habitat".
Significant wildlife habitat includes:
Habitat for species appearing on the official state or federal lists of endangered or threatened
species; high and moderate value deer wintering areas and travel corridors as defined by the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife; high and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird
habitats, including nesting and feeding areas as defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife; critical spawning and nursery areas for Atlantic sea run salmon as defined by the
Atlantic Sea Run Salmon Commission; and shorebird nesting, feeding and staging areas and
seabird nesting islands as defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
825
(2) Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed great ponds along rivers, defined by
the 100 year floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA)
Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence
of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(3) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or greater.
(4) Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric soils, which are
not part of a freshwater wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected to a water body
during the period of normal high water.
NOTE: These areas usually consist of forested wetlands abutting water bodies and non-forested
wetlands.
(5) Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or river bed movement.
B. Limited Residential District. The Limited Residential District includes those areas suitable for
residential and recreational development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource Protection
District, or Stream Protection District, and areas which are used less intensively than those in the Limited
Commercial District or the General Development Districts.
C. Limited Commercial District. The Limited Commercial District includes areas of mixed, light
commercial and residential uses, exclusive of the Stream Protection District, which should not be
developed as intensively as the General Development Districts. This district includes areas of two or
more contiguous acres in size devoted to a mix of residential and low intensity business and commercial
uses. Industrial uses are prohibited.
D. General Development I District. The General Development I District includes the following types of
existing, intensively developed areas:
(1) Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial, industrial or intensive recreational
activities, or a mix of such activities, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other industrial activities;
(b) Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and service activities, or other
commercial activities; and
(c) Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and activities, such as, but not limited to
amusement parks, race tracks and fairgrounds.
(2) Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive commercial, industrial or recreational
uses.
E. General Development II District. The General Development II District includes the same types of areas
as those listed for the General Development I District. The General Development II District, however,
shall be applied to newly established General Development Districts where the pattern of development at
the time of adoption is undeveloped or not as intensively developed as that of the General Development I
District.
Portions of the General Development District I or II may also include residential development. However,
no area shall be designated as a General Development I or II District based solely on residential use.
826
In areas adjacent to great ponds classified GPA and adjacent to rivers flowing to great ponds classified
GPA, the designation of an area as a General Development District shall be based upon uses existing at
the time of adoption of this Ordinance. There shall be no newly established General Development
Districts or expansions in area of existing General Development Districts adjacent to great ponds
classified GPA, and adjacent to rivers that flow to great ponds classified GPA.
F. Stream Protection District. The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those areas within
two-hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond, or
river, or within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater
wetland. Where a stream and its associated shoreland area are located within two-hundred and fifty (250)
feet, horizontal distance, of the above water bodies or wetlands, that land area shall be regulated under the
terms of the shoreland district associated with that water body or wetland.
14. Table of Land Uses. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone, shall
conform with all of the applicable land use standards in Section 15. The district designation for a particular
site shall be determined from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table 1:
Yes - Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all applicable land use standards.)
No - Prohibited
PB - Allowed with permit issued by the Planning Board.
CEO - Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI - Allowed with permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
Abbreviations:
RP - Resource Protection GD General Development I and General Development II
LR - Limited Residential LC - Limited Commercial
SP - Stream Protection
TABLE 1. LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
LAND USES DISTRICT
SP RP LR LC GD
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring structures such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and trails yes yes yes yes yes
3. Forest management activities except for timber harvesting yes yes yes yes yes
4. Timber harvesting yes CEO yes yes yes
5. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber harvesting CEO CEO1 yes yes yes
6. Fire prevention activities yes yes yes yes yes
7. Wildlife management practices yes yes yes yes yes
8. Soil and water conservation practices yes yes yes yes yes
9. Mineral exploration no yes2 yes2 yes2 yes2
10. Mineral extraction including sand and gravel extraction no PB3 PB PB PB
11. Surveying and resource analysis yes yes yes yes yes
12. Emergency operations yes yes yes yes yes
13. Agriculture yes PB yes yes yes
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB yes yes
15. Principal structures and uses
A. One and two family residential, including driveways
PB4
PB8
CEO
CEO
CEO
B. Multi-unit residential no no PB PB PB
C. Commercial No9 No9 No9 PB PB
D. Industrial no no no no PB
E. Governmental and institutional no no PB PB PB
F.Small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific, or nature
interpretation purposes
PB4 PB CEO CEO CEO
16. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB4 PB8 CEO CEO yes
17. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and uses extending
over or below the normal high-water line or within a wetland
a. Temporary
b. Permanent
CEO10
PB
CEO10
PB
CEO10
PB
CEO10
PB
CEO10
PB
18. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round residences LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
827
19. Home occupations PB PB PB CEO yes
20. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed uses LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
21. Essential services
A. Roadside distribution lines (34.5kV and lower) CEO5 CEO5 yes11 yes11 yes11
B. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving ten poles or less in
the shoreland zone
PB5 PB5 CEO CEO CEO
C. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving eleven or more
poles in the shoreland zone
PB5 PB5 PB PB PB
D. Other essential services
PB
5 PB5
PB PB PB
22. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses Yes yes yes yes yes
23. Public and private recreational areas involving minimal structural development PB PB PB CEO CEO
24. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. Campgrounds No No6 PB PB PB
26. Road construction PB No7 PB PB PB
27. Parking facilities No No6 PB PB PB
28. Marinas PB no PB PB PB
29. Filling and earth moving of <10 cubic yards CEO CEO yes yes yes
30. Filling and earth moving of >10 cubic yards PB PB CEO CEO CEO
31. Signs Yes yes yes yes yes
32. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
33. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
34. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB PB
Footnotes for Land uses in the Shoreland Zone:
1 In RP not allowed within 75 feet horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of great ponds, except to
remove safety hazards.
2 Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than 100 square feet of surface area, in total, is
disturbed.
3 In RP not allowed in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
4 Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
5 See further restrictions in Section 15( L)(2).
6 Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to floodplain criteria in which case a
permit is required from the PB.
7 Except as provided in Section 15(H)(4).
8 Single family residential structures may be allowed by special exception only according to the provisions of
Section 16(E), Special Exceptions. Two-family residential structures are prohibited.
9 Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table, such as marinas and campgrounds, that are allowed in
the respective district.
10 Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no permit is required.
11 Permit not required, but must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with CEO.
NOTE: A person performing any of the following activities shall require a permit from the Department of
Environmental Protection, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C, if the activity occurs in, on, over or
adjacent to any freshwater wetland, great pond, river, stream or brook and operates in such a manner that
material or soil may be washed into them:
A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil, sand, vegetation or other materials;
828
B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or
D. Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
15. Land Use Standards. All land use activities within the shoreland zone shall conform with the following
provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum Lot Standards
Minimum Lot Minimum
Area (sq. ft.) Shore
Frontage (ft.)
(1)
(a) Residential per dwelling unit 40,000 200
(b) Governmental, Institutional, Commercial
or Industrial per principal structure 60,000 300
(c) Public and Private Recreational Facilities 40,000 200
(2) Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and land beneath
roads serving more than two (2) lots shall not be included toward calculating minimum lot area.
(3) Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract or
parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after
September 22, 1971.
(4) The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the
shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
(5) If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional, commercial or
industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single parcel, all
dimensional requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
(1) All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of great ponds classified GPA and rivers that flow to great
ponds classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line
of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, except that in the General
Development I District the setback from the normal high-water line shall be at least twenty five (25)
feet, horizontal distance. In the Resource Protection District the setback requirement shall be 250 feet,
horizontal distance, except for structures, roads, parking spaces or other regulated objects specifically
allowed in that district in which case the setback requirements specified above shall apply.
In addition:
(a) The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to structures
which require direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity, such as piers,
docks and retaining walls, nor to other functionally water-dependent uses.
829
(b) All principal structures along Significant River Segments as listed in 38 M.R.S.A. section 437 (see
Appendix B), shall be set back a minimum of one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line and shall be screened from the river by existing
vegetation. This provision does not apply to structures related to hydropower facilities.
(c) On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and it is not possible
to place an accessory structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream or wetland
setbacks, the code enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a single accessory structure, with
no utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such accessory structure shall not
exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor eight (8) feet in height, and shall be located as far from
the shoreline or tributary stream as practical and shall meet all other applicable standards, including
lot coverage and vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the structure be located closer to
the shoreline or tributary stream than the principal structure.
NOTE: A tributary stream may be perennial or intermittent. Where a tributary stream is present within the
shoreland zone, setback standards from that tributary stream are applicable.
(2) Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are permitted in the
Resource Protection, Limited Residential, Limited Commercial, and Stream Protection Districts, shall
not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as
transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
(3) The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures, including basements, shall be
elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the 100 year flood, the flood of record, or in the
absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(4) The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces, within the
shoreland zone shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot or a portion thereof, located within the
shoreland zone, including land area previously developed, except in the General Development
District adjacent to rivers that do not flow to great ponds classified GPA, where lot coverage shall
not exceed seventy (70) percent.
(5) Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure setback
requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all of the following conditions
are met:
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not exist;
(b) The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
(c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a site eroding
from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with vegetative
plantings;
(d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24 inches;
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers, streams, and tributary
streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood
Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence
of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
830
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof, and no
further structural development will occur within the setback area, including patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a natural buffer
area does not exist. The buffer area must meet the following characteristics:
(i) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation. Where natural
ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark mulch;
(ii) Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and provide for effective
infiltration of stormwater runoff;
(iii) Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
(iv) A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required, measured
perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland;
(v) A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 15(P)(2)(a), may traverse the buffer;
NOTE: If the wall and associated soil disturbance occurs within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of a water
body or tributary stream, a permit pursuant to the Natural Resource Protection Act is required
from the Department of Environmental Protection.
(6) Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be allowed with a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or
unstable soils provided: that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width; that the
structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland, (unless permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates that no
reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
C. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or Below the Normal
High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a Wetland.
(1) Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as to control
erosion.
(2) The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
(3) The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
(4) The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be consistent
with the surrounding character and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf shall not be wider
than six feet for non-commercial uses.
(5) No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending
below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the structure requires
direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity.
(6) New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to the Planning
Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act.
831
(7) No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other structure extending below
the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall be converted to residential
dwelling units in any district.
(8) Except in the General Development Districts, structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or
other structure extending below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall
not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure.
NOTE: New permanent structures, and expansions thereof, projecting into or over water bodies shall
require a permit from the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C. Permits may also be required from the
Army Corps of Engineers if located in navigable waters.
D. Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures and the following:
(1) Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of land, not including
roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land below the normal
high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
(2) The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility and service
buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified
GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
E. Individual Private Campsites. Individual private campsites not associated with campgrounds are
allowed provided the following conditions are met:
(1) One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is less, may be permitted.
(2) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent platform,
shall be set back one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a
great pond classified GPA or river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the
upland edge of a wetland.
(3) Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The recreational vehicle shall not be
located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure except a
canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
(4) The clearing of vegetation for the sitting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a
Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1000) square feet.
(5) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage disposal shall
be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector. Where
disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land owner is required.
(6) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one hundred and
twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met, including the
832
installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities.
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses. The following new commercial and industrial uses are prohibited
within the shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and rivers and streams which flow to
great ponds classified GPA:
(1) Auto washing facilities
(2) Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
(3) Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
(4) Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, other than amounts normally
associated with individual households or farms
NOTE: 22 M.R.S.A. section 1471-U requires municipal ordinances that apply to pesticide storage,
distribution or use be filed with the Maine Board of Pesticides Control, 28 State House Station,
Augusta, ME 04333. If a municipality’s ordinance is more inclusive or restrictive than these
Guidelines, as it pertains to pesticides, a copy of the ordinance must be filed with the Board of
Pesticides Control.
(5) Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
(6) Dry cleaning establishments
(7) Electronic circuit assembly
(8) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
(9) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
(10) Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property as use occurs
and except for storage and sales associated with marinas
(11) Photographic processing
(12) Printing
G. Parking Areas
(1) Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements for structures for the
district in which such areas are located. The setback requirement for parking areas serving public
boat launching facilities in Districts other than the General Development I District shall be no less
than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if the Planning Board
finds that no other reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline or tributary stream.
(2) Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to prevent
stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and where
feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
(3) In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following shall apply:
833
(a) Typical parking space: Approximately ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long, except that
parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be forty (40) feet long.
(b) Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty (20) feet wide.
H. Roads and Driveways. The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways
and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
(1) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river that flows to a great pond classified
GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as
determined by the Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or driveway
setback requirement shall be no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the
applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/or driveway setback shall be increased by
ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five (5) percent increase in slope above twenty (20) percent.
Section 15 (H)(1) does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or driveways that provide
access to permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the shoreline or tributary stream due to an
operational necessity, excluding temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and driveways providing
access to permitted structures within the setback area shall comply fully with the requirements of
Section 15(H)(1) except for that portion of the road or driveway necessary for direct access to the
structure.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right of way regardless of their setback
from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
(3) New permanent roads are not allowed within the shoreland zone along Significant River Segments
except:
(a) To provide access to structures or facilities within the zone; or
(b) When the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative route exists outside the shoreland
zone. When roads must be located within the shoreland zone they shall be set back as far as
practicable from the normal high-water line and screened from the river by existing vegetation.
(4) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except that the Planning
Board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to permitted uses within the
district. A road or driveway may also be approved by the Planning Board in a Resource Protection
District, upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the district.
When a road or driveway is permitted in a Resource Protection District the road and/or driveway shall
be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland.
(5) Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical, and
shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation control
contained in Section 15(Q).
834
(6) Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for segments of less than
two hundred (200) feet.
(7) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water bodies, tributary
streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty
onto an unscarified buffer strip at least (50) feet plus two times the average slope, in width between
the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip
shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow
of the drainage through the buffer strip.
(8) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a manner
effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains sufficient volume
or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along the road,
or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21 + 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is ten (10)
percent or less.
(c) On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts shall be placed at
approximately a thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the centerline of
the road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for
effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate materials.
(9) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control installations
associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective
functioning.
I Signs. The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection, Stream
Protection, Limited Residential and Limited Commercial Districts:
(1) Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be allowed, provided that such signs
shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not exceed two (2) signs per premises. In the
Limited Commercial District, however, such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area.
Signs relating to goods or services not sold or rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
(2) Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed two (2) signs per premises, and shall
not exceed twelve (12) square feet in the aggregate.
835
(3) Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3) square feet in area relating to the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises.
(4) Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed without restriction as to number provided
that no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
(5) Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
(6) No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20) feet above the ground.
(7) Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
J. Storm Water Runoff
(1) All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water runoff from the site
in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural runoff control
features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas, shall be retained in order to reduce runoff
and encourage infiltration of stormwaters.
(2) Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper functioning.
NOTE: The Stormwater Management Law (38 M.R.S.A. section 420-D) requires a full permit to be
obtained from the DEP prior to construction of a project consisting of 20,000 square feet or more
of impervious area or 5 acres or more of a developed area in an urban impaired stream watershed
or most-at-risk lake watershed, or a project with 1 acre or more of developed area in any other
stream, coastal or wetland watershed. A permit-by-rule is necessary for a project with one acre or
more of disturbed area but less than 1 acre impervious area (20,000 square feet for most-at-risk
lakes and urban impaired streams) and less than 5 acres of developed area. Furthermore, a Maine
Construction General Permit is required if the construction will result in one acre or more of
disturbed area.
K. Septic Waste Disposal
(1) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following: a) clearing or removal of woody
vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated fill extensions, shall not extend closer
than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body or
the upland edge of a wetland and b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the
shoreland zone.
NOTE: The Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules require new systems, excluding fill extensions, to
be constructed no less than one hundred (100) horizontal feet from the normal high-water line of a
perennial water body. The minimum setback distance for a new subsurface disposal system may not
be reduced by variance.
L. Essential Services
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways and
existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not allowed in a
Resource Protection or Stream Protection District, except to provide services to a permitted use
within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists.
836
Where allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts
on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
(3) Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and related equipment
may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction. Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral
resources shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal
disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground surface. A permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All
excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be immediately capped, filled or secured by other equally
effective measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved, by the Planning Board before a permit is
granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements of
Section 15 (M)(4) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features, shall be permitted
within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond
classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the
upland edge of a wetland. Extraction operations shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet,
horizontal distance, of any property line without written permission of the owner of such adjacent
property.
(3) Developers of new gravel pits along Significant River Segments shall demonstrate that no reasonable
mining site outside the shoreland zone exists. When gravel pits must be located within the zone, they
shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line and no less than seventy-five
(75) feet and screened from the river by existing vegetation.
(4) Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction site,
which operations shall be deemed complete when less than one hundred (100) cubic yards of
materials are removed in any consecutive twelve (12) month period, ground levels and grades shall be
established in accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an approved location, or
shall be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site may be buried or covered on-site.
NOTE: The State of Maine Solid Waste Laws, 38 M.R.S.A., section 1301 and the solid waste management
rules, Chapters 400-419 of the Department of Environmental Protection's regulations may contain
other applicable provisions regarding disposal of such materials.
(b) The final graded slope shall be two and one-half to one (2 1/2:1) slope or flatter.
(c) Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall be reseeded and
stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam shall be obtained from
off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization project.
(5) In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose such conditions as
are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations on
surrounding uses and resources.
837
N. Agriculture
(1) All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization
Guidelines published by the Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient
Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209).
(2) Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of a great
pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, or within seventy-five (75)
feet horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. All manure storage
areas within the shoreland zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no
discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water.
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in
surface area, within the shoreland zone shall require a Conservation Plan to be filed with the Planning
Board. Non-conformance with the provisions of said plan shall be considered to be a violation of this
Ordinance.
NOTE: Assistance in preparing a Conservation Plan may be available through the local Soil and Water
Conservation District office.
(4) There shall be no new tilling of soil within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance,
from other water bodies; nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and
freshwater wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this ordinance and not in
conformance with this provision may be maintained.
Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of other water bodies; nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of
tributary streams and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities, and
which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing
is conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan.
NOTE: 17 M.R.S.A. section 2805(4) requires a municipality to provide the Commissioner of Agriculture,
Food and Rural Resources with a copy of any proposed ordinance that impacts farm operations.
The law further requires the Commissioner to review the proposed ordinance and advise the
municipality if the proposed ordinance would restrict or prohibit the use of best management
practices. A copy of a shoreland zoning ordinance that regulates no more restrictively than
contained in these Guidelines need not be provided to the Commissioner of Agriculture, Food and
Rural Resources.
O. Timber Harvesting
Timber Harvesting in the Shoreland Zone is enforced by the Maine Forest Service.
838
Historical Note: Section 13-500, §15-O; Timber Harvesting in the Shoreland Zone was deleted January 1,
2013.
839
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
(1) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of vegetation within
the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line, except
to remove safety hazards.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be limited to
that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
(2) Except in areas as described in Section P(1), above, and except to allow for the development of
permitted uses, within a strip of land extending one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, inland
from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary
stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy (or other
existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the outer limits
of the tree or shrub crown. However, a footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width as measured
between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed provided that a cleared line of sight to the
water through the buffer strip is not created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a well-distributed stand
of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of Section 15(P)(2)(b) a
"well-distributed stand of trees" adjacent to a great pond classified GPA or a river or stream
flowing to a great pond classified GPA, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of 24 or
more in each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as determined by the
following rating system.
Diameter of Tree at 4-1/2 feet Above Points
Ground Level (inches)
2<4 in. 1
4<8 in. 2
8<12 in. 4
12 in. or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a "well-distributed stand of trees"
is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular area.
840
NOTE: As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a 25-foot x 50-foot plot contains four (4) trees
between 2 and 4 inches in diameter, two trees between 4 and 8 inches in diameter, three trees
between 8 and 12 inches in diameter, and two trees over 12 inches in diameter, the rating
score is:
(4x1)+(2x2) + (3x4) + (2x8) = 36 points
Thus, the 25-foot by 50-foot plot contains trees worth 36 points. Trees totaling 12 points (36-
24 =12) may be removed from the plot provided that no cleared openings are created.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the landowner or
lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed except as
otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to the
minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by is Ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15(P)(2)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining existing
vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at least five (5)
saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4 ½) feet above ground level
for each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not exist, no woody stems less than
two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 5 saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees four (4)
inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level may be removed in any ten
(10) year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three (3) feet in
height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut,
covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as described in
Section 15(P) paragraphs (2) and (2)(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm-damaged, diseased,
unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted
with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present.
Section 15(P)(2) does not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to public
swimming areas as long as cleared areas are limited to the minimum area necessary.
(3) At distances greater than one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from a great pond classified
GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting of not more
than forty (40) percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet
above ground level.
841
Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included in the forty
(40) percent calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to, principal and
accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate, 25% of
the lot area within the shoreland zone or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater,
including land previously cleared. This provision shall not apply to the General Development
Districts.
(4) Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but shall not be enlarged,
except as allowed by this Ordinance.
(5) Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody
vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of Section 15(P).
Q. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
(1) All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result in
unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall also require a written soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for approval and
shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
(a) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(b) Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
(c) Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
(2) In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with the
topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall
be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed project
involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The amount of
exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
(4) Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one (1) week from the
time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other effective measures.
In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of the initial date of exposure.
In addition:
(a) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five hundred (500)
square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
(b) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be required to
maintain the mulch cover.
(c) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the water.
Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
842
(5) Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from erosion from water
flowing through them. Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry water from
a twenty five (25) year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
R. Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can be
established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass
soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed
uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other similar
intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by statecertified
professionals. Certified persons may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered
Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other persons who have training and
experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the
analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water
elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems
appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil
limitations where they exist.
S. Water Quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the State any
pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair designated uses
or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or wetland.
T. Archaeological Site. Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) days prior to action being
taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments received from the
Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
(1) Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed or reappointed annually
by July 1st.
(2) Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the provisions of 30-A
M.R.S.A. section 2691.
(3) Planning Board. A Planning Board shall be created in accordance with the provisions of State law.
B. Permits Required. After the effective date of this Ordinance no person shall, without first obtaining a
permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the district in which such
activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use or structure; or renew a
discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is issued a permit pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a
copy of the permit on site while the work authorized by the permit is performed.
(1) A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as long as:
(a) The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the culvert being replaced;
(b) The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
(c) Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water, and the
crossing does not block fish passage in the watercourse.
843
(2) A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as the excavation is conducted by an
archaeologist listed on the State Historic Preservation Officer’s level 1 or level 2 approved list, and
unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means of adequate and timely temporary and
permanent stabilization measures.
(3) Any permit required by this Ordinance shall be in addition to any other permit required by other law
or ordinance.
C. Permit Application
(1) Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application, including a scaled site plan, on a form
provided by the municipality, to the appropriate official as indicated in Section 14.
(2) All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can show evidence of right, title or
interest in the property or by an agent, representative, tenant, or contractor of the owner with
authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder, certifying that the information in the
application is complete and correct.
(3) All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate,
shall note upon each application the date and time of its receipt.
(4) If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a completed application for
a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be
submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure or use would require the installation of a
subsurface sewage disposal system.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits. Within 35 days of the date of receiving a written application, the
Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as indicated in Section 14, shall notify the applicant in
writing either that the application is a complete application, or, if the application is incomplete, that
specified additional material is needed to make the application complete.
The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, as appropriate, shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny all permit applications in writing within 35 days of receiving a completed application.
However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision on the application shall occur
within 35 days after the first available date on the Planning Board's agenda following receipt of the
completed application, or within 35 days of the public hearing, if the proposed use or structure is found to
be in conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in conformity with
the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the Board shall approve an
application or approve it with conditions if it makes a positive finding based on the information presented
that the proposed use:
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
844
(5) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland waters;
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the comprehensive plan;
(7) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use; and
(8) Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as conditions shall be stated in
writing. No approval shall be granted for an application involving a structure if the structure would be
located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local ordinance, or regulation or statute
administered by the municipality.
E. Special Exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16(D) above, excepting structure
setback requirements, the Planning Board may approve a permit for a single family residential structure in
a Resource Protection District provided that the applicant demonstrates that all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource Protection District,
where the structure can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and recorded in the
registry of deeds of the county in which the lot is located before the adoption of the Resource
Protection District.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway of the 100-year floodplain along rivers and artificially formed great
ponds along rivers, based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance
Rate Maps; all buildings, including basements, are elevated at least one foot above the 100-year
flood plain elevation; and the development is otherwise in compliance with any applicable
municipal flood plain ordinance. If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Maps, it is deemed to be 1/2 the width of the 100-year floodplain.
(4) The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of all principal
and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This limitation shall not be
altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest practical
extent, but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest practical extent, the
Planning Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion,
the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed building site's elevation in regard to
the floodplain, and its proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of Permit. Permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if a substantial start is not
made in construction or in the use of the property during that period. If a substantial start is made within
one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall have one additional year to complete the project,
at which time the permit shall expire.
845
G. Installation of Public Utility Service. A public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility
company of any kind may not install services to any new structure located in the shoreland zone unless
written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under this or any
previous Ordinance has been issued by the appropriate municipal officials or other written arrangements
have been made between the municipal officials and the utility.
H. Appeals
(1) Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(a) Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an appellate basis, where it
is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in the administration of this
Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de novo basis where it is alleged by
an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in his or her review of and action on a permit
application under this Ordinance. Any order, requirement, decision or determination made, or
failure to act, in the enforcement of this ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
(b) Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations set forth in this
Ordinance.
(2) Variance Appeals. Variances may be granted only under the following conditions:
(a) Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including, but not limited to, lot
width, structure height, percent of lot coverage, and setback requirements.
(b) Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited by this
Ordinance.
(c) The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(i) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of Section 15 except for the specific
provision which has created the non-conformity and from which relief is sought; and
(ii) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in undue hardship. The term
"undue hardship" shall mean:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to
the general conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
d. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 16(H)(2)(c)(ii) above, the Board of Appeals may grant a variance to an
owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a person with
a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The board shall restrict any variance
granted under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of structures
necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the disability.
846
The board may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance to the duration of
the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives in the dwelling. The term
“structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling" shall include railing, wall or roof
systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the structure.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to ensure
conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest extent possible, and
in doing so may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary. The party receiving
the variance shall comply with any conditions imposed.
(f) A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information supplied
by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection at least twenty (20) days prior to action by the Board of
Appeals. Any comments received from the Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of
Appeals shall be made part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by the Board of
Appeals.
(3) Administrative Appeals
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer the Board of Appeals
shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may receive and consider new evidence and
testimony, be it oral or written. When acting in a “de novo” capacity the Board of Appeals shall hear
and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of evidence and the law, and
reaching its own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it shall hold an appellate hearing,
and may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the decision was contrary to
specific provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the Planning Board. The
Board of Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings before the Planning Board.
The Board Appeals shall not receive or consider any evidence which was not presented to the Planning
Board, but the Board of Appeals may receive and consider written or oral arguments. If the Board of
Appeals determines that the record of the Planning Board proceedings are inadequate, the Board of
Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board for additional fact finding.
(4) Appeal Procedure
(a) Making an Appeal
(i) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved
party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board, except for
enforcement-related matters as described in Section 16(H)(1)(a) above. Such an appeal shall be
taken within thirty (30) days of the date of the official, written decision appealed from, and not
otherwise, except that the Board, upon a showing of good cause, may waive the thirty (30) day
requirement.
(ii) Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written notice of
appeal which includes:
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why the appeal or
variance should be granted.
b. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and structures and
other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
847
(iii) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal or a variance, the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the
papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an administrative appeal or a request for a
variance within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of a complete written application, unless this
time period is extended by the parties.
(b) Decision by Board of Appeals
(i) A majority of the full voting membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of deciding an appeal.
(ii) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(iii) The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and variance appeals within thirty five
(35) days after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its decision, including a
statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by the Board. The Board shall cause
written notice of its decision to be mailed or hand-delivered to the applicant and to the
Department of Environmental Protection within seven (7) days of the Board’s decision.
Copies of written decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board,
Code Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers.
(5) Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), any aggrieved
party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an
appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five (45) days from the date of any
decision of the Board of Appeals.
(6) Reconsideration. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), the Board of Appeals may
reconsider any decision within forty-five (45) days of its prior decision. A request to the Board to
reconsider a decision must be filed within ten (10) days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A
vote to reconsider and the action taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed within
forty-five (45) days of the date of the vote on the original decision.
Reconsideration of a decision shall require a positive vote of the majority of the Board members
originally voting on the decision, and proper notification to the landowner, petitioner, planning board,
code enforcement officer, and other parties of interest, including abuttors and those who testified at the
original hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and
testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within fifteen (15) days after the
decision on reconsideration.
I. Enforcement
(1) Nuisances. Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer
(a) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If
the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he
848
or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of
land, buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and
abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be submitted to the municipal
officers and be maintained as a permanent record.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to ensure compliance with all
applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
also investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of the
office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or denied,
revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations investigated, violations
found, and fees collected. On a biennial basis, a summary of this record shall be submitted to the
Director of the Bureau of Land and Water Quality within the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(3) Legal Actions. When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or
nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby
directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking
injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the municipality. The municipal officers, or their
authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose
of eliminating violations of this Ordinance and recovering fines without Court action. Such agreements
shall not allow an illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that
the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice given by
an authorized municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the
removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and safety or will result
in substantial environmental damage.
(4) Fines. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent or a contractor, who
violates any provision or requirement of this Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A,
M.R.S.A. section 4452.
NOTE: Current penalties include fines of not less than $100 nor more than $2500 per violation for each day
that the violation continues. However, in a resource protection district the maximum penalty is
increased to $5000 (38 M.R.S.A. section 4452).
17. Definitions.
Accessory structure or use - a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or similar
extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or a common wall is
considered part of the principal structure.
Aggrieved party - an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or denial of
a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance has
been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the
granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agriculture - the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals, including but
not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and
849
poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and green-house products. Agriculture does
not include forest management and timber harvesting activities.
Aquaculture - the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or animal
species.
Basal Area - the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above ground level and inclusive of bark.
Basement - any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having more than
50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Boat Launching Facility - a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft, and which
may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Campground - any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary living quarters,
including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy – the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Commercial use - the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation," defined below, the
intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or
services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
DBH – the diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level.
Development – a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the addition or
alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional requirements - numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not limited to
setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability - any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or mental condition
caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness; and also includes
the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial handicap as determined by a
physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or
sensory impairment which requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or related services.
Driveway - a vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving two single-family
dwellings or one two-family dwelling, or less.
Emergency operations - operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such as
protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human
beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Essential services - gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water
transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related
equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply
systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but shall
not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a structure - an increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all extensions such
as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
850
Expansion of use - the addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the use of more floor area
or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family - one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot in height.
Floor area - the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls, plus the
horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
Forest management activities - timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities, pesticide or
fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning, regeneration of
forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction,
creation or maintenance of roads.
Forested wetland - a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall
(approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller.
Foundation - the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and post
supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block, brick or
similar material.
Freshwater wetland - freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested wetlands,
which are:
1. Of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface
water body, excluding any river, stream or brook, such that in a natural state, the combined
surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to
support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not
conform to the criteria of this definition.
Functionally water-dependent uses - those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on submerged
lands or that require direct access to, or location in, inland waters and that can not be located away from these
waters. The uses include, but are not limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities,
excluding recreational boat storage buildings, finfish and shellfish processing, fish storage and retail and
wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities,
marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, retaining walls, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne
transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water that can not reasonably be located or
operated at an inland site, and uses that primarily provide general public access to inland waters.
Great pond - any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten acres, and
any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of thirty (30)
acres except for the purposes of this Ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased inland body of
water is completely surrounded by land held by a single owner,
851
Great pond classified GPA - any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. Article 4-A Section
465-A. This classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers that are defined as great ponds.
Ground cover – small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic matter of the
forest floor.
Height of a structure - the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to construction) grade at the
downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas,
and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.
Home occupation - an occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a residential structure
or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the property and
surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no more than two (2) persons other than family members
residing in the home.
Increase in nonconformity of a structure - any change in a structure or property which causes further deviation
from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited to, reduction in water
body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a
structure. Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which
cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be
considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity with the setback
requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the expansion extends no further into the
required setback area than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may
be expanded laterally provided that the expansion extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland than the closest portion of the existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
Included in this allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Individual private campsite - an area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which is
developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10) individuals and which involves site
improvements which may include but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.
Industrial - The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods, or the
extraction of minerals.
Institutional – a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or private
school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public purposes.
Lot area - The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal highwater
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more than two lots.
Marina - a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal use, providing for
hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also provide accessory services such as
boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor storage of boats and marine
equipment, bait and tackle shops and marine fuel service facilities.
Market value - the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing market
conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with
prevailing general price levels.
Mineral exploration - hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or extent of
mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to
restore the land to its original condition.
852
Mineral extraction - any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes more than one
hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its
natural location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Minimum lot width - the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only two lot lines extend
into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be side lot lines.
Multi-unit residential - a residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling units.
Native – indigenous to the local forests.
Non-conforming condition – non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.
Non-conforming lot - a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is located.
Non-conforming structure - a structure which does not meet any one or more of the following dimensional
requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence
at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-conforming use - use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not allowed in the
district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the
time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Normal high-water line - that line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of soils
due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that
support non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the
water level of the river or great pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river
or great pond.
Person - an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership, association,
two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or below the normal high-water
line or within a wetland.
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in any period
of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in any period
of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Principal structure - a building other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the
use of another building or use on the same premises.
Principal use - a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the same
premises.
Public facility - any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and roads,
which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
853
Recent floodplain soils - the following soil series as described and identified by the National Cooperative Soil
Survey:
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewell Medomak Ondawa
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
Recreational facility - a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and
other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle - a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up camper,
travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a
structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State Division of
Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system - a system intended to replace: 1.) an existing system which is either malfunctioning or
being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or 2.) any existing overboard
wastewater discharge.
Residential dwelling unit - a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking,
sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that contain cooking,
sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential
dwelling units.
Residual basal area - the average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.
Riprap - rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control and soil
stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or less.
River - a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that point at which it
provides drainage for a watershed of twenty five (25) square miles to its mouth.
Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material
constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles, excluding a driveway as defined.
Service drop - any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water body
provided that:
1. in the case of electric service
a. the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely upon the premises of
the customer requesting service or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
b. the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
2. in the case of telephone service
854
a. the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone wires to existing
utility poles, or
b. the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement underground is less than one
thousand (1,000) feet in length.
Setback - the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or tributary stream,
or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object or
area.
Shore frontage - the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight line between
the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Shoreland zone - the land area located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a
freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
stream.
Shoreline – the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
Significant River Segments - See Appendix B or 38 M.R.S.A. section 437.
Skid trail – a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul or drag forest products from
the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal excavation.
Slash - the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
Stream - a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two (2) perennial
streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series
topographic map, or if not available, a 15-minute series topographic map, to the point where the body of water
becomes a river or flows to another water body or wetland within the shoreland area.
Structure - anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any
kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive of
fences, and poles, wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated with service drops as well as guying
and guy anchors. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios, and
satellite dishes.
Substantial start - completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use measured as a percentage of
estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system – any system designed to dispose of waste or waste water on or beneath
the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields; grandfathered cesspools;
holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture, mechanism, or apparatus used for those
purposes; does not include any discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. section 414, any surface waste
water disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water treatment system.
Sustained slope - a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially maintained or
exceeded throughout the measured area.
Timber harvesting - the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or processing forest
products. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two (2) acres within
the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees shall be
855
regulated pursuant to Section 15 (P), Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber
Harvesting.
Tributary stream – means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water, which is
characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing
waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which is connected hydrologically with
other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated
erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by human activity.
This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only applies to
that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or wetland.
Upland edge of a wetland - the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a freshwater wetland,
the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to support wetland
vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by
woody stems that are six (6) meters (approximately twenty (20) foot) tall or taller.
Vegetation - all live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and under 4
inches in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
Volume of a structure - the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as
measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body - any great pond, river or stream.
Water crossing - any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream, tributary stream,
or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects include but may not be
limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on
these crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wetland - a freshwater wetland.
Woody Vegetation - live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
Historical Note: Section 13-500; Shoreland Zoning Ordinance adopted September 14, 2009.
856
Appendix A
City of Caribou
Official Shoreland Zoning Map – See Attached
857
Sec. 13-600 Flood Hazard Area Regulations.
Sec. 13-601 Establishment.
The City of Caribou, Maine elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-
488, as amended). The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town
having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the floodplain
management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a Flood Hazard Development
Permit system and review procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard areas of the City of Caribou,
Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and A1-30, identified by FEMA in a report entitled “Flood Insurance Study-City
of Caribou, Maine, Aroostook County, “dated February, 1980 with accompanying “Flood Insurance Rate Map” and “Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map” dated August 1, 1980 is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
Ordinance.
Sec. 13-602 Permit Required.
Before any construction or other development (as defined in 13-614), including the placement of manufactured homes,
begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in 13-602, a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to
the codes and ordinances of the City of Caribou, Maine.
Sec. 13-603 Application for Permit
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall
include:
A. The name and address of the applicant;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply
facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot dimension;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure;
E. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
F. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure;
G. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or to a locally established datum in
Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a: in Zones A1-30 from data contained in the “Flood Insurance Study-City of Caribou,
Maine,” as described in 13-602; or,
B: in Zone A, to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain
boundary and a line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground
through a site of the proposed building;
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement;
and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed;
H. A description of a base flood elevation reference point established on the site of all new or substantially
improved structures;
I. A written certification by a registered land surveyor that the elevations shown on the application are accurate;
858
J. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that flood proofing methods for any nonresidential
structures will meet the flood proofing criteria of 13-604. G.4;13-607. G; and other applicable
standards in 13-607.
K. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed
development; and,
L. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in 13-607 will
be met.
Sec. 13-604 Application Fee and Expert’s Fee.
A non-refundable application fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the City Clerk and a copy of a receipt for the same shall
accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Board of Appeals needs the assistance of a
professional engineer or other experts. The expert’s fee shall be paid in full by the applicant within 10 days after the town
submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the
issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the
applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An
applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may appeal that decision to the Board of
Appeals.
Sec. 13-605 Review of Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed building sites are
reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of 13-607 (Development Standards)
have, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, the base flood data contained in the
“Flood Insurance Study-City of Caribou, Maine,” as described in 13-602. In special flood hazard areas where base
flood elevation data are not provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data from federal, state, or other sources, including information obtained pursuant
to 13-604. G1b; 13-607. J; and 13-609. D, in order to administer 13-607 of this Ordinance;
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps described in 13-
602 of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior approval is required by federal
and state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Floodplain Management
Program in the State Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course;
F. Issue a two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the applicant to
build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood level. At that time the applicant
shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with an application for Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit
and shall include an Elevation Certificate completed by a registered Maine surveyor for compliance with the
elevation requirements of 13-607, paragraphs F, G, and H. Following review of the application, which review shall
take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood
Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; and,
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permits issued and data relevant thereto,
including reports of the Board of Appeals on variances granted under the provisions of 13-610 of the Ordinance, and
copies of Elevation Certificates and Certificates of Compliance required under the provisions of 13-608 of this
Ordinance.
859
Sec. 13-606 Development Standards.
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that
are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
flooding conditions.
B. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems.
C. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters.
D. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during floods.
E. All development shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the flood carrying
capacity of any watercourse.
F. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located within:
1. Zones A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to 13-604. G.1.b., 13-606. B; or 13-609. D.
G. New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure located within:
1. Zones A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood level so that below that elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to passage of water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such
certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by
13-604. J. and shall include a record of the elevation above mean sea level of the lowest floor including
basement.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to 13-604. G.1.b.; 13-606. B; or 13-609. D.
H. New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zones A1-30 shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor is at least one foot above the base flood
elevation; and,
b. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
860
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home, plus two
additional ties per side at intermediate points (homes less than 50 feet long require one additional tie
per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at intermediate points
(homes less than 50 feet long require four additional ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in 13-607. H.1 shall be capable of carrying a force
of 4800 pounds.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to 13-604. G.1.b; 13-606. B.; or 13-609. D.
I. Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zones A1-30 shall either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices,
and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. Meet the permit requirements of elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured home” in 13-
607. H. a&b.
J. Floodways
1. In Zones A1-30 encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted in riverine areas, for which a regulatory floodway is
designated on the community’s “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map”, unless a technical evaluation certified
by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones A1-30, for which no regulatory floodway is designated, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted unless a technical
evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing development and anticipated development
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community; and,
3. In Zone A riverine areas, in which the regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other
water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from
the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted unless a technical
evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided meeting the requirements of 13-607,
paragraph J.2.
K. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure in Zones A1-30 and A that meets the development
standards of 13-607, including the elevation requirements of 13-607, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts,
columns, piers, piles, “stilts”, or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the elevation requirements provided all the
following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not “basements” as defined in 13-614; and,
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either:
a. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any external influence or control
861
such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means; and,
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed area may be used for building maintenance, access, parking vehicles, or storing of articles and
equipment used for maintenance of the building.
Sec. 13-607 Certificate of Compliance.
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and not structure which is constructed or substantially
improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer subject to the
following provisions:
A. The applicant shall submit an Elevation Certificate completed by:
1. a registered Maine surveyor for compliance with 13-607, paragraphs F, G, H, or K; and,
2. a registered professional engineer or architect, in the case of flood proofed non-residential structures, for
compliance with 130607. G; and,
B. The application for a Certificate of Compliance shall be submitted by the applicant in writing along with a
completed Elevation Certificate to the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the application within 10 working days of receipt of the application and
shall issue a Certificate of Compliance, provided the building conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Sec. 13-608 Review of Subdivision and Development Proposals.
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require review under other
federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on 5 or more acres, or in the case of manufactured
home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood dames.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevation and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway data.
E. Any proposed development plan shall include a statement that the developer will require that structures on lots in the
development be constructed in accordance with 13-607 or this ordinance and that such requirements will be included
in any deed, lease or document transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure,
including but not limited to a time-share interest. That statement shall clearly articulate that the municipality may
enforce any violation of the construction requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or nay other
document previously described. The construction requirement shall also be stated on any map, plat or plan to be
signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
Sec. 13-609 Appeals and Variances.
The Board of Appeals of the City of Caribou, Maine, may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear and decide
appeals from determinations of the Code Enforcement Officer in the administration of the provisions of this Ordinance. The
Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state law and the following
criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and,
862
3. a showing that the existence of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws or
ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in “undue hardship”, which is in this sub-section
means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to
the general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character or the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of 13-910 and 13-607.J. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood
and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued by a community for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in 13-910, paragraphs A through D.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of 13-910, paragraphs A through E shall be notified by the Board of Appeals in
writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 Per $100 of insurance
coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use of land subject
to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality against claims filed
against it that are related to the applicant’s decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant
individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are
related to the use of land located in a floodplain.
G. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report to all variance actions, including
justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood
Hazard Development Permit, which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit.
Sec. 13-610 Enforcement and Penalties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance pursuant to 30A
MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in 30A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a violation exists, shall
submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a denial of flood
insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to confirm its identity
or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law, or ordinance;
3. a statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective denial of
insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1969, as amended.
863
Sec. 13-611 Validity and Severability.
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any
other section or provision of this Ordinance.
Sec. 13-612 Conflict with other Ordinances.
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other applicable rule, ordinance,
regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land,
buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
Sec. 13-613 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning as they have at
common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in the present tense include the future,
the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The word “may” is permissive; “shall”
in mandatory and not discretionary.
Adjacent Grade: Means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard: Means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in 13-602 of this Ordinance.
Base Flood: Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, commonly called
the 100-year flood.
Basement: Means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall: Means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design
and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system.
Building: See Structure.
Certificate of Compliance: A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure is in compliance
with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer: Any person or board responsible for performing the inspection, licensing, and enforcement
duties required by a particular statute or ordinance.
Development: Means any change caused by individuals or entities to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to the construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of additions or substantial improvements to
buildings or other structures; mining dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities.
Elevated Building: Means a non-basement building:
(i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30 and A, to have the top of the elevated floor, elevated above the
ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or “stilts”, and
(ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to one foot above
the magnitude of the base flood.
864
In the case of Zones A1-30 and A, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls less than three feet in height with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
Elevation Certificate: An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 05/93, as amended) that:
(i) is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program; and,
(ii) is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding: Means:
(a) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
(b) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or
undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force
of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study: Means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): Means an official map of a community, on which the Administrator of the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
Flood Insurance Study: See Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area: Means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
flooding).
Floodplain Management: Means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations: Means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain Ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Flood proofing: Means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and
contents.
Floodway: See Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines: Means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain
maps.
Freeboard: Means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management.
Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological
effect of urbanization of the watershed, that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected
size flood and floodway conditions.
865
Functionally Dependent Use: Means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in
close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure: Means any structure that is:
(a). Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior)
or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
(b). Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of
a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a
registered historic district;
(c). Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(d). Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
1). By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2). Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs.
Locally Established Datum: Means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a specific site to which all
other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) or any other established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific
site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor: Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements described in 13-607 of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home: Means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles
placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level: Means, for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate map are
referenced.
New Construction: Means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-year flood: See Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle: Means a vehicle which is:
(a) built on a single chassis;
(b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and,
(d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
866
Regulatory Floodway:
(i) means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot, and
(ii) in riverine areas is considered to be the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas
to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the
upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine: Means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area: See Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction: Means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of Construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or Other improvement was within 180 days of
the
permit date. The actual start means either the first Placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, The installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure: Means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage: Means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: Means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include their:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local Code
Enforcement Official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance: Means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
Violation: Means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community’s floodplain management
regulations.
Sec. 13-614 Abrogation.
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1969 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
867
Sec. 13-700 General Requirements for Land Uses.
The following General Requirements are applicable to land use activities within the City, to include site design review and
subdivisions. These standards are intended to clarify review criteria and provide guidance. In reviewing a proposed
development, the CEO or Planning Board, whomever conducts the review, shall review the application for conformance to
the applicable standards and make findings of fact for each prior to approval of the Final Plan. The burden of proof of
conformance is with the applicant, who shall provide clear and convincing evidence that the proposed Final Plan meets the
standards and the review criteria.
1. Apartments Accessory to Commercial Uses.
The Planning Board may allow residential dwelling units in a commercial structure provided the following are met:
A. The residential dwelling units shall be clearly incidental to the principal commercial use of the structure.
B. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a private space 500 square feet minimum per dwelling unit
adjacent to each unit.
C. Each dwelling unit shall be provided one (1) off-street parking space separate from customer parking.
D. Subsurface sewage disposal, where applicable, shall be provided that complies with the State of Maine Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Rules.
E. Each dwelling unit shall have access to and use of private storage space within the individual dwelling unit or
in common storage facilities.
F. No access to a residential dwelling unit shall be through the commercial space.
G. All provisions of the City Building Code, Property Maintenance Code and the Life Safety Code shall be met.
2. Archaeological Sites.
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or
eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the CEO or Planning Board shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least 20 days
prior to action being taken by the CEO or Planning Board. The CEO or Planning Board shall consider comments
received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
3. Basement Drainage.
The applicant shall show that the floor of any basement(s) can be drained to the ground surface, or storm sewers, if they
are required to be installed, or that the spring water table is one (1) foot below the level of the basement floor.
4. Bed and Breakfast.
A. There shall be no less than one parking space on the property for each rental room in addition to the spaces required
for the dwelling unit.
B. There shall be one bathroom provided for the rental rooms, in addition to the bathroom for the dwelling unit.
C. Each rental room shall have not less than ten by twelve (10 X 12) feet horizontal dimensions.
5. Buffers and Screening.
A. A landscaped buffer strip of no less than fifteen (15) feet in width and six (6) feet in height shall be provided to
minimize the visual impact of adverse characteristics such as, but not limited to, storage areas, parking spaces,
driveways, loading areas, exposed machinery, sand and gravel extraction operations, and areas used for the storage
or collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts, metals or any other articles of salvage or refuse, and to protect
abutting residential properties from the intrusion of noise, light, and exhaust fumes from such non-residential
buildings and uses. The buffer areas shall be maintained and vegetation replaced to ensure continuous year round
screening.
B. Where no natural vegetation or berms can be maintained, or due to varying site conditions, the landscaping may
consist of fences, walls, tree plantings, hedges, or combinations thereof.
C. Any abutting residential property shall be effectively screened by a continuous landscaped area no less than six (6)
feet in height along lot lines adjacent to the residential properties, except that driveways shall be kept open to
provide visibility for entering and leaving.
868
D. Where a potential safety hazard to small children would exist, physical screening / barriers shall be used to deter
entry to such premises.
E. There shall be no paving, parking, or structures located in the buffer area.
F. The CEO or Planning Board may allow a buffer area of less width when site conditions, such as natural features,
vegetation, topography, or site improvements, such as additional landscaping, berming, fencing, or low walls, make
a lesser area adequate to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance.
6. Campground and/or Recreational Vehicle Park.
A campground and/or recreational vehicle (RV) park shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures of (10-144A CMR 205) "Tent and Recreational Vehicle Parks..." and the following (in case of
possible conflict, the stricter rule shall apply). For the purposes of this Section "RV" shall include: travel RV, pick-up
coach, motor home, camping trailer, dependent RV, and self-contained RV.
A. General.
1. A campground and/or RV park shall have no less than ten (10) acres of land and all campground and/or RV
park sites (sites) or structures shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line and 200 feet from any
residence, exclusive of the residence belonging to the owner.
2. Sites shall be laid out and screened in such a manner that none are within view from public roads, navigable
rivers, or existing residence. Any combination of evergreen planting, landscaped earthen berms, or solid
fencing may be used to achieve this screening standards, when sites would otherwise be visible from the
locations described above.
3. No trailers or mobile homes, other than RVs, shall be permitted within any campground and/or RV park,
temporarily or otherwise. No RVs shall be stored or exhibited for sale within the campground and/or RV park.
Permanent or long-term dwellings or shelter devices are specifically prohibited.
4. Tent sites and RV sites shall be laid out so that the density of each developed acre of land shall not exceed the
standards below (in terms of sites per acre of land, excluding circulation roads). Land supporting wetland
vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating land
area per site.
Non-Shoreland Shoreland Areas
Tent Sites 14 per acre 8 per acre
RV and Travel Trailer Sites 11 per acre 7 per acre
5. The minimum frontage of a tent site or RV site along any shoreline of a waterbody shall be 100 feet. The
minimum setback from the normal high-water line shall be 100 feet for all tent sites or RV sites, other vehicles,
and temporary or permanent structures.
6. No tent site or RV site shall be located within a Resource Protections District or within the 100 year floodplain.
B. Parking and Circulation.
1. A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of off-street parking plus maneuvering space shall be provided
for each tent site or RV site. RVs shall be parked in spaces so that:
a. There shall be a minimum of 50 feet between vehicles; and
b. There shall be a minimum of 75 feet between all RVs and tents, and all public rights-of-way located inside
the boundaries of the campground.
2. Vehicular access shall be provided onto a hard-surfaced adequate for the volume and type of traffic likely to be
generated. Grades and sight distances specified in the Road Design and Construction Standards, within these
Ordinances, shall be observed in designing all intersections. Roads shall be constructed of at least 12" of bankrun
gravel (no stone larger than 4"), 2" of crushed gravel (1/2" chips) and two (2) applications of liquid asphalt
(1/2 gallon per sq. yd. each application). The minimum width of roadways shall be twelve (12) feet for oneway
roads and twenty-two (22) feet for two-way roads. No vehicle parking shall be permitted on the roadway.
869
C. Health and Safety.
1. Each tent site or RV site shall be provided with a picnic table and trash receptacle. The park management shall
dispose of refuse from said containers by transporting the refuse in a closed truck or in enclosed containers or
bags to an approved disposal area at least once every three (3) days.
2. A campground and/or RV park shall provide water and sewerage disposal systems, sanitary facilities, and
convenience facilities in accordance with the regulations of 10-144A CMR 205 and the "State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules". All RV sites shall be equipped with water and sewage hook-ups, and
connected to approved distribution or disposal systems.
3. Fire extinguishers capable of dealing with electrical and wood fires shall be kept in all service buildings. A
suitable ingress and egress shall be provided so that the campground or RV park may be readily serviced in
emergency situations. 24-hour emergency communication service (e.g. telephones) shall be provided.
D. Planning and Review.
1. Roads, parking, sites, and required facilities shall be planned in accordance with the basic principles outlined
below, and shall be shown on the proposed plan which is submitted for review and approval.
a. A logical sequence of entry and circulation should be created: entrance, administration, storage, parking,
sites, toilets, laundry, playing fields, or shoreline.
b. Sites should be clustered in groups according to intensity of use (low density, medium density, etc.) and
also related to common support service areas (laundries, play areas, etc.) serving a number of site clusters.
The purpose is to minimize road length, increase accessibility, and preserve open space.
c. Footpaths and roads should follow "desired lines" of pedestrian and vehicular movement between sites and
all jointly used facilities. Parking areas may be grassed, reinforced with open concrete blocks.
d. Access roads shall be laid out as loops to the greatest extent practicable, although "cul-de-sacs" or "deadends"
may be allowed to serve up to twenty (20) campsites.
2. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the County Soil and Water Conservation District
shall be submitted. In addition to data on soils, slopes, and drainage, a vegetation map showing the following
items may be required:
a. The major types of vegetation should be identified and described (as to age, height, openness or density,
and pattern, either natural or reforested).
b. New planting should be selected to provide screening and shelter, to tolerate existing and proposed site
conditions, and to blend compatibly with existing natural vegetation.
c. All vegetative clearing should avoid creating straight line edges between open land and surviving stands.
d. Areas of activity and/or traffic should be sited to avoid wildlife areas (such as thickets for birds and small
mammals, or deer yards and trails).
7. Disposal of Solid Waste.
If the additional solid waste from the proposed development exceeds the capacity of the City's solid waste facility, causes
the City's facility to no longer be in compliance with its license from the Department of Environmental Protection, or
causes the City to exceed its contract with a non-city's facility, the applicant shall make alternate arrangements for the
disposal of solid waste. The alternate arrangements shall be at a disposal facility which is in compliance with its license.
The CEO or Planning Board may not require the alternate arrangement to exceed a period of five years.
8. Easements for Natural Drainage Ways.
Where a development is traversed by a natural water course, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course and such
further width or construction, or both, as will assure that no flooding occurs and all stormwater can be disposed of
properly.
9. Electro-Magnetic Interference.
870
No use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electro-magnetic interference in the transmission or
reception of electrical impulses beyond the lot lines, including radio and television. In all cases federal, state, and local
requirements shall be met. Violation of this standard shall be considered a nuisance.
10. Erosion and Sedimentation Control.
A. The procedures outlined in a erosion and sedimentation control plan shall follow Best Management Policies (BMPs)
and shall be implemented during the site preparation, construction, and clean-up stages.
B. All earth changes shall be designed, constructed, and completed in such a manner so that the exposed area of any
disturbed land shall be limited to the shortest period of time possible.
C. The proposed development shall prevent sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion from entering water bodies,
freshwater wetlands, and adjacent properties.
D. Any temporary or permanent facility designed and constructed for the conveyance of water around, through, or from
the development shall be designed to limit the water flow to a non-erosive velocity.
E. Permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels, ditches, or any disturbed land area shall be
completed within fifteen (15) calendar days after final grading has been completed. When it is not possible or
practical to permanently stabilize disturbed land, temporary erosion control measures shall be implemented within
thirty (30) calendar days of the exposure of soil.
F. Topsoil shall be considered part of the development and shall not be removed from the site, except for surplus
topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building excavations.
H. When vegetative cover shall be established as a temporary or permanent erosion control measure:
1. Plant species to be used and the seeding rates shall take into account soil, slope, climate, duration, and use of the
vegetative cover.
2. Mulch shall be provided at rates appropriate to ensure a minimum of soil and seed loss until an acceptable
"catch" of seed is obtained.
3. Reseeding shall be done within a reasonable period of time if there is not an acceptable "catch".
H. All development plans shall incorporate building designs and road layouts that fit and utilize existing topography
and desirable natural surroundings to the fullest extent possible.
11. Exterior Lighting.
Lighting may be used which serves security, safety, and operational needs, but which does not directly or indirectly
produce deleterious effects on abutting properties or which would impair the vision of a vehicle operator on adjacent
roadways. Lighting fixtures shall be shielded or hooded so that the lighting elements are not exposed to normal view by
motorists, pedestrians, or from adjacent dwellings.
A. The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the architectural style of the principal building.
B. The maximum height of free standing lights shall be the same as the principal building, but not to exceed forty (40)
feet.
C. The CEO or the Planning Board, whomever is conducting the review, shall determine the necessity for lighting of
parking areas.
D. Exterior lighting shall be shielded in such a manner as not to create a hazard or nuisance to the adjoining properties
or to the traveling public.
E. Direct or indirect illumination shall not exceed 0.6 foot-candles upon abutting residential properties.
F. Required Light Levels:
1. Parking areas or lots: An average of one and one-half (1.5) foot-candles throughout.
2. Intersections of parking areas or lots: Three (3) foot-candles.
3. Maximum at property lines: One (1.0) footcandle.
4. In residential areas: Average of six-tenths (0.6) footcandle.
12. Fire Protection.
871
A. Fire hydrants connected to the public water supply system shall be located no further than 500 feet from any
building.
B. Hydrants or other provisions for drafting water shall be provided to the specifications of the Fire Department.
Minimum pipe size connecting dry hydrants to ponds or storage vaults shall be six (6) inches.
C. Where a dry hydrant or other water source is not within the right-of-way of a proposed or existing street, an
easement to the City shall be provided to allow access. A suitable accessway to the hydrant or other water source
shall be constructed.
D. A proposed subdivision of 5-10 lots not served by a public water supply shall provide for a minimum storage
capacity of 10,000 gallons. Additional storage capacity of 2,000 gallons per lot over 10 lots shall be provided. The
Planning Board may require additional storage capacity upon a recommendation from the Fire Chief. Where ponds
are proposed for water storage, the capacity of the pond shall be calculated based on the lowest water level less an
equivalent of three (3) feet of ice.
13. Home Occupations.
Home occupations shall be incidental to the residential use of the property. No Home Occupation is allowed
without first obtaining a Permit from the Code Enforcement & Planning Office. As of January 1, 2013 Home Occupation
Site Design Review Applications shall have an initial fee of $90.00.
Home occupations shall be allowed in any zone, and
All Home Occupations activity shall be restricted to within the interior of the primary or an accessory structure, and
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the buildings or premise that shall cause the premise to differ
from its residential character by use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, sounds, or noises. The Home Occupation
shall be identified by no more than one free standing single or double sided yard sign or one sign on the building, no sign
face to exceed two square feet in area, and
There shall be no exterior storage of materials, such as, but not limited to, trash and or any other materials used in
the Home Occupation, and
The following requirements shall be satisfactorily demonstrated to the Planning Board before a permit is issued:
1. The home occupation shall employ only residents of the dwelling unit.
2. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal or accessory structure.
3. The home occupation shall not occupy more than 50% of the total floor area of the principal dwelling
structure. Accessory structures used for the Home Occupation may use up to 100% of the floor area.
4. No client or customer shall be allowed on any floor level other than the first floor ground floor level
unless the structure is protected throughout with a State Fire Marshal approved sprinkler system.
5. Objectionable noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance, odors, heat, glare, or other
nuisance shall not be permitted.
6. No on street parking is allowed for clients or customers.
7. All means of ingress and egress to and from all areas accessible to clients and customers shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of the 2009 Edition of NFPA 101, Life Safety Code and the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
Should all of the above conditions not be maintained on a continual basis once the permit has been issued, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall rescind the permit and issue a cease and desist order to stop the non-conforming Home
Occupation. Any Home Occupation operating without a current permit shall be prosecuted in District Court according to
Title 30-A, MRSA §4452.
All other requirements of the Caribou Code of Ordinances apply to all Home Occupations.
872
14. Hotels, Motels, and Inns.
For the purposes of these Ordinances, the terms hotel, motel, and inn are used interchangeably.
A. A green space, not less than twenty (20) feet wide, shall be maintained open and green with grass, bushes, flowers,
or trees all along each side lot line, the rear lot line, the front line of such lot, except for entrance and exit driveways.
The green space shall not be used for automobile parking.
B. If cooking or eating facilities are provided in any units, each unit shall be considered a dwelling unit and the
development shall meet all applicable standards for multi-family development in these Ordinances, including the
residential density requirements of the appropriate District. If three (3) or more multi-family units are to be
constructed within a five (5) year period the development shall be considered a subdivision and shall also be
reviewed through the Subdivision Ordinance.
C. Each unit shall contain not less than two-hundred (200) square feet of habitable floor area enclosed by walls and
roof, exclusive of any adjoining portions of roofed or covered walkways. Each sleeping room shall not be less than
twelve by fifteen (12x15) feet horizontal dimensions, exclusive of bath. Each unit shall include private bathroom
facilities.
D. On each lot, one apartment may be provided for a resident owner, manager, or other responsible staff person.
E. Building construction plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Fire Chief.
F. Recreational vehicle parking stalls shall be designed to accommodate the traveling public with a minimum stall
width of eleven (11) feet and stall depth of thirty-two (32) feet. Angled parking stall width and depths shall be
increased by 10 percent and 25 percent above the parking standards contained in this Ordinance.
G. All hotel, motel, and inn development shall be connected to the public sewer and water systems where provided.
Where public sewer and water systems are not available, an adequate on-site septic system, in accordance with the
"State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules", shall be provided to serve the maximum number of guests
or customers who can be accommodated. Plans or written specifications, or both, for such systems shall be
submitted to the Planning Board before final approval is granted by the Board. Where any doubt exists as to the
adequacy of such proposed systems, the Board shall obtain the advice of a sanitary engineer or other qualified
person and any cost of such service shall be paid by the applicant.
H. No building shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from a property line.
I. All other relevant standards of these Ordinances shall be observed.
873
15. Impact on Natural Beauty, Aesthetics, Historic Sites, Wildlife Habitat, Rare Natural Areas, or Public Access to
the Shoreline.
A. Preservation of Natural Beauty and Aesthetics.
1. The Plan shall, by notes on the Final Plan and deed restrictions, limit the clearing of trees to those areas
designated on the Plan for preservation.
2. A development in which the land cover type at the time of application is forested shall maintain a wooded
buffer strip no less than fifty (50) feet in width along all existing public roads. The buffer may be broken only
for driveways and roads.
3. The development should be designed to minimize the visibility of buildings from existing public roads; yet,
maximize the natural features of the site, whenever possible. When the development contains no forest or
insufficient forested portions to include all buildings, the development should be designed to minimize the
appearance of building when viewed from existing public roads.
4. The Planning Board may require that the application include a landscape plan that would show the preservation
of any existing trees larger than 24" inches diameter breast height, the replacement of trees and vegetation, and
graded contours.
5. When a proposed road traverses open fields, the plans should include the planting of street trees. Street trees
shall include a mix of tall shade trees and medium height flowering species. Trees should be planted no more
than fifty (50) feet apart.
6. When a proposed development contains a ridge line, the Plan shall restrict tree removal and prohibit building
placement within fifty (50) feet vertical distance of the ridge top. These restrictions shall appear as notes on the
final recording Plan and as covenants in the deed.
B. Retention of Usable Open Spaces and Natural or Historic Features.
1. The development should reserve between five and ten percent of the area of the development as open space in
order to provide for the recreational needs of the occupants of the development and/or to maintain the scenic or
natural beauty of the area. In determining the need for open space the Planning Board shall consider the
recreation plan for open space or recreation facilities in the area surrounding the development and the policies
of the plan for meeting those needs; the proximity of the development to neighboring dedicated open space or
recreation facilities; the type of development; and the demographic characteristics of potential occupants in the
development; and the density or lot sizes of the development.
2. If any portion of the development is located within an area designated as a critical natural area, or the
Department of Economic and Community Development’s Natural Areas Program, the Plan shall indicate
appropriate measures for the preservation of the values which qualify the site for such designation.
3 If any portion of the development is designated a site of historic or prehistoric importance, by the
comprehensive plan, or the Maine Historic Preservation Commission, appropriate measures for the protection of
the historic or
prehistoric resources shall be included in the Plan.
4. The development should reserve sufficient undeveloped land to provide for the recreational needs of the
occupants. The percentage of usable open space to be reserved would depend on: the identified needs for
outdoor recreation in that portion of City according to the comprehensive plan; the proposed lot sizes within the
development; the expected demographic makeup of the occupants of the development; and the site
characteristics. A site intended to be used for active recreation purposes, such as a playground or a play field,
should be relatively level and dry, have a total frontage on one or more roads of at least 200 feet, and have no
major dimensions of less than 200 feet.
5. Land reserved for usable open space purposes shall be of a character, configuration, and location suitable for the
particular use intended.
6. Sites selected primarily for scenic or passive recreation purposes should have such access as the Planning Board
may deem suitable and no less than twenty-five (25) feet of road frontage. The configuration of such sites
should be deemed adequate by the Planning Board with regard to scenic attributes and significant wildlife
habitat to be preserved, together with sufficient areas for trails, lookouts, etc. where necessary and appropriate.
7. Reserved usable open space land may be dedicated to the City.
874
C. Protection of Significant Wildlife and Important Habitat Areas.
1. If any portion of a proposed development lies within:
a. 250 feet of the following areas identified and mapped by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
as:
1. Habitat for species appearing on the official state or federal lists of endangered or threatened species;
2. High and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird habitats, including nesting and feeding areas;
3. Shorebird nesting, feeding, and staging areas;
4. Critical spawning and nursery areas for Atlantic sea run salmon as defined by the Atlantic Sea Run
Salmon Commission, or
5. 1,320 feet of an area identified and mapped by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as a
high or moderate value deer wintering area or travel corridor, or
6. Other important habitat areas identified in the local comprehensive plan, the applicant shall
demonstrate that there shall be no adverse impacts on the habitat and the species it supports. A report
prepared by a wildlife biologist, selected or approved by the Planning Board shall be submitted. This
report shall assess the potential impact of the development on the significant habitat and adjacent areas
that are important to the maintenance of the affected species and shall describe appropriate mitigation
measures to ensure that the development shall have no adverse impacts on the habitat and the species it
supports.
2. Protection of Deer Wintering Areas. The applicant shall contact the Regional Biologist of the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife at the Planning Board's request to determine whether any portion
of the proposed development lies within an identified deer wintering area. A letter should be prepared by the
Wildlife Biologist stating whether there is or is not a deer wintering area on the plat. If there is an identified
deer wintering area, the Plan shall include the limits of the area on the Plan and a management plan prepared by
a wildlife biologist for any identified deer wintering areas. The management plan shall provide for
approximately 50 percent of the area to be maintained in mature softwoods. The management plan will be
reviewed by the IF&W Wildlife Biologist for acceptance and their comments will be forwarded to the Planning
Board.
D. Public Access to the Shoreline. Any existing public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body shall be
maintained by means of easements or rights-of-way, or should be included in the usable open space, with provisions
made for continued public access.
16. Impact on Water Quality or Shoreline.
A. GPA Lakes. No application for development in the direct drainage area of a GPA lake should be approved unless
the development will have no significant impact on the water quality of the lake or any downstream lakes. The
direct drainage area of a lake is that portion of a lake's watershed which drains to the lake through tributaries or
overland runoff without passing through another lake. In determining the significance of impact on the lake the
Planning Board shall consider:
1. Past degradation of the lake's water quality;
2. The cumulative impact of this development and any other developments or activities subsequent to the
establishment of this policy; and
3. The assimilative capacity of the lake.
It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide the Planning Board with any information necessary to evaluate
the magnitude of the impact of the proposed development on the lake.
B. Phosphorus Export.
1. Any development within the watershed of a Great Pond shall make provisions to limit the post development
phosphorus export. The Planning Board shall keep an accurate record of permits issued within the watershed.
875
2. Simplified Phosphorus Review. The simplified review may be used for a:
a. Proposed development of three or four lots with less than 200 feet of new or upgraded road with a
cumulative driveway length not exceed 450 feet for a three lot subdivision or 600 feet for a four lot
subdivision;
b. Proposed development of three or four lots with no new or upgraded road with a cumulative driveway
length not to exceed 950 feet for three lot subdivisions or 1,100 feet for four lot subdivisions; or
c. Proposed developments consisting of multi-family dwellings that have less than 20,000 square feet of
disturbed area including building parking, driveway, lawn, subsurface waste water disposal systems, and
infiltration areas, and new or upgraded roads not exceeding 200 linear feet.
A proposed development which creates lots which could be further divided such that five or more lots may
result shall be subject to the standard review procedures unless there are deed restrictions prohibiting future
divisions of the lots.
3. Standard Review. This subsection shall apply to proposed developments which do not qualify for the simplified
review. Phosphorous export from a proposed development shall be calculated according to the procedures in
Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development, published by
the Maine DEP, latest edition. When a proposed development creates lots which are more than twice the
required minimum lot size and there are no deed restrictions proposed to prohibit future divisions, the applicant
shall either calculate phosphorus loading based on the maximum feasible number of lots, and shall design
controls adequate to limit the resulting phosphorus loading, or shall reserve a portion of the permitted
phosphorus export for future divisions.
4. Maintenance and Use Restrictions for Phosphorus Control Measures.
Provisions for monitoring, inspections, and maintenance of phosphorus control measures shall be included in
the application.
a. General Requirements for Buffer Strips.
1. Buffer strips shall provide sufficient area for travel lanes between areas of designated wildlife habitat.
2. The construction, alteration, maintenance, and other activities in buffer strips shall not adversely affect
wildlife and fisheries lifecycles.
3. There shall be no unreasonable disturbance to:
a. Designated deer wintering areas.
b. Habitat of any species declared threatened or endangered by the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
c. Nesting sites for bird colonies.
4. The buffer strip shall be maintained permanently and any plant material which does not live will be
replaced within one year.
5. Screen planting, when used, shall be so placed that at maturity it shall be 8 feet in height and be no
closer than three feet from any road or property line.
6. Fencing and screening will be so located within the owner's property line to allow access for
maintenance on both sides without intruding upon abutting properties.
b. Vegetative Buffer Areas. Individual lot owners shall be required to maintain buffer areas on their
individual lots in accordance with the following standards, to be specified in recorded deed restrictions and
as notes on the final recording Plan. Where a vegetative buffer area is to be owned in common by property
owners in the development, documentation establishing the lot owners association shall include the
following standards.
1. Wooded Buffers.
Maintenance provisions for wooded buffers shall provide for either of the following two options.
a. No Disturbance.
876
Maintenance and use provisions for wooded buffer areas which are located on hydrologic soil
group D soils and within 250 feet of the Great Pond or a tributary, or which are located on slopes
over 20 percent shall include the following:
1. Buffers shall be inspected annually for evidence of erosion or concentrated flows through or
around the buffer. All eroded areas must be seeded and mulched. A shallow stone trench
must be installed as a level spreader to distribute flows evenly in any area showing
concentrated flows.
2. All existing undergrowth (vegetation less than four feet high), forest floor duff layer, and leaf
litter must remain undisturbed and intact, except that one winding walking path, no wider than
six feet, is allowed through the buffer. This path shall not be a straight line to the Great Pond
or tributary and shall remain stabilized.
3. Pruning of live tree branches that do not exceed twelve feet above the ground level is
permitted provided that at least the top two-thirds of the tree canopy is maintained.
4. No cutting is allowed of trees except for normal maintenance of dead, wind blown, or
damaged trees.
5. Buffers shall not be used for all-terrain vehicle or vehicular line to the Great Pond or tributary
and shall remain stabilized.
6. Pruning of live tree branches that do not exceed twelve feet above the ground level is
permitted provided that at least the top two-thirds of the tree canopy is maintained.
7. No cutting is allowed of trees except for normal maintenance of dead, wind blown, or
damaged trees.
8. Buffers shall not be used for all-terrain vehicle or vehicular traffic.
9. Limited disturbance.
Maintenance and use provisions for other buffer areas may include the following:
1. There shall be no cleared openings and an evenly distributed stand of trees and other
vegetation shall be maintained.
2. Activity within the buffer shall be conducted so as to minimize disturbance of existing forest
floor, leaf litter and vegetation less than four feet in height. Where the existing ground cover
is disturbed and results in exposed mineral soil, that area shall be immediately stabilized to
avoid soil erosion.
3. Removal of vegetation less than four feet in height is limited to that necessary to create a
winding foot path no wider than six feet. This path shall not be a straight line to the Great
Pond or a tributary. The path must remain stabilized.
4. Pruning of live tree branches that do not exceed 12 feet in height above the ground level is
permitted provided that at least the top two-thirds of the tree canopy is maintained.
5. Where the removal of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in a cleared
opening being created, those openings shall be replanted with native trees at least three feet in
height unless existing new tree growth is present.
6. Buffers shall not be used for all terrain vehicle or vehicular traffic.
2. Non-Wooded Buffers.
a. Non-wooded buffers may be allowed to revert or to be planted to forest, in which case the
standards above shall apply.
b. A buffer must maintain a dense, complete and vigorous cover of “non-lawn” vegetation which
shall be mowed no more than once a year. Vegetation may include grass, other herbaceous
species, shrubs and trees.
c. Activity within the buffer shall be conducted so as to prevent damage to vegetation and exposure
of mineral soil. Burning of vegetation shall be prohibited.
d. Buffers shall not be used for all-terrain vehicles or other vehicular traffic.
C. Infiltration Systems. Individual lot owners shall be responsible for maintenance of individual infiltration systems
according to the standards specified in "Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating
New Development", published by the Maine DEP, revised May, 1990. Requirements for maintenance shall be
877
included in deed restrictions and as notes upon the final recording Plan. As an alternative to maintenance by
individual lot owners, the applicant may designate some other entity to be contracted to take the responsibility, and
shall include the above referenced maintenance provisions in any contractual agreement. Where infiltration systems
serve more than one lot, a lot owners association shall be established and the above referenced maintenance
provisions shall be referenced in the documentation establishing the association.
D. Wet Ponds. A lot owners association shall be established to maintain wet ponds, unless the City or some other
public entity agrees to assume inspection and maintenance duties. Documentation establishing the association or
establishing an agreement with a public entity shall include the maintenance standards specified in the manual
"Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development", published by the
Maine DEP, revised May, 1990.
C. Cutting or removal of vegetation along water bodies shall not increase water temperature, result in shoreline erosion,
or sedimentation of water bodies.
17. Kennels.
Including Animal Shelters, Boarding Kennels, Breeding Kennels and Rescue Group facilities. This ordinance does not
regulate or limit the number of domesticated privately owned household pets.
Animal Shelter, “means a facility that houses animals and operates for the purpose of providing stray, abandoned, abuses or
owner-surrendered animals with sanctuary or finding the animals temporary or permanent adoptive homes.” Animal Shelters
are not allowed in the R1, R2, C1 & H-1 zones. Animal Shelters are allowed in RC-2, R-3, C-2, I-1 & I-2 zones with site
design review and planning board approval.
Boarding Kennel, “means any place, building, tract of land or abode in or on which 3 or more privately owned companion
animals are kept any one time for their owners in return for a fee or compensation and includes a facility where 3 or more
companion animals are kept for training purposes for compensation.” Boarding Kennels are not allowed in the R-1, R-2, C-1
& H-1 zones. Boarding Kennels are allowed in the RC-2, R-3, C-2, I-1 & I-2 zones with site design review and planning
board approval.
Breeding Kennel, “means a location where 5 or more adult female dogs, wolf hybrids or cats capable of breeding are kept
and some or all of the offspring are offered for sale, sold or exchanged for value or a location where more than 16 dogs or
cats raised on the premises are sold to the public in a 12-month period. Breeding Kennel does not include a kennel licensed
by a municipality under Section 3923-C when the dogs are kept primarily for hunting, show, training, sledding, competition,
field trails or exhibition purposes and not more than 16 dogs are offered for sale, sold or exchanged for value within a 12-
month period.” Breeding Kennels are not allowed in the R-1, R-2, C-1, C-2 & H-1 zones. Breeding Kennels are allowed in
the RC-2, R-3, I-1 & I-2 zones with site design review and planning board approval.
Rescue Group, “means an organization or individual that receives animals that have been abandoned, surrendered or
removed from an animal facility or that take in homeless dogs or cats and sells, gives or otherwise places the animals in
private homes. Rescue group does not include a facility licensed under chapter 723.” Rescue Groups are not allowed in the
R-1, R-2, C-1 & H-1 zones. Rescue Groups are allowed in the RC-2, R-3, C-2, I-1 & I-2 zones with site design review and
planning board approval.
All buildings and or structures used as Kennels, Animal Shelters, Boarding Kennels, Breeding Kennels and Rescue Groups
shall comply with A. through G. following:
A. Structures or pens for housing or containing the animals shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from
any residential property line existing at the time of permit.
B. All pens, runs, or kennels, and other facilities shall be designed, constructed, and located on the site in a manner that
will minimize the adverse effects upon the surrounding properties.
C. The owner or operator of a kennel shall maintain the premises in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition at all times.
D. Temporary storage containers for any kennel wastes containing or including animal excrement, shall be kept tightly
covered at all times.
E. No owner of animals or operator of a kennel shall allow any animals to create objectionable noise disturbance,
odors, or other nuisances.
F. All other relevant standards of this ordinance shall also be observed.
Historical Note: Section 13-700 §17 Kennels was amended by the City Council on February 13, 2012.
878
18. Lots and Density.
A. There shall be no more than one principal building and its accessory buildings erected on any one lot.
B. Any lot containing a residential building shall abut on a public street for a distance of not less than 75 feet.
C. Every lot that is to be offered for sale for development shall be such that any buyer, with or without knowledge of
the lots physical characteristics, shall be able to have a principal structure, adequate access, adequate water supply
and quality, and adequate sewage disposal on that lot.
D. Lot dimensions and building setback dimensions shall meet the requirements of the Zoning District in which the
development is located. Any lot intended for use as a year round residence shall be connected either to the City
sewer system or to an approved subsurface wastewater disposal system. Any residential lot served by an approved
subsurface wastewater disposal system shall be a minimum of one acre.
E. Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the road.
F. Depth and width of lots shall be adequate to provide for the off-road service, loading, and parking facilities for
vehicles required by the type of use and development.
G. Corner lots shall be increased in size wherever necessary in order that any structure to be placed thereon shall
conform to the minimum front setback line from each road. Any new corner lots should be encouraged to have
access onto the road with the least amount of traffic volume or impact.
H. The division of parcels into lots with more than twice the required minimum lot size required by the Zoning
Ordinance should be laid out in such a manner as either to provide for future legal subdivision or to allow the
opening of future roads. Deed restrictions and notes on the final recording Plan shall either prohibit future divisions
of the lots or specify that any future division shall constitute a revision to the plan and require approval from the
Planning Board, subject to all applicable federal, state, or local ordinances or regulations, and any conditions placed
on the original approval.
I. If a lot on one side of a stream, road, or other similar barrier fails to meet the minimum requirements for lot size, it
should be combined with a lot on the other side of the stream, road, or other similar barrier to meet the minimum lot
size requirement.
J. In areas served by a postal carrier, lots shall be numbered in such a manner so as to facilitate mail delivery. Even
numbers shall be assigned to lots on one side of the road and odd numbers on the opposite side. Where the proposed
development contains the extension of an existing road approved by the Planning Board, but not yet constructed, the
lot numbers shall correspond with the existing lot numbers. The lot numbering shall be reviewed by the Postmaster
and City Tax Assessor and their comments considered by the Planning Board.
K. Double frontage lots and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
A vegetative buffer strip of at least ten (10) feet wide, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be
provided along each lot abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantaged use.
L. All lots must abut a public way, unless an access road meeting the following criteria has been constructed within a
deeded right-of-way having a minimum width of fifty (50) feet. The access road shall be constructed to a minimum
width of twelve (12) feet if serving one dwelling unit, and eighteen (18) feet if serving two (2) dwelling units. The
access road shall contain a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches of bank-run gravel and have drainage ditches and
culverts at all appropriate points. Such an access road shall serve no more than two (2) dwelling units. Any access
road serving between three (3) and five (5) dwelling units shall meet the "Private" road design and construction
standards, but need not be paved. Any access road serving more than five (5) dwelling units shall meet the "Private"
road design and construction standards and it shall be paved. All lots shall have adequate right-of-way access for
emergency vehicles to enter, turn around, and exit.
M. Land susceptible to flooding and land not suitable for housing or road development and land which may be
hazardous to life, health, or property shall not be accepted as part of a development for residential purposes, but may
be used, with the approval of the CEO or Planning Board, for parks, playgrounds, or other open-space uses.
N. No lots created shall have a lot depth to frontage ratio of greater than 5 to 1.
19. Monumentation.
A. No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall sell or convey any land unless, prior to the conveyance of
said land, monuments have been set within each lot sold or conveyed in conformance with this subsection (See:
Title 30-A, MRSA, §4406 (2)).
B. If artificial monuments have not been set at the time of the Final Plan submission, that fact shall be indicated by
notation on the Final Plan. Said notation shall also indicate that monuments will be set prior to the sale or
conveyance of any lot.
879
C. All monuments required by this subsection shall be set along any street, road, way, or parcel to be dedicated to the
municipality prior to the acceptance of any street, road, way, or parcel by the municipality.
D. Monument, monument location, and artificial monument settings shall conform with the requirements of the Maine
Board of Licensure for Professional Land Surveyors, latest edition.
E. Artificial monuments shall be located in a manner and be of sufficient size, composition, and material that:
1. The likelihood of their disturbance is minimal;
2. The monument is capable of being detected with electromagnetic metal detectors;
3. Their life expectancy, under normal circumstances, shall exceed 25 years; and
4. The person who placed the monument can be identified with certainty by inspection of the monument.
F. Monuments shall be set at all corners and angle points of the property boundaries where the interior angle of the
boundaries is 135° or less.
20. Noise.
A. The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous, regular, or frequent source of sound produced by
any activity shall be limited by the time period and land use District listed in the following chart. Sound levels shall
be measured at least 4 feet above ground at the property boundary.
Sound Pressure Level Limits (Measured in dB (a) scale)
7 AM - 10 PM 10 PM - 7 AM
Residential Districts 55 45
Commercial Districts 60 50
Industrial Districts 65 50
B. The levels specified may be exceeded by 10 dBA for a single 15 minute period per day. Noise shall be measured by
a meter set on the A-weighted response scale, slow response. The meter shall meet the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1961) "American Standard Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters".
C. No person shall engage in construction activities, on a site abutting any residential use, between the hours of 10 PM
and 7 AM which exceed those limits established for residential Districts. Otherwise the following activities shall be
exempt from these regulations:
1. Sounds emanating from construction and maintenance activities conducted between 7 AM - 10 PM.
2. Sounds emanating from safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief valves, and other emergency
activities.
3. Sounds emanating from traffic on public transportation facilities.
21. Preservation of Natural Features.
The CEO or Planning Board may require that a proposed development preserve such natural features as trees, streams,
water courses, and scenic views. The road and lot layout shall be adapted to the topography. Extensive grading and
filling shall be avoided as much as practical.
22. Professional Offices in Residential Districts.
Professional offices may be permitted in those residential Districts indicated on the Land Use Permit Table and in
accordance with the provisions below:
A. New professional offices shall be located only within existing buildings, in order to retain the essential character of
the neighborhood, except as allowed in "E", below.
B. Parking for professional offices shall be located to the side or rear of the building, and shall be screened from view
from all streets and abutting residential properties.
C. All outdoor lighting shall be directed in such a manner as to avoid "overspill" onto abutting residential properties or
glare into the street.
D. Exterior alterations shall be minimized and shall be similar to the original architectural style of the building.
880
E. In special situations where a building is extremely dilapidated and structurally unsound and where reuse is therefore
not practicable or economically feasible, or where a building is not judged to be a significant component of the
neighborhood's overall architectural and historic character, the Planning Board may approve plans to replace an
existing residential building with a proposed new professional office building whose scale and design would be
appropriate to the site and to the neighborhood.
23. Rear Lots.
Rear lots may be developed for any permitted use if they are or can be provided with a right-of-way, which complies
with the following provisions:
A. The right-of-way must be conveyed by deed recorded in the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, Northern Office
to the owner of the rear lot and be a minimum of 50 feet in width.
B. A legal description of the right-of-way by metes and bounds shall be attached to any building permit application for
construction on the rear lot.
C. Except for lots recorded on the effective date of these Ordinances, the right-of-way deed must be recorded in the
Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, Northern Office at the time the rear lot is first deeded out as a separate parcel.
D. Creation of the right-of-way to serve the rear lot shall not create a non-conforming front lot by reducing such lot's
required road frontage below the minimum, or, if the front lot is already non-conforming with respect to road
frontage, reduce its road frontage at all.
E. The right-of-way may serve only one single-family dwelling, unless the following provisions are met:
1. If serving two (2) dwelling units the access shall be constructed to a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet. The
access shall contain a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches of bank-run gravel and have drainage ditches and
culverts at all appropriate points.
2. Any access serving between three (3) and five (5) dwelling units shall meet the "Private" road design and
construction standards, but need not be paved.
3. Any access serving more than five (5) dwelling units shall meet the "Private" road design and construction
standards and it shall be paved. All lots shall have adequate right-of-way access for emergency vehicles to
enter, turn around, and exit.
F. If the right-of-way is brought up to standards as set forth in the City's road design and construction standards, further
dwellings may be constructed on a rear lot with Planning Board approval, provided all other space and bulk
requirements are met for each dwelling. For purposes of such approval, the sale or lease of additional lots or the
construction of an additional dwelling or dwellings served by the right-of-way shall be considered in the same
manner and under the same restrictions and requirements as if such division or construction were a subdivision.
G. Each single-family dwelling on a back lot shall be located within an area large enough to hold a circle with a
minimum diameter equal to the required road frontage as required for a single-family dwelling in the District.
H. A lot of record which could otherwise be legally built upon, but which is served by a right-of-way which does not
comply, herein, may nevertheless be used for a single-family dwelling with Planning Board approval.
24. Reservation or Dedication and Maintenance of Usable Open Space and Common Land, Facilities, and Services.
A. All usable open space common land, facilities, and property shall be owned by:
1. The owners of the lots or dwelling units by means of a lot-owners association;
2. An association which has as its principal purpose the conservation or preservation of land in essentially its
natural condition; or
3. The City.
B. Further subdivision of the common land or usable open space and its use for other than non-commercial recreation
agriculture or conservation purposes, except for easements for underground utilities, shall be prohibited. Structures
and buildings accessory to non-commercial recreational or conservation uses may be erected on the common land.
When usable open space is to be owned by an entity other than the City, there shall be a conservation easement
deeded to the City prohibiting future development.
C. The common land or usable open space shall be shown on the Final Plan with appropriate notations on the Plan to
indicate that:
881
1. It shall not be used for future building lots; and
2. Which portions of the usable open space, if any, may be dedicated for acceptance by the City.
D. The Final Plan application shall include the following:
1. Covenants for mandatory membership in the lot owners association setting forth the owners’ rights, interests,
and privileges in the association and the common property and facilities, to be included in the deed for each lot
or dwelling.
2. Draft articles of incorporation of the proposed owners association as a non-profit corporation; and
3. Draft by-laws of the proposed lot owners association specifying the responsibilities and authority of the
association, the operating procedures of the association and providing for proper capitalization of the
association to cover the costs of major repairs, maintenance and replacement of common facilities.
E. In combination, the documents referenced in paragraph D above shall provide for the following:
1. The homeowners association shall have the responsibility of maintaining the common property or facilities.
2. The association shall levy annual charges against all owners of lots or dwelling units to defray the expenses
connected with the maintenance, repair and replacement of common property and facilities and tax assessments.
3. The association shall have the power to place a lien on the property of members who fail pay dues or
assessments.
4. The developer or applicant shall maintain control of the common property, and be responsible for its
maintenance until development sufficient to support the association has taken place. Such determination shall
be made by the Planning Board upon request of the lot owners association, applicant, or developer.
25. Residences Excluded from Industrial Districts.
Residential uses are specifically excluded from Industrial Districts except for watchman, caretaker, or janitor, or other
such use clearly incidental to a lawful industrial use.
26. Satellite Receiving Dish.
No satellite receiving dish, greater than 40" in diameter, shall be located within 100 feet of the right-of-way of a public
road.
27. Sewage Disposal.
A. Public Sewage Disposal
1. Any development within 1000 feet of a public sewage disposal system, at its nearest point, shall make
provisions for connection to the public system. When public sewage disposal service shall not be available at
the time of construction, a “capped system” may be installed within the development, at the discretion of the
Planning Board and after consultation with the Caribou Utilities District (CUD), to allow future connection
when service becomes available without excavation within the right-of-way of any road within the
development.
2. When a development is proposed to be served by the public sewage system, the complete collection system
within the development, including manholes and pump stations, shall be installed at the expense of the
applicant.
3. The CUD shall certify that providing public sewage service to the proposed development is within the capacity
of the system’s existing collection and treatment system or improvements planned to be complete prior to the
construction of the development.
4. The CUD shall review and approve the construction drawings for the public sewage system. The size and
location of laterals, collectors, manholes, and pump stations shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the
District.
5. The public sewage disposal system(s) and related equipment for the development shall be designed by a Maine
Registered Professional Engineer in full compliance with the requirements of the State of Maine, Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules and shall be approved by the CEO or Planning Board and the Health Office.
B. Private Sewage Disposal.
882
1. When a proposed development is not within 1000 feet of a public sewage disposal system, at its nearest point,
connection to the public system shall not be permitted. Sewage disposal shall be by a private subsurface
wastewater disposal system. The developer may install and connect to the public sewage disposal system
totally at their own expense and in conformance with the standards and specifications of the CUD.
2. The applicant shall submit evidence of site suitability for subsurface wastewater disposal prepared by a Maine
Licensed Site Evaluator in full compliance with the requirements of the State of Maine, Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules.
a. The Site Evaluator shall certify, in writing, that all test pits which meet the requirements for a new system
represent an area large enough to install a disposal area on soils which meet the, Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules..
b. On lots in which the limiting factor has been identified as being within 12-15 inches of the surface,
exclusive of shoreland areas, a second site with suitable soils shall be shown as a reserve area for future
replacement of the disposal area. The reserve area shall be shown on the Plan and restricted so as not to be
built upon.
c. In no instance shall a disposal area be on a site which requires a New System Variance from the Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules.
28. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks should be installed on one side of the street in all new residential developments within the Urban Compact
Area. Where sidewalks exist adjacent to a proposed development outside of the Compact Area, sidewalks shall be
installed connecting to existing sidewalks. Where installed, sidewalks shall meet the following minimum requirements.
A. Where utilities or other appurtenances are present within five (5) feet of the curb, the typical width of the sidewalk
should be seven (7) feet. Where no utilities are present, a sidewalk width of five (5) feet is acceptable. Sidewalks
shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the curb facing or edge of shoulder if the street is not curbed.
Preferably, utility poles, fire hydrants, and traffic signs should be placed behind the sidewalk.
B. Bituminous Sidewalks.
1. The “subbase” aggregate course shall be no less than twelve (12) inches thick after compaction.
2. The hot bituminous pavement surface course shall be MDOT plant Mix Grade D constructed in one (1) lift no
less than two (2) inches thick after compaction.
C. Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks.
1. The "subbase" aggregate course shall be no less than twelve (12) inches thick after compaction.
2. The Portland Cement concrete shall be reinforced with six (6) inch square, W 2.0 wire mesh and shall be no less
than four (4) inches thick.
D. Brick, Pavement Stone, Cobblestone, or Flagstone.
Excavation shall be to the required depth and width and the layers shaped and compacted to a firm even surface. All
soft and yielding material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material. A brick, pavement stone,
cobblestone, or flagstone sidewalk should be constructed in four (4) layers:
1. The first layer is a “subbase” aggregate course no less than twelve (12) inches thick after compaction.
2. The second layer is a hot bituminous pavement course of MDOT plant Mix Grade D constructed in one (1) lift
no less than one (1) inch thick after compaction.
3. The third layer is a course of fine sand no less than one (1) inch thick after compaction.
4. The fourth layer is either the bricks, pavement stones, cobblestones, or flagstones.
E. Curb-Cut Ramps.
Curbs and sidewalks should be designed with curb-cut ramps at all pedestrian crosswalks to provide adequate access
for the safe and convenient movement of physically handicapped persons. The following criteria should be
considered in the design of curb-cut ramps:
883
1. At each intersection with a pedestrian crosswalk, curb-cut ramps should be provided on all corners. At Tintersections,
ramps should be located on the side opposite the minor intersecting road.
2. Curb-cut ramps should be located and protected to prevent their obstruction by parked vehicles.
3. At marked pedestrian crosswalks, curb-cut ramps should be contained entirely within the markings, excluding
any flared sides.
4. The function of the curb-cut ramp should not be compromised by other roadway features, such as, but not
limited to guardrails, catch basins, manholes.
29. Signs.
A. Purposes: The purposes of this subsection are to:
1. Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication;
2. Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment;
3. Create and maintain an attractive business climate;
4. Improve and maintain pedestrian and traffic safety;
5. Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and
6. Implement the intent of the Caribou Comprehensive Plan.
B. Sign Permit: Except as provided in subsection "D" below, no sign may be erected, enlarged, illuminated, or
substantially altered without a Sign Permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer after they find that the sign is in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Each individual sign shall require a permit issued from the CEO.
B1. Sign Permit Fee: The permit fee shall be $50.00 for each sign permit issued. Charitable and/or civic organizations
must obtain a permit, however the fee is waived.
C. General Provisions.
1. Signs must be kept clean, legible, and free from all hazards such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose
fastenings, or deterioration, and must be maintained at all times in such condition so as not to be detrimental to
the public health or safety, detract from the physical appearance and the natural beauty of the community, or
constitute a distraction or obstruction that may impair traffic safety. Property owners are responsible for the
conditions of signs on their property; regardless of rental arrangements. Signs for businesses that have been
closed or otherwise no longer operate are required to be maintained in the same condition noted above.
2. Except for banners, flags and temporary signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this
ordinance, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials, and shall be permanently attached to the
ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure.
3. Flags of the United States, Maine, Aroostook County, or any other flag allowed by the City Council, provided
that such flag shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area and shall not be flown from a pole the top of which
is more than 40 feet in height are exempt from this ordinance. The United States flag shall be flown in
accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United States in Chapter 1 of Title 4 of the United
States Code.
4. Nothing within this subsection shall prohibit the use of the following signs:
a. Traffic safety signs, directional signs, or emergency warning signs, erected by a government agency, or a
public utility.
b. Legal notices, identification, information, or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies.
D. Permitted Signs: The following types of signs are permitted, except where otherwise prohibited by law, and shall not
require a Sign Permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
1. All permanent on-premise signs erected prior to the effective date of this Ordinance (ordinary maintenance and
upkeep shall be allowed).
2. Any sign approved by the Planning Board, as an element of Site Design Review, prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance or as proposed in a pending application.
E. Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited in all areas of the City.
1. No permanent sign except traffic and similar public safety signs, official business directional signs (OBDS)
shall be located in the public right-of-way of any street or highway unless approved by the Police Chief or
his/her designee; if applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the Police Chief he or she may appeal the decision
of the Police Chief to the City Council.
884
2. No sign shall be located so that it interferes with the view necessary for motorists to proceed safely through
intersections or to enter into or exit from public streets or private roads.
3. Temporary movable signs are allowed under the following uses:
a. To call attention to and/or to advertise the name of a new business and the products sold or activities to be
carried on in connection with a new business. In such cases, no sign shall remain at a premises for a period
of more than ninety (90) consecutive days.
b. To advertise a special sale or sales. In such cases, a sign shall be allowed for a period not to exceed ninety
(90) consecutive days.
c. To promote community or civic activities. In such cases, no sign shall remain in place for more than ninety
(90) consecutive days.
d. There must be a 30 day waiting period in between each 90 day period a temporary sign is erected.
e. Temporary signs less than 12 square feet which are not displayed when the business is closed, are exempt
from this ordinance.
4. Signs in any district shall not exceed 25 feet in height
5. Signs in any district shall not exceed 96 square feet
6. Signs in R-1 and R-2 districts that are not in compliance with the Home Occupation Ordinance or in a
subdivision a sign for the purpose of identifying that subdivision exceeding 32 square feet are prohibited.
F. Non-Conforming Signs: Non-Conforming signs that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this Ordinance
may continue except as provided below:
1. No non-conforming sign may be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to aggravate the non-conforming
condition.
2. A non-conforming sign may not be moved except for maintenance, change in message or repair, or replaced
except to bring the sign into conformity with this subsection.
H. Specific Standards:
1. C-1, C-2, RC-2, I-1, and I-2 Districts.
The following standards apply to signs in the C-1, C-2, RC-2, I-1, and I-2 Districts.
a. In the case of a multi-tenant or unit commercial or industrial development, the owner of such premises is
responsible for compliance with this ordinance.
2. R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts.
The following standards apply to signs in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts.
a. In the case of a multi-family development or a subdivision with an identifying name (i.e. "Solar Slopes"),
the owner of such premises is responsible for compliance with this ordinance.
I. Changeable Signs: The goal of the City is to regulate the frequency and manner of change of display on each side of
a changeable sign in a manner consistent to that provided by State law, and to do so in a manner that promotes
highway safety.
1. Definitions
a. Changeable Sign: “Changeable Sign” means an on-premises sign created, designed, manufactured or
modified in such a way that its message may be electronically, digitally or mechanically altered by the
complete substitution or replacement of one display by another on each side.
b. Display: “Display” means that portion of the surface area of a changeable sign that is, or is designed to be,
or is capable of being, periodically altered for the purpose of conveying a message.
c. Message “Message” mans a communication conveyed by means of a visual display of text.
2. Regulations
885
a. The display on each side of the changeable sign may be changed no more frequently than once every thirty
(30) seconds.
b. The display on each side of the changeable sign must change as rapidly as technologically practicable, but
the display may change through phasing, rolling, scrolling or blending provided, however, that the display
on each side of a changeable sign shall not flash.
c. Changeable signs are only allowed in C-1, C-2, RC-2, I-1, and I-2 districts.
3. Administration
Pursuant to Title 23 M.R.S.A. Section 1914, Sub-Section 11-A, the changeable signs within the municipality
and displays on each side of those changeable signs shall comply with all other requirements of State law. The
City shall notify the Maine Department of Transportation in writing that it has adopted this Ordinance and shall
send it a copy of the same. The City’s Code Enforcement Officer shall administer the provisions of this
Ordinance.
4. Penalty
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Ordinance, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be found guilty of a civil offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00, or more than
$2,500.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Historical Note: Section 13-700 §29 as amended June 27, 2005; Section 13-700 §13 as amended March 25, 2013; Section
13-700 §29 as amended June 10, 2013
886
887
30. Stormwater Management.
A. Adequate provision shall be made for disposal of stormwater generated within the development, and any drained
ground water, through a management system of swales, culverts, underdrains, and storm drains.
B. All components of the stormwater management system shall be designed to infiltrate, detain, or retain water falling
on the site so as to limit peak discharge rates to predevelopment levels for the 2-year, 10-year, and the 25-year
frequency, 24-hour duration storms, based on rainfall data for Caribou, ME.
C. The proposed stormwater management system shall be designed by a Maine Registered Professional Engineer.
D. The design of piped or open channel systems shall be based on a ten (10) year flow frequency without overloading
or flooding beyond channel limits. In addition, the areas expected to be flooded by runoff of a twenty-five (25) year
frequency shall be designated, and no structures shall be planned within such area.
E. Rights-of-way or easements shall be designated for all components of the stormwater management system lying
outside of established road lines. Wherever the storm drainage system is not within the right-of-way of a public
road, perpetual easements shall be provided to the City allowing maintenance and improvement of the system. Such
rights-of-way shall be at least thirty (30) feet in width.
F. The stormwater management system shall take into consideration the upstream runoff which must pass over or
through the development site. The system shall be designed to pass upstream flows generated by a twenty-five (25)
year frequency through the proposed development without overloading the system or flooding areas not specifically
planned for such flooding.
G. Downstream drainage requirements shall be studied to determine the effect of the proposed development. The storm
drainage shall not overload existing or future planned storm drainage systems downstream from the development.
The applicant shall be responsible for financing any improvements to existing drainage systems required to handle
the increased stormwater flows.
H. Where permanent embankment type storage or retention basins are planned, the basins shall be designed as outlined
in the Natural Resources Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual or other appropriate references.
I. Any grading or other construction activity on the site shall not cause unreasonable alteration of natural drainage
ways such that drainage, other than that which occurred prior to development, shall adversely affect adjacent parcels
of land and that drainage ways flowing from adjacent parcels of land to the development site shall be impeded.
J. The developer shall maintain all components of the stormwater management system until it is formally accepted by
the City, or is placed under the jurisdiction of a legally created association that shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the system. The charter of such an association must be acceptable to the Planning Board.
K. The stormwater management system shall be fully coordinated with project site plans, including consideration of
road patterns, pedestrian ways, open space, building siting, parking areas, recreational facilities, and other utilities,
especially sanitary wastewater disposal facilities.
L. When the construction of a development is to occur in phases, the planning of the stormwater management system
should encompass the entire site which may ultimately be developed, and not limited to an initial or limited phases
of the development.
M. The minimum pipe size for any storm drainage pipe shall be fifteen (15) inches for driveway entrances and eighteen
(18) inches for cross culverts. Maximum trench width at the pipe crown shall be the outside diameter of the pipe
plus two (2) feet. Minimum depth of cover material shall be 24" from the pipe crown. Pipe shall be bedded in a fine
granular material, containing no stones larger than three (3) inches, lumps of clay, or organic
888
matter, reaching a minimum of six (6) inches below the bottom of the pipe extending to six (6) inches above the top
of the pipe. Outlets shall be stabilized against soil erosion by stone riprap or other suitable materials which reduce
water velocity. Catch basins shall be installed where necessary and located at the curb line.
N. The physical, biological, and chemical properties of the receiving waters shall not be unreasonably degraded by the
stormwater runoff from the development site.
O. Storm Drainage Construction Standards.
1. Materials.
a. Storm drainage pipes shall conform to the requirements of MDOT Standard Specifications for Highways
and Bridges, latest edition, materials specifications §706 for non-metallic pipe and §707 for metallic pipe.
Plastic (polyethylene) pipes shall not be installed except in closed systems such as road underdrains.
Bituminous coated steel pipes shall not be used.
b. Where the storm drainage pipe is to be covered by ten (10) feet or more of fill material, pipe material with a
fifty (50) year life shall be used. These materials include concrete pipe, polymer coated galvanized
corrugated steel pipe, polyvinylchloride (PVC) pipe, and corrugated aluminum alloy pipe.
2. Pipe Gauges.
Metallic storm drainage pipe shall meet the following thickness requirements depending on pipe diameter:
Material
Galvanized CMP
Aluminum/Zinc Coated CMP Aluminum Coated CMP
Inside Diameter Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Polymer Coated CMP
15" to 24" 14 ga.
16 ga
30" to 36" 12 ga.
14 ga.
42" to 54" 10 ga.
12 ga.
60" to 72" 8 ga.
10 ga.
3. Drain inlet alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and vertical alignment unless specific approval of a
curvilinear drain is obtained in writing from the Board, after consultation with the Highway Superintendent.
4. Manholes shall be provided at all changes in vertical or horizontal alignment and at all junctions. On straight
runs, manholes shall be placed at a maximum of 400 foot intervals.
P. Upon completion, each catch basin or manhole shall be cleaned of all accumulation of silt, debris, or foreign matter
and shall be kept clean until final acceptance.
31. Street Trees, Esplanades, and Open Green Spaces.
Street trees, esplanades, and open space areas may be required at the discretion of the CEO or Planning Board. Where
such improvements are required, they shall be incorporated in the Final Plan and executed by the developer as
construction of the development progresses.
889
32. Swimming Pools.
A. Swimming pools designed to hold more than 10,000 gallons of water installed after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall require a permit issued by the CEO.
B. All swimming pools shall meet accessory structure setback requirements for the District they are to be located in.
C. Enclosures of swimming pools shall comply with the provisions of Title 22, MRSA, §1632.
33. Temporary Dwellings.
A. Purpose: To provide for the temporary habitation of one dwelling during the construction or renovation of a second
dwelling on a lot, except within the Resource Protection District of the City's Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
B. The CEO may issue a Temporary Dwelling permit for the purpose of the owner residing in one dwelling while a
new dwelling is constructed or an existing dwelling is renovated, only if all of the following are met:
1. The temporary structure to be resided in during the construction or renovation of the second (primary) structure
shall be connected to an approved subsurface sewage disposal system.
2. All zoning setbacks and lot coverage requirements of this Ordinance shall be met.
3. The owner must reside in one of the structures during construction or renovations.
7. The structure which is not to be the principle residence shall be resided in for not more than eighteen (18)
months from the date of the issuance of the permit for the construction of the primary residence.
5. Within eighteen (18) months from the date of the issuance of a permit in the case of a mobile home it shall be
removed from the lot and other structures shall be converted to an accessory structure or removed.
6. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction and renovation on a lot where a temporary
residential structure will be located, the owner shall sign a binding agreement with the City that the provisions
of this subsection shall be complied with.
34. Toxic and Noxious Discharges.
No use shall for any period of time discharge across the boundaries of the lot on which it is located toxic and noxious
matter in concentrations in excess of one-fourth of the maximum allowable concentrations set forth in Table 1 of the
Industrial Hygiene standards, maximum Allowable Concentration, Chapter 5 of the "Air Pollution Abatement Manual,"
latest edition, which is hereby incorporated in and made a part of this subsection by reference.
35. Utilities.
A. Easements for utilities, either within or beyond the proposed development, as may be necessary, shall be provided
for where necessary and shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide.
B. Whenever practical, the applicant should be encouraged to install underground conduits and other necessary
subsurface structures to provide electric power, telephone, and cable service throughout the development. Such
underground structures shall be constructed according to the requirements of the utility company involved.
36. Waste Material Accumulations Regulated.
Deposits or accumulations of rubbish, junk, junk automobiles and parts thereof, discarded articles of any kind,
household, industrial, or commercial wastes shall not be made in any District except at a dumping place or places
designated as such by the City Council provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit
the establishment or operation of commercial automobile graveyards and junkyards as permitted under the terms of these
Ordinances.
37. Water Supply.
A. Public Water Supply.
1. Any development within 1000 feet of a public water supply, at its nearest point, shall make provisions for
connection to the public system. When public water supply service shall not be available at the time of
construction, a “capped system” may be installed within the development, at the discretion of the Planning
890
Board and after consultation with the Caribou Utilities District, to allow future connection when service
becomes available without excavation within the right-of-way of any road within the development.
2. When a development is to be served by a public water supply system, the complete system within the
development, including fire hydrants, shall be installed at the expense of the developer. The size and location
of mains, gate valves, hydrants, service connections shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the Caribou
Utilities District. Service provided shall be a minimum of 20 psi. and 500 gallons per minute. The Caribou
Fire Chief shall review the system for minimal provision of service.
3. A proposed development shall not generate a demand on the source, treatment facilities, or distribution system
of the Caribou Utilities District beyond the capacity of those system components, considering improvements
that are planned to be in place prior to occupancy of the development. The developer shall be responsible for
paying the costs of system improvements necessary to the District’s system improvement plan, as necessary, to
alleviate existing deficiencies.
4. The public sewage disposal system(s) and related equipment for the development shall be designed by a Maine
Registered Professional Engineer in full compliance with the requirements of the "State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules "and shall be approved by the CEO or Planning Board and the Health Office.
B. Private Individual Wells.
1. When a proposed development is not within 1000 feet of a public water supply, at its nearest point, the water
supply shall be from individual wells. The developer may install and connect to the public water supply system
totally at their own expense and in conformance with the standards and specifications of the Caribou Utilities
District.
2. Due to the increased chance of contamination from surface water, dug wells shall be prohibited. The applicant
shall prohibit dug wells by deed restrictions and a note on the final recording Plan.
3. Wells shall not be constructed within 100 feet of the traveled way of any road. If located downhill from the
road, or within 50 feet of the traveled way of any road, or if located uphill of the road, this restriction shall be
included as a note on the final recording Plan and deed restriction to the effected lots.
4. Individual wells shall be sited and constructed to prevent infiltration of surface water, and contamination from
subsurface wastewater disposal systems and other sources of potential contamination.
8. Lot design shall permit placement of wells, subsurface wastewater disposal areas, and reserve sites for
subsurface water disposal areas in compliance with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
38. Establishments dealing in the consignment or resale of used personal property.
The City of Caribou, Maine elects to adopt and enforce the requirements of Maine Revised Statute Annotated, Title 30-A,
§3971, Records of sales of used merchandise.
The City of Caribou requires by this ordinance that every establishment within the City of Caribou, dealing in the
consignment for sale, resale or trade of any and all personal property, provide and deliver to the Caribou Chief of Police a
monthly inventory report of all items taken into that establishment’s inventory. The monthly report is to be delivered to the
Chief of Police by the 15th of each month showing the previous calendar months inventory of new transactions.
This ordinance pertains to every dealer in used personal property, including and not limited to pawn shops, used merchandise
shops, consignment shops, internet sales shops and establishments similar in use.
39. Registered Nonprofit Dispensaries and Registered Cultivation Facilities for Medical Marijuana
A. Purpose and Authority
To regulate the location of Registered Medical Marijuana Dispensaries within the City of Caribou:
Pursuant to Title 22 MRSA Chapter 558 C and §2428 (10), Maine law provides for the siting of Medical Marijuana
Dispensaries as permitted by the Department of Health and Human Services. The City of Caribou also reserves the right for
additional siting and licensing requirements pursuant to municipal home rule authority, Title 30-A MRSA §3001.
Where as marijuana has been determined to have both legitimate medical uses as well as a history of widespread illegal use,
this Ordinance shall serve to govern the siting and licensing requirements specific to the City of Caribou for the operation of
a Registered Medical Marijuana Dispensary.
891
C. Regulations:
1. The establishment of a Registered Nonprofit Dispensary or Registered Cultivation Facility shall require review by
the Caribou Planning Board as per Section 13-300 "Site Design Review" of the Caribou Code. Section 13-302 (B)
shall require a mandatory public hearing as part of the Site Design Review. Siting requirements shall also apply to
any and all ancillary structures, mobile units, or any future types of dispensary mechanisms as yet contemplated
within this ordinance.
2. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted for a Registered Nonprofit Dispensary unless the structure providing
the service is located in the H-1, C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2 or RC-2 Zones.
3. No Registered Nonprofit Dispensary shall be allowed in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential Zones or within 300 feet of
an existing residential dwelling or within 300 feet of the R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential Zone Boundary Line.
4. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted for a Registered Nonprofit Dispensary if the premise concerned is
located within the Drug Free Safe Zone, or 500 feet of a preexisting Private School, Day Care Facility, or House of
Public Worship.
5. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted for a Registered Cultivation Facility unless the structure is located
within a Registered Nonprofit Dispensary or is offsite from the Dispensary within the R-3 Zone and also meeting all
setback requirements applicable to Registered Nonprofit Dispensaries.
6. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted for a Registered Nonprofit Dispensary unless the premise concerned is
in complete compliance with all municipal, state and federal Codes and Regulations.
Security requirements for both the Registered Nonprofit Dispensary and associated Registered Cultivation Facilities shall
include as a minimum:
a. Lockable doors and windows to include intrusion alarms with audible and police notification components
sending notification directly to or through a second party to the Caribou Police Department.
b. Exterior security lighting comprised of spot lights with motion sensors covering the full perimeter of the
facility.
c. Video surveillance capable of covering the entire perimeter of the facility, interior, and all plants cultivated
within the facility. The video surveillance system shall be operated with continuous recording twenty-four
hours per day seven days per week and such records of surveillance shall be retained for a minimum
duration of 90 days
7. A Registered Nonprofit Dispensary and Registered Cultivation Facility may not continue to employ an employee
who is convicted of any state or federal controlled substance law, or is under indictment or charged with any state of
federal controlled substance law violation, while employed at the Registered Nonprofit Dispensary and or
Registered Cultivation Facility. If a principal officer or board member is convicted of any state or federal controlled
substance law while a principal officer or board member of a Registered Nonprofit Dispensary or Registered
Cultivation Facility, that Registered Nonprofit Dispensary or Registered Cultivation Facility shall immediately be
considered in violation of this Chapter.
8. Medical Marijuana Disbursing Facilities must provide an adequate interior waiting area to ensure no exterior waiting
of clients.
9. Medical Marijuana Disbursing Facilities must provide adequate off street parking on site at 1 parking space per
every 150 square feet of interior space. Each parking space shall be a minimum of 9 feet wide by 21 feet long.
10. All signage shall meet the requirements of Section 13-700, #29, A through H and may not use any pictorial
representations of any portion of a marijuana plant, products, by-products, or paraphernalia associated with the use
or distribution of legalized medical marijuana or illegal use of marijuana.
40. Conditions of Keeping Livestock and Poultry
1. Any livestock shall be kept at least 100 feet from any property line except pigs and hogs which shall be kept at
least 200 feet from any property line and shall be kept at least 100 feet from any residential dwelling or water well.
2. Any poultry shall be kept at least 50 feet from any property line.
892
41. Prohibiting Recreational Marijuana
Section 1. Authority. The ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Title 30-A M.R.S. §3001 and Title 7 M.R.S. c. 417.
Section 2. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to impose a ban on the operation of Retail Marijuana
Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs in the City of Caribou to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the people of Caribou as these activities constitute a nuisance.
Section 3. Prohibition. The operation of Retail Marijuana Establishments which includes Retail Marijuana Stores,
Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facilities, Retail Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facilities, and Retail Marijuana
Testing Facilities; and the operation of Retail Marijuana Social Clubs are prohibited within the City of Caribou, and
therefore all activities related to the abovementioned retail uses such as, but not limited to, cultivation, possession,
extraction, manufacturing, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, delivering, dispensing,
transferring, and distributing are expressly prohibited within the City of Caribou.
Section 4. Exemptions.
A. Personal Use of Marijuana. This ordinance shall not be construed to prohibit the Personal Use of
Marijuana per Title 7 M.R.S. c. 417 section 2452.
B. Medical Use of Marijuana. This ordinance shall not be construed to limit any privileges or rights of a
qualifying patient, primary caregiver, registered or otherwise, or registered dispensary under the Maine
Medical Use of Marijuana Act and the City of the Caribou Code of Ordinances, c. 56 Unified Development
Ordinance.
Section 5. Relationship with Other Ordinances. Whenever a provision of this ordinance is inconsistent with another
provision of any other ordinance, regulation, or statute, the more restrictive provision shall control.
Section 6. Validity and Severability. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to
be invalid, such a decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this ordinance.
Section 7. Enforcement.
A. Any duly designated Caribou Police Officer is authorized and shall have the authority to enforce all
provisions of this ordinance.
B. The City Manager is authorized to order that legal action be taken to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Section 8. Cease Operations Order. A Police Officer may issue a written cease operations order directing the
occupancy, use and other activities prohibited under this ordinance to cease immediately, and that the premises be
vacated. Upon notice of the cease operations order, all occupancy, use, or other activity subject to the cease
operations order shall stop immediately and the premises shall be vacated and closed.
Section 9. Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance may be liable for the penalties set forth
below:
A. Civil Penalties.
i. First Violation. The maximum penalty for undertaking an activity related to Retail Marijuana
Establishments or Retail Marijuana Social Clubs is $2,500.
ii. Multiple. The maximum penalty for undertaking an activity related to Retail Marijuana
Establishments or Retail Marijuana Social Clubs is $25,000 when it is shown that there has
been a previous conviction of the same person within the past five (5) years for a violation of
the ordinance.
iii. Economic Benefit. The maximum penalty may be increased if the economic benefit resulting
from the violation exceeds the applicable penalties. The maximum civil penalty may not
exceed an amount equal to twice the economic benefit resulting from the violation. Economic
benefit includes, but is not limited to, the costs avoided or enhanced value accrued at the time
of the violation as a result of the violator’s noncompliance with the applicable legal
requirements.
893
iv. Setting of Penalty. In setting a penalty, the following shall be considered:
a. Prior violations by the same party;
b. The impact caused and/or potential impact posed by the operation of the prohibited
activity to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of Caribou.
c. The damage that cannot be abated or corrected; and
d. The extent to which the violation continued following an order to stop.
B. Abatement and Mitigation. The violator may be ordered to correct, abate or mitigate the violations.
C. Damage Incurred. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become liable
to the City for any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the City by reason of such violation.
D. Attorney Fees. If Caribou is the prevailing party, the City must be awarded reasonable attorney
fees, expert witness fees and costs.
Section 10. Definitions. The definitions below are per Title 7 M.R.S. c. 417, section 2442.
Marijuana: Means cannabis.
Extraction: The process of extracting marijuana with solvents or gases.
Person: A natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, limited liability company or organization
or a manager, agent, owner, director, servant, officer or employee thereof. “Person” does not include any
governmental organization.
Retail Marijuana: Cannabis that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed or sold by a licensed retail marijuana
establishment or retail marijuana social club.
Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility: An entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package retail marijuana and
sell retail marijuana to retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs.
Retail Marijuana Establishment: Retail marijuana store, a retail marijuana cultivation facility, a retail marijuana
products manufacturing facility or a retail marijuana testing facility.
Retail Marijuana Product: Concentrated retail marijuana and retail marijuana products that are composed of retail
marijuana and other ingredients are intended for use or consumption, including, but not limited to, edible products,
ointments and tinctures.
Retail Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facility: An entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana; manufacture,
prepare and package retail marijuana products; and sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products only to other
retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana stores and retail marijuana social clubs.
Retail Marijuana Social Club: An entity licensed to sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products to
consumers for consumption on the licensed premises.
Retail Marijuana Store: An entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana from a retail marijuana cultivation facility
and to purchase retail marijuana products from a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility and to sell retail
marijuana and retail marijuana products to consumers.
Retail Marijuana Testing Facility: Any entity licensed and certified to analyze and certify the safety and potency
of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products.
Historical Note: Section 13-700 §1(B,C,D & E) as amended March 26, 2007; Section 13-700 §38 was added February 11,
2008 (State Law Reference: MRSA 30-A, §3971); Section 13-700 §39 was added October 25, 2010; Section 13-700 §40 was
added October 28, 2013; Section 13-700 §41 was added April 24, 2017.
894
Sec. 13-710 Access Management, Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Road Design and
Construction Standards.
The following standards are applicable to all land use activity and development within the City.
1. Access Management.
A. General.
1. These standards shall apply to vehicular access into and out of a proposed development. In a residential
subdivision these accesses may be roads within the subdivision or access to individual lots. In non-residential
development the access may be a driveway into a parking lot or a road into the development. If the access to
the residential subdivision and the non-residential development is a road, the Road Design and Construction
Standards contained within this Ordinance shall be met. Where there is a conflict between standards, the
stricter or more stringent shall apply.
2. Where a lot has frontage on two or more roads, the access to the lot shall be provided to the lot across the
frontage and to the road where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and for hazards to traffic and
pedestrians.
3. Accessways to non-residential developments or to multi-family developments shall be designed to avoid
queuing of entering vehicles on any road. Left lane storage capacity shall be provided to meet anticipated
demand. A warrant analysis to determine the need for a left-turn storage lane or traffic control device shall be
done, if necessary.
B. Sight Distances. Access should be designed in profile and grading and located to provide the required sight distance
measured in each direction. Sight distances should be measured from the driver's seat of a vehicle standing on that
portion of the exit driveway with the front of the vehicle a minimum of 10 feet behind the curbline or edge of
shoulder, with the height of the eye 3.5 feet, to the top of an object 4.5 feet above the pavement. The required sight
distances are listed below for various designed speed limits. Where necessary, corner lots shall be cleared of all
growth and sight obstructions, including ground excavation, to achieve the required visibility.
Sight Distances*
Design Speed Minimum** Desired***
(MPH) (feet) (feet)
25 175 250
30 210 300
35 245 350
40 280 400
45 315 450
* Required exiting sight distance for a standard passenger vehicle to safely enter onto a 2-lane roadway from a complete stop, allowing approaching vehicles to
adjust speed to avoid a collision.
** Approximately equivalent to 1.5 times the average stopping distance on wet pavement, 3 percent downgrade, as documented by AASHTO, 1990.
*** Ten times the design speed.
C. Vertical Alignment. Access shall be flat enough to prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage. Accesses
shall slope upward or downward from the gutter line on a straight slope of 3 percent or less for at least 75 feet.
Following this landing area, the steepest grade on the access shall not exceed 8 percent.
895
D. Design Standards. New access design shall be based on the estimated volume using the access classification defined
below. Traffic volume estimates should be as defined in the Trip Generation Manual, latest edition, published by
the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
1. Low Volume Access: Less than 50 vehicle trips per day.
2. Medium Volume Access: 50 or more vehicle trips per day.
1. Low Volume Accesses.
a. Skew Angle. Low volume access shall be two-way operation and shall intersect the road at an angle as
nearly 90 degrees as development conditions permit, but in no case less than 75 degrees.
b. Curb Radius. The curb radius shall be between 10' and 25' (5-10'), with a preferred radius of 20' (10').
c. Curb-Cut Width. On a two-way access the curb-cut width shall be between 40' and 54' (22-46'), with a
preferred width of 40' (36').
d. Access Width. The width of the access shall be between 20' and 24' (12-16'), with a preferred width of 20
(16') feet.
2. Medium Volume Accesses.
a. Skew Angle. Medium volume access shall be either one-way or two-way operation and shall intersect the
road at an angle as nearly 90 degrees as development conditions permit, but in no case less than 75 degrees.
b. Curb Radius. Curb radii will vary depending if the access has one-way or two-way operation. On one-way
accesses, the curb radii shall be 30' for right turns into and out of the development, with a 5' radius on the
opposite curb. On a two-way access the curb radii shall be between 25 and 40', with a preferred radius of
30'.
c. Curb-Cut Width. On a two-way access the curb-cut width shall be between 74 and 110' with a preferred
width of 86'. On a one-way access the curb-cut width shall be between 46 and 70', with a preferred width
of 51'.
d. Access Width. On a two-way access the width shall be between 24 and 30', with a preferred width of 26',
however where truck traffic is anticipated, the width may be no more than 30'. On a one-way access the
width shall be between 16 and 20', with a preferred width of 20'.
Design Standards
Preferred Dimension in ( )
Skew Curb Curb-Cut Access
Angle Radii Width Width
Low Volume Access:
Roadway: 90 degrees 10-25' (20') 40-54' (40') 20-24' (20')
Driveway: 90 degrees 5-10' (10') 22-46' (36') 12-16' (16')
Medium Volume Access:
(roadway and driveway are same)
Two-Way Access: 90 degrees 25-40' (30') 74-110' (86') 24-26' (26')1
One-Way Access: 90 degrees 30' for right turns 46-70' (51') 16-20' (18')
5' on the opposite
1
Where truck traffic is anticipated the width should be no more than 30 feet.
E. Access Location and Spacing.
1.Minimum Corner Clearance. Corner clearance shall be measured from the point of tangency for the corner to the
point of tangency for the access. In general the maximum corner clearance should be provided as practical
896
based on site constraints. Minimum corner clearances are listed below based upon access volume and intersection
type.
Minimum Standards for Corner Clearance
Minimum Corner Clearance (feet)
Intersection Intersection
Driveway Type Signalized Unsignalized
Low Volume 150 50
Medium Volume 150 50
If based on the above criteria, full access to the site cannot be provided on either the major or minor roads, the
site shall be restricted to partial access. Alternately, construction of a shared access drive with an adjacent
parcel is recommended.
2. Access Spacing. Accesses and road intersections shall be separated from adjacent accesses and property lines
as indicated below, in order to allow roads to effectively serve their primary function of conducting through
traffic. This distance shall be measured from the access point of tangency to the access point of tangency for
spacing between accesses and from the access point of tangency to a projection of the property line at the edge
of the roadway for access spacing to the property line. Where two (2) or more two-way driveways connect a
single development to any one (1) road, a minimum clear distance of one hundred (100) feet measured along the
right-of-way line shall separate the closest edges of any two (2) such driveways. If one (1) driveway is two-way
and one (1) is a one-way driveway, the minimum distance shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
Minimum Access Spacing
Minimum Minimum Spacing to Adjacent
Spacing to Access by Access Type2 (Dsp)3
Property
Line (Dpl)1 Low Medium
Access Type (feet) (feet) (feet)
Low Volume 5 * 75
Medium Volume 10 - 100
1 Dpl measured from point of tangency of driveway to projection of property line on road-way edge.
2 For two or more driveways serving a single parcel, or from a proposed driveway from an existing driveway.
3 Dsp measured from point of tangency of driveway to point of tangency of adjacent driveway.
* Low volume driveways are not permitted in combination with other driveway types on a single lot.
3. Shared Driveways. No part of any driveway shall be located within a minimum of five (5) feet of a side
property line. However the Planning Board may permit a driveway serving two (2) or more adjacent sites to be
located on/or within five (5) feet of a side property line between the adjacent sites. Proof of easement shall be
provided by the applicant to the Planning Board.
4. Acceleration Lanes. Where a driveway serves right-turning traffic from a parking area providing two hundred
(200) or more parking spaces and the road has an ADT volume exceeding seven thousand five hundred (7,500)
vehicles, an acceleration lane shall be provided which is at least two hundred (200) feet long and at least ten
(10) feet wide measured from the road curbline. A minimum thirty-five (35) feet curb return radius shall be
used from the driveway to the acceleration lane.
897
5. Deceleration Lanes. Where the same conditions exist as in the previous paragraph and a driveway serves as an
entrance to a development, a deceleration lane shall be proved for traffic turning right into the driveway from
the road. The deceleration lane shall be at least two hundred (200) feet long and at least ten (10) feet wide
measured from the road curbline. A minimum thirty-five (35) foot curb return radius shall be used from the
deceleration lane into the driveway.
F. Number of Accesses.
The maximum number of accesses onto a single road is controlled by the available site frontage and the table above.
In addition, the following criteria shall limit the number of accesses independent of frontage length.
1. No low volume traffic generator shall have more than one two-way access onto a single roadway.
2. No medium volume traffic generator shall have more than two two-way accesses onto a single roadway.
G. Construction and Materials/Paving.
1. All accesses entering a curbed road shall be curbed with materials matching the road curbing. Sloped curbing is
required around all raised channelization islands or medians.
2. All commercial and industrial accesses regardless of access volume shall be paved with bituminous concrete
pavement within 30 feet of the roadway right-of-way. The remainder of the driveway should be constructed to
the following specifications (MDOT Standard Specifications, §703.06):
a. graded to a crown of no less than .5":12"; and
b. constructed of 12" Type D subbase gravel and 3" Type A base gravel.
3. Dust control shall be approved by the CEO prior to being applied and shall be applied at time of construction
with either calcium chloride, or an approved alternative, by being mixed with the gravel or sprayed on at
completion of the access.
4. As a means of prolonging the life of a driveway and creating a pervious surface, 4 oz. woven or unwoven
stabilization geo-textile may be used, as can properly constructed geo-web and blocks, grass paving rings, or
other similar devices approved by the CEO.
2. Off-Street Parking and Loading.
A. General.
1. A permitted use in any District shall not be extended, and no structure shall be constructed or enlarged, unless
off-street vehicle parking is provided in accordance with the standards of this subsection.
2. All parking spaces shall be a minimum of 9 feet x 19 feet.
3. Parking areas with more than two (2) parking spaces shall be arranged so that it is not necessary for vehicles to
back into the street.
4. Required off-street parking for all land uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal building or facility.
Except, required off-street parking may be provided on a lot under the same ownership as the owner requiring
the additional off-street parking. Such parking scheme shall be approved by the Board of Appeals. The
additional parking must be within 300’ measured along the roadway right-of-way. Evidence of ownership shall
be required.
5. The joint use of a parking area by two or more principal buildings or uses may be approved as an administrative
appeal by the Board of Appeals where it is clearly demonstrated that said parking area would substantially meet
the intent of the requirements by reason of variation in the probable time of maximum use by patrons or
employees on such establishments.
6. Parking spaces shall be provided as required and made available for use prior to the issuance of the Certificate
of Occupancy.
B. Additional Requirements for Non-Residential Development.
1. Access points from a public road to non-residential development shall be so located as to minimize traffic
congestion and to avoid generating traffic on local access streets of a primarily residential character.
898
2. All parking areas, driveways, and other areas serving ten (10) or more vehicles shall be paved with bituminous
concrete or an equivalent surfacing over a gravel sub-base at least 6" in thickness, and shall have appropriate
bumper or wheel guards where needed.
3. All driveway entrances and exits shall be kept free from visual obstructions higher than three (3) feet above
street level for a distance of 25 feet measured along the intersecting driveway and street lines in order to provide
visibility for entering and leaving vehicles.
4. Loading facilities shall be located entirely on the same lot as the building or use to be served so that trucks,
trailers, and containers for loading or storage shall not be located upon any municipal way.
5. The following minimum off-street loading bays or berths shall be provided and maintained in the case of new
construction, alterations, and changes of use:
a. Retail, office, consumer services, wholesale, warehouse, and industrial operations with a gross floor area of
more than 5,000 square feet require the following:
5,001 to 20,000 SF 1 bay
20,001 to 50,000 SF 2 bays
50,001 to 100,000 SF 3 bays
100,001 to 150,000 SF 4 bays
150,001 to 300,000 SF 5 bays
b. Each 150,000 square feet over 300,000 square feet requires (1) additional bay. No loading docks shall be
located to face any street frontage. Provision for handling all freight shall be on those sides of any
buildings which do not face on any street or proposed streets.
6. Off-street parking and loading spaces, where not enclosed within a building, shall be effectively screened from
view by a continuous landscaped area not less than six (6) feet in height and fifteen (15) feet in width along
exterior lot lines adjacent to residential properties, except that driveways shall be kept open to provide visibility
for entering and leaving. No off-street parking and loading shall be permitted within the front setback or any
setback adjoining a public street, except as specifically authorized in this Ordinance.
C. Parking Lot Design Criteria. (Except for single-family and two-family development)
1. Vehicular Entrance and Exit.
a. Entrances/exits should be clearly identified by use of signs, curb cuts, and landscaping.
b. Entrance/exit design shall be in conformance with the standards contained within this Ordinance.
2. Interior Vehicular Circulation.
a. Major interior travel lanes should be designed to allow continuous and uninterrupted traffic movement.
b. Access to parking stalls should not be from major interior travel lanes and shall not be immediately
accessible from any public way.
c. Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space
provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles.
d. Parking aisles should be oriented perpendicular to stores or businesses for easy pedestrian access and
visibility.
e. Enclosures, such as guardrails, curbs, fences, walls, and landscaping, should be used to identify circulation
patterns of parking areas and restrict driving movements diagonally across parking aisles, but not to reduce
visibility of oncoming pedestrians and vehicles.
f. Entrance/exits shall be designed to allow adequate stacking of vehicles without blocking interior vehicle
circulation lanes.
g. All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line, except for
the additional requirements in buffer yards.
h. The width of all aisles and parking angles providing direct access to individual parking stalls shall be in
accordance with the requirements below. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles serving singlerow
parking spaces placed at an angle other than ninety (90) degrees.
899
Parking Angle and Aisle Width
Parking Angle (degrees) Aisle Width (feet)
0 (parallel parking) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 (perpendicular parking) 25
i. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline setback requirements for structures for the District in which such
areas are located. The setback requirement for parking areas serving public boat launching facilities, in
Districts other than the General Business and Industrial Districts, may be reduced to no less than fifty (50)
feet from the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland if the Planning Board finds that no other
reasonable alternative exists.
j. Parking areas in the Shoreland Areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed
to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, and where feasible, to retain all
runoff on-site.
k. In paved parking areas painted stripes shall be used to delineate parking stalls. Stripes should be a
minimum of 4" in width. Where double lines are used, they should be separated a minimum of 12" on
center.
l. In aisles utilizing diagonal parking, arrows should be painted on the pavement to indicate traffic flow.
m. Bumpers and/or wheel stops shall be provided where overhang of parked cars might restrict traffic flow on
adjacent through roads, restrict pedestrian movement on adjacent walkways, or damage landscape
materials.
900
D. Required Parking Spaces.
1. Parking spaces shall be provided to conform with the number required in the following schedule:
Activity Minimum Required Parking
Residential Dwelling 1 space per dwelling unit.
Elderly Housing 1 space per dwelling unit.
Tourist home, Boarding House, Lodging 1 space per room/unit rental and for each employee on
House, Motel, Hotel, Inn on the largest shift.
Church 1 space per three seats based upon max. seating capacity.
Schools
Primary 1.5 spaces per classroom.
Secondary 8 spaces per classroom.
Post-Secondary 1 space for each student and 1 space for each faculty and
staff member.
Child Care Facility 1 space for every 4 children facility is licensed to care for.
Private Clubs or Lodges 1 space per every seventy-five (75) square feet of floor
space.
Theatre, Auditorium, Public Assembly Areas 1 space per three seats based upon max. seating capacity.
Funeral Homes 1 space for every 100 square feet of floor space.
Medical Care Facilities 1 space for every three (3) beds and every two (2)
employees on the maximum working shift.
Offices, Banks 1 space for every 150 square feet of floor space.
Medical Offices (MD's, OD's) 10 spaces for each doctor, dentist, or other medical
practitioner.
Veterinarian Clinic, Kennel 5 spaces/veterinarian.
Retail and Service Businesses 1 space for every 150 sq. ft. of floor space.
Barber/Beauty Shop 4 spaces/chair.
Restaurant 1 space per three seats based upon max. seating capacity.
Industrial Businesses 1 space/employee on the maximum working shift.
Warehouse, Wholesale 1 space/500 sq. ft. floor area business.
Flea Market 3 spaces/table.
Mixed Use Total of individual uses.
Automobile Repair Garage and
Repair Gasoline Filling Stations 5 spaces for each bay or area used for work.
Library, Museum, Art Gallery 1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of floor space.
Commercial Recreation Facility,
Fitness Area 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area.
Motor Vehicle Sales 1 space reserved for customers per thirty vehicles
displayed on the lot.
Notes
1. Where the calculation of the aforementioned parking spaces results in a fractional part of a complete parking space, the parking spaces required shall be
construed to be the next highest number.
2. The above are minimum standards, and additional parking spaces shall be required if these prove to be inadequate.
3. Where floor space is to be used in calculating the number of required parking stalls, gross floor area shall be used unless otherwise noted.
901
3. Road Design and Construction Standards.
The following Road Design and Construction Standards shall apply to all new road construction, shoulders, curbs,
drainage systems, culverts, and other appurtenances associated with roads within the City, unless the applicant can
provide clear and convincing evidence that an alternate design or construction standard will meet good engineering
practice.
A. General Requirements.
1. The Planning Board shall not approve any development proposal unless proposed roads are designed in
accordance with the specifications contained herein. Approval of the Final Plan by the Planning Board shall not
be deemed to constitute or be evidence of acceptance by the City of Caribou of any road or easement.
2. Applicants shall submit to the Planning Board, as part of the Final Plan, detailed construction drawings showing
a plan view, profile, and typical cross-section of the proposed roads and existing roads within 300 feet of any
proposed intersections. The plan view shall be at a scale of one inch equals no more than fifty feet (1"=50').
The vertical scale of the profile shall be one inch equals no more than five feet (1"=5'). The plans shall include
the following information:
a. Date, scale, and North point, indicating, magnetic or true.
b. Intersections of the proposed road with existing roads.
c. Roadway and right-of-way limits including edge of pavement, edge of shoulder, sidewalks, and curbs.
d. Kind, size, location, material, profile and cross-section of all existing and proposed drainage structures and
their location with respect to the existing natural waterways and proposed drainage ways.
e. Complete curve data shall be indicated for all horizontal and vertical curves.
f. Turning radii at all intersections.
g. Centerline gradients.
h. Size, type, and locations of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities, to include but not
be limited to electricity, telephone, lighting, and cable television.
3. Upon receipt of plans for a proposed public road the Planning Board shall forward one copy to the Chair of the
City Council and the Highway Department Foreman for review and comment. Plans for roads which are not
proposed to be accepted by the City shall be sent to the Highway Department Foreman for review and
comment.
4. Where the applicant proposes improvements within existing public roads, the proposed design and construction
details shall be approved in writing by the Highway Department Foreman and/or the Maine Department of
Transportation, as appropriate.
5. Where the development roads are to remain private roads, the following words shall appear on the Final Plan.
“All roads in this development shall remain private roads to be maintained by the developer or the lot owners
and shall not be accepted or maintained by the City of Caribou, until they meet the Caribou Road Design and
Construction Standards.”
B. Road Design Standards.
1. Where topographic and other site conditions allow, provision shall be made for road connections to adjoining
lots of similar existing or potential use within areas of the City designated as growth areas in the comprehensive
plan; or in non-residential development when such access shall:
a. Facilitate fire protection services as approved by the Fire Chief; or
b. Enable the public to travel between two existing or potential uses, generally open to the public, without
need to travel upon a public road.
2. Where a development borders an existing narrow road (not meeting the width requirements of the standards for
roads), or when the development indicates plans for realignment or widening of a road that would require use of
some of the land in the development, the Plan shall indicate reserved areas for widening or realigning the road
marked “Reserved for Road Realignment (Widening) Purposes.” When such widening or realignment is
included in the City's capital investment plan, the reserve area shall not be included in any lot, but shall be
reserved to be deeded to the City or state.
902
3. Roads which join and are in alignment with roads of abutting or neighboring properties shall bear the same
name. Names of new roads shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of existing roads
within the City, and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board. No road name shall be the common
given name of a person. The developer shall reimburse the City for the costs of installing road name, traffic
safety, and control signs.
4. Proposed roads shall conform, as far as practicable, to such master or study plan as may have been adopted, in
whole or in part, by the Planning Board prior to the submission of a Preliminary Plan.
5. All roads in the development shall be so designed that, in the opinion of the Planning Board, they will provide
safe vehicular travel while discouraging movement of through traffic. Where a development abuts or contains
an existing or arterial road, the Planning Board may require marginal access roads, reverse frontage with screen
planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service roads, or
such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic.
6. Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, the Planning Board may require a road
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of
the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential Districts. Such distances shall also be determined with
due regard for approach grades and future grade separations.
7. Reserve strips controlling access to roads shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed with
the City.
8. The centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of the right-of-way.
9. In addition to the design and construction standards herein, dead-end roads shall not be longer than 1000' and
shall be constructed to provide a cul-de-sac turn-around with the following requirements for radii:
Property line: 60 feet (125')
Outer edge of pavement: 50 feet (100')
Inner edge of pavement: 30 feet (30')
Where the cul-de-sac is in a wooded area prior to development, a stand of trees shall be maintained within the
center of the cul-de-sac. The Planning Board may require the reservation of a twenty (20) foot easement in line
with the road to provide continuation of pedestrian traffic or utilities to the next road. The Planning Board may
also require the reservation of a fifty (50) foot easement in line with the road to provide continuation of the road
where future development is possible.
1. The following road design and construction standards shall apply according to road classification:
Historical Note: Section 13-710, §2D (1) as amended March 26, 2007.
903
Caribou Road Design and Construction Standards.
Collector Residential Private
Local
a. Minimum width of ROW 50' 50' 50'
b. Minimum paved width 24' 20' 18'
c. Minimum shoulder width (each side) 4' 4' 3'
d. Curbing (if required) vertical vertical none e.
Curb reveal 7" 7" -
f. Minimum roadway grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
g. Maximum roadway grade 6.0% 8.0% 8.0%
h. Maximum shoulder grade - 5.0% -
i. Drainage ditch angle ratio: (maximum)
Shoulder to ditch bottom 3:1 3:1 3:1
Ditch bottom to row 2:1 2:1 2:1
j. Minimum distance ditch bottom to subbase bottom 12" 12" 12"
k. Maximum grade intersections 3% within 75 feet of the intersection
l. Minimum angle intersections (degrees) 90 75 75
m. Minimum center line radii on curves 280' 280' 175'
n. Minimum tangent length between reverse curves 200' 100' 100'
o. Minimum sidewalk; width 5' 5' -
Bituminous surface 2" 2" 2"
Crushed base course 2" 2" 2"
Gravel subbase course 12" 12" 12"
Portland cement concrete
Reinforced with 6" square #10-wire mesh 4" 4" 4"
Sand base if cement used 6" 6" 6"
(See text for other types of sidewalks)
p. Minimum road base: (after compaction)
Aggregate subbase (max. size stone 4") 24" 24" 24"
Crushed aggregate base (max. size stone 2") 6" 6" 6"
q. Hot bituminous pavement:
Surface course 1.25" 1.25" 1.25"
Base course 1.75" 1.75" 1.75"
r. Minimum road crown 0.25":1' 0.25":1' 0.50":1'
s. Property line radii (intersections) 10' 10' 10'
t. Curb radii intersections 30' 20' -
u. Minimum distances between intersections:
Same side 400' 300' 300'
Opposite sides 250' 200' 200'
C. Road Construction Standards.
1. During construction, the development shall be maintained and left each day in a safe and sanitary manner. The
roads shall be regularly sprayed to control dust from construction activity. Following road construction, the
developer or contractor shall conduct a thorough clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire road rightof-
way. If on-site disposal of the stumps and debris is proposed, the site shall be indicated on the Plan, and be
suitably covered with fill and topsoil, limed, fertilized, and seeded.
904
2. Curbs shall be installed within all developments at the discretion of the Planning Board. Granite curbing shall
be installed on a thoroughly compacted gravel base of six (6) inches minimum thickness. Bituminous curbing
shall be installed on the base course of the pavement. The specified traveled way width above shall be
measured between the curbs.
3. Grades of all roads shall conform in general to the terrain, so that cut and fill are minimized while maintaining
the grade standards.
4. Cross (four-cornered "+") road intersections shall be avoided insofar as possible or at other important traffic
intersections. A minimum distance of 125' feet shall be maintained between centerlines of minor roads and 200'
feet between collector roads or a collector and minor road.
5. The minimum thickness of material shall meet the specifications in the table below, after compaction.
Road Materials Collector Residential Private
Aggregate Sub-base Course
(max. sized stone 4")
Without base gravel 24" 24" 15"
With base gravel 20" 18" 12"
Crushed Aggregate Base Course 6" 6" 6"
(max. sized stone 2")
Hot Bituminous Pavement
Total Thickness 3.00" 3.00" N/A
Surface Course 1.25" 1.25" N/A
Base Course 1.75" 1.75" N/A
Surface Gravel N/A N/A 3"
6. Construction Preparation.
a. Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the center line and side lines of the new road shall be
staked or flagged at fifty (50) foot intervals.
b. Before grading is started, the entire area within the right-of-way necessary for traveled way, shoulders,
sidewalks, drainage ways, and utilities shall be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, and other objectionable
material. All shallow ledge, large boulders, and tree stumps shall be removed from the cleared area.
c. All organic materials or other deleterious material shall be removed to a depth of two (2) feet below the
subgrade of the roadway. Rocks and boulders shall also be removed to a depth of two (2) feet below the
subgrade of the roadway. On soils which have been identified as not suitable for roadways, either the
subsoil shall be removed from the road site to a depth of two (2) feet below the subgrade and replaced with
material meeting the specifications for gravel aggregate sub-base below, or a MDOT approved stabilization
geotextile may be used.
d. Except in a ledge cut, side slopes shall be no steeper than a slope of three (3) feet horizontal to one foot
vertical, and shall be graded, loamed, limed, fertilized, and seeded according the specifications of the
erosion and sedimentation control plan. Where a cut results in exposed ledge a side slope no steeper than
four (4) feet vertical to one foot horizontal is permitted.
e. All underground utilities shall be installed prior to paving to avoid cuts in the pavement.
7. Bases and Pavement.
a. Bases/Subbase.
1. The aggregate subbase course shall be sand or gravel of hard durable particles free from vegetative
matter, lumps, or balls of clay and other deleterious substances. The gradation of the part that passes a
two (2) inch square mesh sieve shall meet the following grading requirements:
905
Percentage by Weight Passing
Sieve Designation Square Mesh Sieves
1/4 inch 25-70%
No. 40 0-30%
No. 200 0-7%
Aggregate for the subbase shall contain no particles of rock exceeding four (4) inches in any
dimension.
2. If the aggregate subbase course is found to be not fine-gradeable because of larger stones, then a
minimum crushed aggregate base course of a six (6) inches (max. sized stone 2") shall be placed on top
of the subbase course. The aggregate base course shall be screened or crushed gravel of hard durable
particles free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances. The
gradation of the part that passes a two (2) inch square mesh sieve shall meet the following grading
requirements:
Percentage by Weight Passing
Sieve Designation Square Mesh Sieves
1/2 inch 45-70%
1/4 inch 30-55%
No. 40 0-20%
No. 200 0-5%
Aggregate for the base shall contain no particles of rock exceeding two (2) inches in any dimension.
b. Pavement Joints.
Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut along a smooth line and
form a neat, even, vertical joint.
c. Pavements.
1. Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement shall be the MDOT specifications for plant mix
grade B with an aggregate size no more than 1 inch maximum and a liquid asphalt content between 4.8
percent and 6.0 percent by weight depending on aggregate characteristics. The pavement may be
placed between April 15 and November 15, provided the air temperature in the shade at the paving
location is 35°F or higher and the surface to paved is not frozen or unreasonably wet.
2. Minimum standards for the surface layer of pavement shall be the MDOT specifications for plant mix
grade C or D with an aggregate size no more than 3/4 inch maximum and a liquid asphalt content
between 5.8 percent and 7.0 percent by weight depending on aggregate characteristics. The pavement
may be placed between April 15 and October 15, provided the air temperature in the shade at the
paving location is 50°F or higher.
906
d. Surface Gravel.
Private rights-of-ways need not be paved and may have a gravel surface. Surface gravel shall be placed on
top of the aggregate subbase, shall have no stones larger than two (2) inches in size, and meet the following
gradation:
Percentage by Weight Passing
Sieve Designation Square Mesh Sieves
2 inch 95-100%
1/2 inch 30-65%
No. 200 7-12%
8. Guard Rails.
When and where required by either the Planning Board or the CEO, guard rails should be designed and
constructed in accordance within Section 606-Guard Rails of the Maine Department of Transportation's,
"Standard Specifications, Highways and Bridges", latest edition.
Sec. 13-720 Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards.
1. Applicability.
This Section shall apply to the Districts where automobile graveyards and junkyards are a permitted use. Automobile
graveyards and junkyards area prohibited in the remaining Districts.
2. Administration.
A. This Section shall be administered by the Planning Board and enforced by the CEO. No automobile graveyard or
junkyard permit shall be issued unless the provisions of this Ordinance are complied with. The Planning Board may
attach reasonable conditions to any permit issued to insure compliance with the performance standards and other
requirements of this Ordinance.
B. Permits shall be renewed annually to remain valid and expire on December 31st of each year. Once the site design
is approved it does not have to be resubmitted unless there are to be changes to the site. The City Council shall
annually inspect, or cause to be inspected, the site to ensure that the provisions of this Ordinance and state law are
complied with.
C. An annual fee established by the City of $50 shall be submitted with the permit application, plus the cost of posting
and publishing the notice of public hearing required below.
D. The City may require that an escrow account of $500 be established by the applicant in the name of the "City of
Caribou" for the purposes of obtaining independent verification of application data, if necessary. If the balance in
the account shall be drawn down by 75 percent, the City shall notify the applicant and require that the account
balance be reestablished by the applicant to the escrow account's indicated amount. The City shall continue to
notify the applicant and require additional payments into the account, as necessary. Any balance remaining in the
account after final determination has been made, shall be returned to the applicant.
E. Upon receipt of a final application, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Title 30-A,
MRSA, §3754.
907
3. Requirements for Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards.
A. No person may establish, operate, or maintain an automobile graveyard or junkyard without first obtaining a nontransferable
permit from the Planning Board. At the time of filing an application for a permit under this Ordinance,
the applicant shall present either a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or a letter
from the DEP stating that a permit is not required.
B. Any application for an automobile graveyard or junkyard permit shall contain the following information:
1. The applicant shall submit a site design drawn to a scale not to exceed 1"=100', on which is shown:
a. The boundary lines of the property;
b. The exact location of any existing and proposed junkyard or automobile graveyard and their distances to
nearby roads and property lines;
c. The soils as reflected from a high intensity soils survey;
d. The location of on-site septic system(s) and drinking water supplies;
e. Topographic contours at intervals of 10';
f. The location of any sand and gravel aquifer or aquifer recharge area, as mapped by the Maine Geological
Survey, or a licensed geologist;
g. The location of any residences, schools, churches, cemeteries, public parks, beaches, and playgrounds
within 500 feet of the area where cars or junk will be placed;
h. The location of any waterbodies or inland wetlands areas on the property and/or within 200 feet of the
property lines;
i. The boundaries of any 100-year floodplain; and
j. The location of all roads within 1000' of the site.
2. The names and addresses of all abutting or impacted property owners, as determined by the Planning Board.
3. The name(s) and address(es) of the person(s) or entity(ies) who will operate the site.
4. The height and material used in any existing and proposed screening.
4. Performance Standards for all Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards.
The following performance standards shall be required of all automobile graveyards and junkyards:
A. The junkyard or automobile graveyard must be screened from ordinary view from any road, as required by statute.
The site of the automobile graveyard or junkyard shall have an effective visual screen no less than six (6) feet in
height, and be built in accordance to the Maine Department of Transportation's rules issued pursuant to Title 30-A,
MRSA, §3759. A plan for visual screening shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval in conjunction
with the application for a permit.
B. No vehicle or junk shall be stored within 300 feet of any waterbody or inland wetland.
C. No vehicle or junk shall be stored within 500 feet of any (residences), private well, school, church, cemetery, public
playground, public beach, or public park.
D. No vehicles or junk shall be stored over a sand and gravel aquifer or aquifer recharge area as mapped by the Maine
Geological Survey or by a licensed geologist.
E. No vehicles or junk shall be stored within the 100-year flood plain.
F. Upon receiving a motor vehicle, the battery shall be removed, and the engine lubricant, transmission fluid, brake
fluid, and engine coolant shall be drained into watertight, covered containers and shall be recycled or disposed of
according to all applicable Federal and State laws, rules, and regulations regarding disposal of waste oil and
hazardous materials. No discharge of any fluids from any motor vehicle or junk shall be permitted into or onto the
ground.
G. There will be no disposal or release to the environment of any solid, special, or hazardous wastes;
H. There will be no open burning of any substances;
I. All vehicles or junk shall be located no closer than 100 feet from all property lines.
J. To reduce noise, all dismantling, crushing, and other activities shall be done between 7 AM and 10 PM, Mondays
through Saturdays.
K. All federal and state hazardous waste laws and regulations shall be complied with.
L. In all instances the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant for the permit.
908
M. Any automobile graveyard or junkyard in existence on the date of adoption this Ordinance, may remain in operation
on the current parcel of land, providing it meets all pertinent statutory and Ordinance requirements.
N. Any automobile graveyard or junkyard shall not expand unless all statutory and requirements of this Ordinance
are met.
Sec. 13-730 Mineral Exploration and Extraction.
The following standards are applicable to all mineral exploration and extraction activity within the City.
1. Mineral Exploration.
Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test
boring, or other methods which create minimal disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground surface.
A permit from the CEO shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All excavations,
including test pits and holes shall be immediately capped, filled, or secured by other equally effective measures, so as to
restore disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety.
2. Mineral Extraction.
A. Any extraction operation that requires a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (MDEP)
under the Site Location of Development Act shall obtain written approval from the MDEP and the Planning Board.
B. Any mineral extraction activity of less than five (5) acres and/or any mineral extraction activity which will remove
more than 1000 cubic yards of product within 12 successive months shall require a permit from the Planning Board.
3. Submission Requirements.
The following submission requirements shall be reflected on a plan to be included with the application and apply to any
mineral extraction activity of less than five (5) acres and/or any mineral extraction activity which will remove more than
1000 cubic yards of product within 12 successive months.
A. Existing and proposed limits of the excavation, clearly delineated.
B. Location, function, and ground areas of all structures, facilities, parking lots, and roads.
C. Entrance and exit locations.
D. Gates or other means of access control.
E. Pre- and post-development topography shall use an interval of two (2) foot contours for pits of less than five (5)
acres.
F. Location of topsoil stockpile area(s).
G. Areas where natural vegetation will be left and where plantings will be made to screen the extraction operation from
view.
H. Slopes and vegetation for protecting adjacent structures.
I. Location of any test pits or borings and observation wells documenting the seasonal high water table.
J. Proposed disposal method of stumps, grubbings, and other debris.
K. Plan(s) and schedule for reclamation. A reclamation plan shall be filed with and approved by the Planning Board
before a permit is granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements
of subsection E, Reclamation, below.
L. For pits of five (5) acres or more, at least one cross-section along the axis of the pit and another cross-section at a
right angle to it. The cross-section diagrams should show the existing grade, the proposed final grade including the
maximum depth of elevation, depth to the ground water, and the stratigraphy of the surficial deposits at the site.
M. Location of any significant wildlife habitats as designated by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
and areas listed under the Maine Department of Economic and Community Development's, Natural Areas Program.
4. Review Criteria and Standards.
A. The area of a working pit shall not exceed four (4) acres.
B. Existing vegetation within a buffer strip shall not be removed. If vegetation within the buffer strip has been
removed or disturbed by activities related to the operation of the extraction operation, that vegetation must be
reestablished as soon as practicable. A buffer strip of not less than seventy-five (75) feet shall be maintained
between the location of any extraction of materials and all property lines.
909
C. A 300 foot separation shall be maintained between any area to store petroleum products and any private drinking
water wells.
D. A 200 foot separation shall be maintained between any excavation and any private drinking water supply in
existence prior to that excavation.
E. A 1000 foot separation shall be maintained between any excavation and any public drinking water supply.
F. There shall be no storage or dumping on the pit of any substances or materials that could produce harmful leachate.
G. No oiling of access and haul roads is permitted.
H. Excavation shall not occur within five (5) feet of the seasonally high water table.
I. Excavation activities shall not occur below road level within 25 feet of a road right-of-way and shall maintain a 2.5
percent slope away from the right-of-way, except that excavation activities may occur below road level within 25
feet of a private road right-of-way with the written permission of the owner.
J. No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and run-off control features, shall be permitted within one
hundred (100) feet of the normal high water line of a Great Pond, and within seventy-five (75) feet of the normal
high water line of any other waterbody, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland.
K. Erosion and sedimentation control for access roads shall be conducted according to best management practices
adopted by the SCS.
L. There may not be more than two (2) acres of stockpiles within the working pit at any time.
M. Noise levels shall not exceed applicable noise limits as adopted by the MDEP.
N. The hours of operation at the site shall conform to the time between sunrise and sunset at Caribou, ME.
O. In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose other conditions as are necessary to
minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations on surrounding uses and resources.
5. Reclamation.
Within twelve (12) months of the completion of extraction operations, or the expiration of a CEO permit, or which
operations shall be deemed complete when less than one thousand (1000) cubic yards of materials are removed in any
consecutive twelve (12) month period, the site shall be reclaimed in accordance with a plan approved by the CEO. The
affected land must be restored to a condition that is similar to or compatible with the conditions that existed before
excavation. Such plan shall include:
A. A vegetative cover by seeding shall be established within one year of the completion of excavation. Vegetative
cover shall be declared acceptable after one year if: (1) the planting of trees and shrubs results in a permanent stand
or stand capable of regeneration and succession, sufficient to ensure a 75 percent survival rate; and (2) the planting
of all materials results in permanent 90 percent ground coverage.
B. All structures and facilities shall be removed and, once no longer in productive use, all access roads, haul roads, and
other support roads shall be reclaimed.
C. The final graded slope shall be two to one (2.5:1) slope or flatter.
D. Reclamation of the pit shall not be made with any substance or material that could either have a harmful leachate or
create an impermeable base.
E. All affected lands shall be reclaimed within one (1) year.
Sec. 13-740 Mobile Homes.
1. General Requirements.
A. All mobile home units to be relocated to within the City from outside of the City shall be placed on a permanent
foundation, have residential siding, and a pitched roof covered with shingles or other materials approved by the
CEO. These design requirements shall not be applied to prevent relocation of units within the City constructed prior
to June 15, 1976 that were legally sited in the City.
B. It shall be unlawful to locate any mobile home for any residential purpose anywhere in the City, except in an
authorized mobile home park, unless a mobile home permit has been issued in conformity with this Ordinance. Any
application for a mobile home permit shall be in writing and in duplicate, signed by the applicant. Such applications
shall include such information as lawfully may be required by the CEO and shall include a site plan of suitable scale
showing:
1. The shape, size, and location of the lot on which the mobile home is to be placed.
2. The make, model, year, serial number, length and width, number of bedrooms, location of kitchen and cost of
mobile home.
910
3. Any building already on the lot.
4. Set back lines of buildings on adjoining lots; and
5. Any other information needed by the Building Inspector, CEO, Planning Board, or Board of Appeals to
determine whether the provisions of this Section are being observed.
C. A mobile home may be permitted on the site of a construction project for not more than two (2) consecutive sixmonths
periods provided that a special permit is issued by the Planning Board for each six month period. Such
permit may only be issued if the Board is satisfied that:
1. The mobile home is a necessary convenience for the construction project and is clearly subordinate to such
project; and
2. No health hazards or problems of sanitation will be caused by improper disposal of sewage from the mobile
home.
D. The CEO may issue a special permit for the use of a mobile home for a temporary office for up to three (3) months
in Districts where offices are permitted or at construction sites anywhere in the City.
F. A recreational vehicle or camper shall in no case be used as a mobile home and any recreational vehicle in use as a
temporary dwelling shall be stationed only in an area where permitted. An RV or travel trailer where not in use may
be stored on the premises of the owner.
3. Mobile Homes Built Before June 15, 1976, or Not Built According to the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, US Code, Title 42, Chapter 70.
The following standards shall apply to all mobile homes built before June 15, 1976, or not built according to the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, US Code, Title 42, Chapter 70, to be
located on an individual lot or in a mobile home park in the City.
A. Exit Facilities - Exterior Door.
1. Required egress doors shall not be located where a lockable interior door must be used in order to exit.
2. Mobile homes shall have a minimum of two (2) exterior doors not less than 12' from each other as measured in
any straight line direction regardless of the length of the travel between doors. One of the required doors must
be accessible from the doorway of each bedroom without traveling more than 35'.
3. All exterior swinging doors shall provide a minimum of 32" wide by 74" high clear opening. All exterior
sliding glass doors shall provide a minimum of 32" wide by 72" high clear opening. Locks shall not require the
use of a key from the inside.
B. Exit Facilities - Egress Windows and Devices.
Mobile homes shall have the following emergency egress facilities:
1. Every room designed expressly for sleeping purposes, unless it has an exit door, shall have at least one outside
window or approved exit device. If an exit window or device is installed, it shall be listed in accordance with
procedures and requirements of NFPA Life Safety Code 101, fourth edition.
2. The bottom of the window opening shall not be more than 44" above the floor.
3. Locks, latches, operating handles, tabs, and any other window, screen or storm window devices, which need to
be operated in order to permit exiting, shall not be located in excess of 54" from the finished floor.
C. Interior Doors.
Each interior door, when provided with a privacy lock, shall have a privacy lock that has an emergency release on
the outside to permit entry when the lock has been locked by a locking knob, lever, button or other locking devices
on the inside.
911
D. Fire Detection Equipment.
1. At least one operating smoke detector shall be installed in the home in the following locations:
a. A smoke detector shall be installed on any wall in the hallway or space communicating with each bedroom
area between the living area and the first bedroom door, unless a door separates the living area from that
bedroom area, in which case the detector shall be installed on the living area side and bedroom side.
Homes having bedroom areas separated by any one or combination of communication areas such as
kitchen, dining room, living room, or family room (but not a bathroom or utility room) shall have at least
one detector protecting each bedroom area.
b. When located in hallways, the detector shall be between the return air intake and the living area.
c. The smoke detector shall not be placed in a location which impairs its effectiveness.
d. Smoke detectors shall be labeled as conforming with the requirements of Underwriters Laboratory
Standards No. 217, Third Edition, 1985.
e. Each smoke detector shall be installed in accordance with its listing. The top of the detector shall be
located on a wall 6" to 12" below the ceiling. However, when a detector is mounted on an interior wall
below a sloping ceiling, it shall be located 6" to 12" below the intersection on the connecting exterior wall
and the sloping ceiling (cathedral ceilings).
E. Flame Spread. (from the NFPA Life Safety Code 101, fourth edition)
1. Ceiling interior finish shall not have a flame spread rating exceeding 75.
2. Walls or ceilings adjacent to or enclosing a furnace or water heater shall have an interior finish with a flame
spread rating not to exceed 25. Sealants and other trim material 2" or less in width used to finish adjacent
surfaces within this space are exempt if supported by framing members or by materials having a flame spread
rating not exceeding 25.
3. Exposed interior finishes adjacent to the cooking range shall have a flame spread rating not exceeding 50.
4. Kitchen cabinet doors, countertops, back splashes, exposed bottoms, and end panels shall have a flame spread
rating not exceeding 200.
5. Finish surfaces of plastic bathtubs, shower units, and tub or shower doors shall not exceed a flame spread rating
of 200.
6. No burner of a surface cooking unit shall be closer than 12" horizontal to a window or an exterior door.
F. Kitchen Cabinet Protectors.
1. The bottom and sides of combustible kitchen cabinets over cooking ranges, to a horizontal distance of 6" from
the outside edge of the cooking range, shall be protected with at least 5/16th" thick gypsum board or equivalent
limited combustible material. One-inch nominal framing members and trim are exempted from this
requirement. The cabinet area over the cooking range or cook tops shall be protected by a metal hood with not
less than a 3"
eyebrow projecting horizontally from the cabinet face. The 5/16th" thick gypsum board or equivalent material
which is above the top of the hood may be supported by the hood. A 3/8th" enclosed air space shall be provided
between the bottom surface of the cabinet and the gypsum board or equivalent material. The hood shall be at
least as wide as the cooking range.
2. The metal hood shall not be required if there is an oven installed between the cabinet and the range.
3. Ranges shall have a vertical clearance above the cooking top of not less than 24" to the bottom of combustible
cabinets.
G. Carpeting.
Carpeting shall not be used in a space or compartment designed to contain only a furnace and/or water heater.
Carpeting may be installed in other areas where a furnace or water heater is installed, provided that it is not located
under the furnace or water heater.
H. Roof Loads.
All homes with roofs added after construction shall require a Maine Registered Professional Engineer to inspect the
roof to determine that the roof can withhold seventy (70) pounds per square foot.
912
I. Heating and Fuel Burning System.
A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Oil and Solid Fuel Examining Board shall inspect
and certify that the heating and fuel system meets the requirements of NFPA-31 Installation of Oil Burning
Equipment as adopted by the Board, or other applicable standards.
J. Electrical System.
A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Electricians Examining Board shall inspect and
certify that the electrical system is safe and meets the requirements of the National Electrical Code in affect at the
time the home was constructed.
Sec. 13-745 Confined Feeding Operations.
1. All confined feeding operations must be constructed and operated in accordance with all applicable rules, laws
and regulations including, but not limited to, rules adopted by the Maine Department of Agriculture, Food and
Rural Resources and any other governmental entity with jurisdiction over such operations.
2. Confined feeding operations which cause unreasonable noise, odor and/or pollution of ground water or any
waterbody shall not be permitted.
3. Confined feeding operations that utilize a lagoon or a waste storage pond, or both, shall meet the following
setback requirements:
A. For a confined feeding operation with a capacity of up to 100 animal units at any one time, the minimum
separation distance required between a lagoon and a waste storage pond and the boundary of any real
property owned by another person is 1 mile. The minimum separation distance required between an
agricultural facility and the boundary of any real property owned by another person is 1 mile.
B. The minimum separation distance between a lagoon and a waste storage pond and any public or private
drinking water well is 1 mile.
C. The minimum separation distance required between a lagoon and a waste storage pond and any water body
is ½ mile. The minimum separation distance required between an agricultural facility and any water body
is ½ mile.
D. The minimum separation distance required between a ditch or swale that drains directly into any water
body and any confined feeding operation is ½ mile.
4. Confined feeding operations which exceed 100 animal units of normal production animal live weight at any one
time are strictly prohibited.
5. A new confined feeding operation or expansion of an established confined feeding operation may not be located
in a floodplain as defined by the Flood Insurance rate maps for the City of Caribou.
6. If a lagoon or a waste storage pond, or both, breaches or fails in any way, the owner or operator of the confined
feeding operation immediately shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer.
7. A person may not cause, allow or permit emission into the ambient air any substance or combination of
substances in quantities that create an undesirable level of odor unless preventive measures are taken to abate or
control the emission to the satisfaction of the Council. When an odor problem comes to the attention of the
Council through field surveillance or specific complaints, the Council shall determine if the odor is at an
undesirable level by considering the character and degree of injury to or interference with:
1. The health or welfare of the people;
2. Plant, animal or marine life;
3. Property; real and otherwise; and
4. Enjoyment of life or use of affected property.
913
8. The City Council may require the following abatement or control practices after review and recommendation by
the Caribou Planning Board.
1. Removal or disposal of odorus materials;
2. Methods of handling and storing odorus materials in order to minimize emissions;
3. Prescribed standards in the maintenance of premises to reduce odorus emissions; and
4. Use of the best available control technology to reduce odorus emissions.
9. After determining that an undesirable level of odor exists, the Council shall require remediation of the
undesirable level of odor, which may require the removal of all animals and odorus materials within 30 days of
receipt of notice or the revocation of a permit issued hereunder.
10-A. Permits for confined feeding operations are for a term of one year only and must be renewed annually. A
renewal permit shall not be issued unless the confined feeding operation meets all of the standards in effect at
the time of renewal. If the confined feeding operation is not in operation or production for 2 or more
consecutive years, a new permit must be obtained.
10-B. POLLUTION INSURANCE
An applicant must show proof of pollution liability insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 to
protect neighboring properties in the event of ground water and/or surface water contamination caused by the
confined feeding operation. A certificate of insurance shall be provided with a one year prepaid insurance
policy. If the owner or operator of the confined feeding operation fails to maintain this insurance coverage, all
confined feeding operations shall cease until satisfactory evidence of insurance is provided.
11. Nothing in this section prohibits an individual or group of persons from bringing a complaint against a confined
feeding operation.
12. CONFINED FEEDING OPERATION TERMS
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms have these definitions:
1. CONFINED FEEDING OPERATION
A use whereby animals are confined and fed or maintained in an agricultural facitily for a total of 120 days
or more in a 12 month period. Structures used for the storage of animal waste from animals in their use are
also part of the confined feeding operation. Two or more confined feeding operations under common
ownership or management are considered to be a single confined feeding operation if they are adjacent or
utilize a common system for animal waste storage or reside on contiguous land under same ownership.
2. AGRICULTURAL FACILITY
A lot, building or stucture that is used for the commercial production of animals in a confined feeding
operation, including any land used for the spreading of animal waste.
3. LAGOON
An impoundment used in conjunction with a confined feeding operation, the primary function of which is
to store or stabilize, or both, organic wastes, wastewater and contaminated runoff shall be covered per
requirement of the site design review ordinance of the City of Caribou.
4. WASTE STORAGE POND
A structure used for impounding or storing manure, wastewater and contaminated runoff as a component of
an agricultural waste management system. Waste is stored for a specified period of time, one year or less,
and then the pond is emptied and shall be covered per requirement of the site design review ordinance of
the City of Caribou.
5. ANIMAL UNIT
Means 1,000 pounds of animal body weight.
914
Sec. 13-750 Performance Guarantees.
1. Types of Guarantees.
With submittal of the application for Final Plan approval and required by the CEO or Planning Board, the applicant shall
provide one of the following performance guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs of all
required improvements, taking into account the time-span of the construction schedule and the inflation rate for
construction costs. The conditions and the amount of the performance guarantee shall be established by the CEO after
reviewing the cost estimates for improvements submitted with the Final Plan by the applicant and the review of those
estimates for accuracy by the appropriate City Officials, departments, utilities, and/or agencies.
A. Escrow Account. A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by either a certified
check made out to the "City of Caribou", the direct deposit into a savings account, or the purchase of a certificate of
deposit. For any account opened by the applicant, the City of Caribou shall be named as owner or co-owner, and the
consent of the City shall be required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow account shall be returned
to the applicant unless the City has found it necessary to draw on the account, in which case the interest earned shall
be proportionately divided between the amount returned to the applicant and the amount withdrawn to complete the
required improvements.
B. Performance Bond. A performance bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method for release of the bond
or portions of the bond to the applicant, and the procedures for collection by the City. The bond documents shall
specifically reference the application for which approval is sought.
C. Letter of Credit. An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution shall indicate that funds have
been set aside for construction and may not be used for any other project or loan.
D. Phasing of Development. The CEO or Planning Board may approve plans to develop an application in separate and
distinct phases. This may be accomplished by limiting final approval to those areas abutting that section of any
proposed road which is covered by a performance guarantee. When development is phased, road construction shall
commence from an existing public way. Final approval of development in subsequent phases shall be given only
upon satisfactory completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases.
E. Conditional Agreement. The CEO or Planning Board may provide for the applicant to enter into a binding agreement
with the City in lieu of the other financial performance guarantees. Such an agreement shall provide for approval of
the Final Plan, on the condition that:
1. (Subdivisions only) No more than four (4) lots may be sold or built upon;
2. It is certified by the Planning Board that all of the required improvements have been installed in accordance
with all local Ordinances and the regulations of the appropriate utilities; or
3. A performance guarantee, acceptable to the City, is submitted in an amount necessary to cover the completion
of the required improvements at an amount adjusted for inflation and prorated for the portions of the required
improvements already installed.
Notice of the agreement and any conditions shall be indicated on the Final Plan which is recorded at the Aroostook
County Registry of Deeds, Northern Office. Release from the agreement shall follow the procedures for release of
the performance guarantees contained herein.
2. Contents of Guarantee.
The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of construction
taking into account inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the release of part
or all of the performance guarantee to the applicant, and a date after which the applicant shall be in default and the City
shall have access to the funds to finish construction.
3. Release of Guarantee.
Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the City Council shall determine to its satisfaction, in part
upon the report of the Planning Board and the CEO and whatever other agencies and departments may be involved, that
the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that portion of the
improvements for which the release is requested.
915
4. Default.
If, upon inspection, the CEO finds that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with
the plans and specifications filed as part of the application, they shall so report in writing to the City Manager, City
Council, the Planning Board, and the applicant or developer. The City shall take any steps necessary to preserve the
City’s rights.
5. Extension.
The Planning Board may recommend a maximum extension of 12 months to the guaranteed performance period when
the applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Planning Board and the City Council, good cause for such
extension. Such recommendation shall be referred to the City Council for official action.
Sec. 13-760 Daycare Facilities.
As of passage of this ordinance, newly established Daycare Facilities shall only be allowed in the R1, R2, R3, RC-2, C1 and
C2 residential and commercial zones following Code Enforcement Officer review and approval. All Daycare Facilities
licensed by the State of Maine and operating prior to the passage of this ordinance, are considered Previously Existing and
exempt from the requirements of this ordinance. Any previously existing Daycare Facility that discontinues operations for a
period of one (1) year that requests to reopen as a Daycare Facility must meet the current Daycare Facility requirements of
this ordinance.
Daycare Facilities must provide the City of Caribou a copy of the yearly State of Maine License for the daycare, annual
update contact information for the operators and employees. Daycare facilities must give written notice to the Code
Enforcement Officer who shall share the information with local police and fire departments as to the scope of their operation,
including the number of children, location of sleeping areas, days and hours of operation.
• Licensing:
o The facility must have an approved and current valid DHHS License, and supply a copy to the City every
year.
o The facility must provide a copy of the State Fire Marshall’s inspection and approval report.
o The facility must provide a copy of the Maine Department of Health & Human Services inspection and
report.
• Inspection:
o The operation of a daycare facility will allow appropriate representative of the municipality to enter the
property to inspect such use for compliance with the requirements of the City ordinance.
o The lot size, building size, set back and lot coverage shall conform to the standards of the zoning distance
in which it is located unless such structure is a legal nonconforming structure.
o All proposed facilities must be inspected for zoning compliance prior to issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
• Non-Compliance:
o Non-compliance with this ordinance may be cause for revocation of this license.
• Outdoor Play Area:
o An outdoor play area, as required by the State, shall be provided for daycare facilities and not be located in
the front yard; play areas must be located in the side and/or rear yards only.
 The front yard is the area between the front property line and front wall of the structure, including
the front wall projection line extending to the side property.
Historical Note: Section 13-760 was adopted December 12, 2011 and revised January 11, 2016.
916
Sec. 13-770 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
Section 1. Title
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Ordinance" of Caribou, Maine.
Section 2. Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Maine Constitution; the
provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001 (Home Rule), and the provisions of the Planning and Land Use Regulation
Act, Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4312 et seq.
Section 3. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide a process and a set of standards for the construction of wireless
telecommunications facilities.
Section 4. Applicability
This local land use ordinance applies to all construction and expansion of wireless telecommunications facilities, except as
provided in section 4.1.
4.1. Exemptions
The following are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance:
A.) Emergency temporary wireless communication facilities for emergency communications by public officials.
B.) Amateur (ham) radio stations. Amateur (ham) radio stations licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC).
C.) Parabolic antenna. Parabolic antennas less than seven (7) feet in diameter, that are an accessory use of the property.
D.) Maintenance or repair. Maintenance, repair or reconstruction of a wireless telecommunications facility and related
equipment, provided that there is no change in the height or any other dimension of the facility.
E.) Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities in operation not to exceed a maximum of one hundred eighty (180)
days per calendar year.
F.) Antennas as Accessory Uses. An antenna that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit.
Section 5. Review and Approval Authority
5.1. Approval Required
No person shall construct or expand a wireless telecommunication facility without first obtaining a “Building Permit” from
the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) as required by the City of Caribou’s adopted Maine Uniform Building Code, Section
105 of the 2009 International Building Code. Review of the Site Design Application under this ordinance, by the CEO, does
not constitute a Building Permit.
917
A.) Expansion of an Existing Facility and Colocation. Approval by the CEO is required for any expansion of an existing
wireless telecommunications facility that increases the height of the facility by no more than 20 feet; accessory use of an
existing wireless telecommunications facility; or colocation on an existing wireless telecommunications facility.
B.) New Construction. Site Design Review and Approval of the Planning Board is required for construction of a new wireless
telecommunications facility; and any expansion of an existing wireless telecommunications facility that increases the height
of the facility by more than 20 feet.
5.2. Approval Authority
In accordance with Section 5.1 above, the CEO shall review applications for wireless telecommunications facilities, and
make written findings on whether the proposed facility complies with this Ordinance.
Section 6. Approval Process
6.1. Pre-Application Conference
All persons seeking CEO review or the approval of the Planning Board under this ordinance shall meet with the CEO no less
than thirty (30) days before filing an application. At this meeting, the CEO shall explain to the applicant the ordinance
provisions, as well as application forms and submissions that will be required under this ordinance.
6.2. Application
All persons seeking review of the CEO or the approval of the Planning Board under this ordinance shall submit an
application as provided below. The CEO shall be responsible for ensuring that notice of the application has been published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the community.
A.) Application for CEO review. Applications for review by the CEO must include the following materials and information:
1.) Documentation of the applicant's right, title, or interest in the property where the facility is to be sited, including name and
address of the property owner and the applicant.
2.) A copy of the FCC license for the facility or a signed statement from the owner or operator of the facility attesting that the
facility complies with current FCC regulations.
3.) Identification of districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant in American history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering or culture, that are listed, or eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places (see 16 U.S.C.
470w(5); 36 CFR 60 and 800).
4.) Location map and elevation drawings of the proposed facility and any other proposed structures, showing color, and
identifying structural materials.
5.) For proposed expansion of a facility, a signed statement that commits the owner of the facility, and his or her successors
in interest, to:
a.) respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential colocation applicant, in exchange
for a reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of preparing a response;
b.) negotiate in good faith for shared use by third parties;
c.) allow shared use if an applicant agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges for colocation;
d.) require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on community rates and generally accepted accounting
principles. This charge may include but is not limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning project
administration, land costs, site design, construction and maintenance, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the
costs of adopting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference.
B.) Application for Planning Board Approval.
A Site Design Review application for approval by the Planning Board must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer.
The application must include the following information:
1.) Documentation of the applicant's right, title, or interest in the property on which the facility is to be sited, including name
and address of the property owner and the applicant.
2.) A copy of the FCC license for the facility, or a signed statement from the owner or operator of the facility attesting that
the facility complies with current FCC regulations.
918
3.) A USGS 7.5 minute topographic map showing the location of all structures and wireless telecommunications facilities
above 150 feet in height above ground level, except antennas located on roof tops, within a five (5) mile radius of the
proposed facility, unless this information has been previously made available to the municipality. This requirement may be
met by submitting current information (within thirty days of the date the application is filed) from the FCC Tower
Registration Database.
4.) A site plan:
a.) prepared and certified by a professional engineer registered in Maine indicating the location, type, and height of the
proposed facility, antenna capacity, on-site and abutting off-site land uses, means of access, setbacks from property lines, and
all applicable American National Standards Institute (ANSI) technical and structural codes;
b.) certification by the applicant that the proposed facility complies with all FCC standards for radio emissions is required;
and
c.) a boundary survey for the project performed by a land surveyor licensed by the State of Maine.
5.) A scenic assessment, consisting of the following:
a.) Elevation drawings of the proposed facility, and any other proposed structures, showing height above ground level;
b.) A landscaping plan indicating the proposed placement of the facility on the site; location of existing structures, trees, and
other significant site features; the type and location of plants proposed to screen the facility; the method of fencing, the color
of the structure, and the proposed lighting method.
c.) Photo simulations of the proposed facility taken from perspectives determined by the Planning Board, or their designee,
during the pre-application conference. Each photo must be labeled with the line of sight, elevation, and with the date taken
imprinted on the photograph. The photos must show the color of the facility and method of screening.
d.) A narrative discussing:
i.) the extent to which the proposed facility would be visible from or within a designated scenic resource,
ii.) the tree line elevation of vegetation within 100 feet of the facility, and
iii.) the distance to the proposed facility from the designated scenic resource's noted viewpoints.
6.) A written description of how the proposed facility fits into the applicant's telecommunications network. This submission
requirement does not require disclosure of confidential business information.
7.) Evidence demonstrating that no existing building, site, or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed facility, the
evidence for which may consist of any one or more of the following:
a.) Evidence that no existing facilities are located within the targeted market coverage area as required to meet the applicant's
engineering requirements,
b.) Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient height or cannot be increased in height at a reasonable cost to meet
the applicant's engineering requirements,
c.) Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and
related equipment. Specifically:
i.) Planned, necessary equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing facility, considering the existing and
planned use of those facilities, and these existing facilities cannot be reinforced to accommodate the new equipment.
ii.) The applicant's proposed antenna or equipment would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers or structures, or the antenna or equipment on the existing facility would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
iii.) Existing or approved facilities do not have space on which planned equipment can be placed so it can function
effectively.
d.) For facilities existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share or adapt an existing facility are unreasonable. Costs exceeding the pro rata share of a new facility
development are presumed to be unreasonable. This evidence shall also be satisfactory for a tower built after the passage of
this ordinance;
919
e.) Evidence that the applicant has made diligent good faith efforts to negotiate colocation on an existing facility, building, or
structure, and has been denied access;
8.) Identification of districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant in American history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering or culture, that are listed, or eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places (see 16 U.S.C.
470w(5); 36 CFR 60 and 800).
9.) A signed statement stating that the owner of the wireless telecommunications facility and his or her successors and assigns
agree to:
a.) respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential colocation applicant, in exchange
for a reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of preparing a response;
b.) negotiate in good faith for shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility by third parties;
c.) allow shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility if an applicant agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges for
colocation;
d.) require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on community rates and generally accepted accounting
principles. This charge may include but is not limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning project
administration, land costs, site design, construction, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting
the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the
above costs by the facility owner shall be accomplished at a reasonable rate, over the useful life span of the facility.
12.) A form of surety approved by the Planning Board to pay for the costs of removing the facility if it is abandoned.
13.) Evidence that a notice of the application has been published in a local newspaper of general circulation in the
community.
6.3. Submission Waiver
The Planning Board, as appropriate, may waive any of the submission requirements based upon a written request of the
applicant submitted at the time of application. A waiver of any submission requirement may be granted only if the Planning
Board finds in writing that due to special circumstances of the application, the information is not required to determine
compliance with the standards of this Ordinance.
6.4. Fees
A.) CEO Application Fee
An application for CEO review shall include payment of an application fee of $200.00 (two hundred dollars). The application
shall not be considered complete until this fee is paid. The applicant is entitled to a refund of the application fee if the
application is withdrawn within fifteen (15) days of date of filing, less all expenses incurred by the City of Caribou to review
the application.
B.) Planning Board Application Fee
An application for Planning Board approval shall include payment of an application fee of
$500.00 (five hundred dollars). The application shall not be considered complete until this fee is paid. An applicant is
entitled to a refund of the application portion of fee if the application is withdrawn within fifteen (15) days of date of filing,
less all expenses incurred by the City of Caribou to review the application.
6.5. Notice of Complete Application
Upon receipt of an application, the CEO shall provide the applicant with a dated receipt. Within five (5) working days of
receipt of an application, the CEO shall review the application and determine if the application meets the submission
requirements. The CEO or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall review any requests for a waiver from the submission
requirements and shall act on these requests prior to determining the completeness of the application.
If the application is complete, the CEO shall notify the applicant in writing of this determination and require the applicant to
provide a sufficient number of copies of the application to the [Planning Board, Planning Office, Code Enforcement Office,
Engineering Department, Police Department, and Fire Department].
If the application is incomplete, the CEO shall notify the applicant in writing, specifying the additional materials or
information required to complete the application.
920
If the application is deemed to be complete, the CEO shall notify all abutters to the site as shown on the Assessor's records,
by first-class mail, that an application has been accepted. This notice shall contain a brief description of the proposed activity
and the name of the applicant, give the location of a copy of the application available for inspection, and provide the date,
time, and place of the Planning Board meeting at which the application will be considered. Failure on the part of any abutter
to receive such notice shall not be grounds for delay of any consideration of the application nor denial of the project.
6.6. Public Hearing
For applications for Planning Board approval under Section 5.1(B), a public hearing shall be held within 30 days of the notice
of the complete application.
6.7. Application Review
A.) CEO review. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a complete application for approval under section 5.1(A), the CEO shall
review and recommend the application go to the Planning Board for Site Design Review, recommend with conditions, or
deny the application in writing, together with the findings on which that decision is based. The CEO shall approve the
application if the CEO finds that the application complies with the provisions in Section 7.1 of this ordinance.
The CEO shall notify all abutters of the decision to issue a permit under this section. The time period may be extended upon
agreement between the applicant and the CEO.
B.) Planning Board Approval. Within ninety (90) days of receiving a complete application for approval under section 5.1(B),
the Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in writing, together with the findings on
which that decision is based. However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of applications that would prevent the
Planning Board from making a decision within the required ninety (90) day time period, then a decision on the application
shall be issued within sixty (60) days of the public hearing, if necessary, or within 60 days of the completed Planning Board
review. This time period may be extended upon agreement between the applicant and the Planning Board.
Section 7. Standards of Review
To obtain approval from the CEO or the Planning Board, an application must comply with the standards in this section.
7.1. CEO Approval Standards
An application for approval by the CEO under Section 5.1(A) must meet the following standards.
A.) The proposed facility is an expansion, accessory use, or colocation to a structure existing at the time the application is
submitted.
B.) The applicant has sufficient right, title, or interest to locate the proposed facility on the existing structure.
C.) The proposed facility increases the height of the existing structure by no more than twenty (20) feet.
D.) The proposed facility will be constructed with materials and colors that match or blend with the surrounding natural or
built environment, to the maximum extent practicable.
E.) The proposed facility, to the greatest degree practicable, shall have no unreasonable adverse impact upon districts, sites,
buildings, structures or objects, significant in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture, that are
listed, or eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places (see 16 U.S.C. 470w(5); 36 CFR 60 and 800).
7.2. Planning Board Approval Standards
An application for approval by the Planning Board under Section 5.1(B) must meet the following standards.
A.) Priority of Locations. New wireless telecommunications facilities must be located according to the priorities below. The
applicant shall demonstrate that a facility of a higher priority cannot reasonably accommodate the applicant's proposed
facility.
1.) Colocation on an existing wireless telecommunications facility or other existing structure in the following districts, as
identified in the [name of municipality] Zoning Ordinance:
2.) A new facility on public or private property in an Industrial District, or permitted as an Industrial Use.
3.) A new facility on public or private property in a Commercial District, or permitted as a Commercial Use.
4.) A new facility on public or private property in a Rural District, or permitted as a Rural Use.
5.) A new facility on public or private property in a Residential District, or permitted as a Residential Use.
921
A.) Location
New wireless telecommunications facilities may be permitted only in the following districts as designated in the Caribou
Zoning Ordinance and Land Use Table:
Industrial 1, Industrial 2, Commercial 2, Residential – Commercial 2, Hospital 1 and Residential 3 Zones.
B.) Siting on Municipal Property. If an applicant proposes to locate a new wireless telecommunications facility, or expand an
existing facility on municipal property, the applicant must show the following:
1.) The proposed location complies with applicable municipal policies and ordinances.
2.) The proposed facility will not interfere with the intended purpose of the property.
3.) The applicant has adequate liability insurance and a lease agreement with the municipality that includes reasonable
compensation for the use of the property and other provisions to safeguard the public rights and interests in the property.
C.) Design for Colocation. A new wireless telecommunications facility and related equipment must be designed and
constructed to accommodate expansion for future colocation of at least three additional wireless telecommunications facilities
or providers. However, the Planning Board may waive or modify this standard where the district height limitation effectively
prevents future colocation.
D.) Height. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be no more than 200 feet in height.
E.) Setbacks. A new wireless telecommunications facility must have a minimum set back of 750 feet from any existing
residential dwelling or school building. A new or expanded wireless telecommunications facility must be set back one
hundred- fifty percent (150%) of its height from all property lines. The setback may be satisfied by including the areas
outside the property boundaries if secured by an easement.
F.) Landscaping. A new wireless telecommunications facility and related equipment must be screened with plants from view
by abutting properties, to the maximum extent practicable. Existing plants and natural land forms on the site shall also be
preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
G.) Fencing. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be fenced to discourage trespass on the facility and to
discourage climbing on any structure by trespassers.
H.) Lighting. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be illuminated only as necessary to comply with FAA or
other applicable state and federal requirements. However, security lighting may be used as long as it is shielded to be downdirectional
to retain light within the boundaries of the site, to the maximum extent practicable.
I.) Color and Materials. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be constructed with materials and colors that match
or blend with the surrounding natural or built environment, to the maximum extent practicable. Unless otherwise required,
muted colors, earth tones and subdued hues shall be used.
J.) Structural Standards. A new wireless telecommunications facility must comply with the current Electronic Industries
Association/ Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision Standard entitled "Structural Standards for
Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures."
K.) Visual Impact. The proposed wireless telecommunications facility will have no unreasonable adverse impact upon
designated scenic resources within Caribou, as identified either in the municipally adopted comprehensive plan, or by a State
or federal agency.
1.) In determining the potential unreasonable adverse impact of the proposed facility upon the designated scenic resources,
the Planning Board shall consider the following factors:
a.) The extent to which the proposed wireless telecommunications facility is visible above tree line, from the viewpoint(s) of
the impacted designated scenic resource;
b.) the type, number, height, and proximity of existing structures and features, and background features within the same line
of sight as the proposed facility;
c.) the extent to which the proposed wireless telecommunications facility would be visible from the viewpoint(s);
d.) the amount of vegetative screening;
e.) the distance of the proposed facility from the viewpoint and the facility's location within the designated scenic resource;
and
922
f.) the presence of reasonable alternatives that allow the facility to function consistently with its purpose.
L.) Noise. During construction, repair, or replacement of the wireless telecommunications facility or during the operation of a
back-up power generator or the testing of a back-up generator or during a power failure, the facility is exempt from existing
municipal noise standards. At all other time the facility shall comply with Section 13-700 § 20 Noise dB limits.
M.) Historic & Archaeological Properties. The proposed facility, to the greatest degree practicable, will have no unreasonable
adverse impact upon a historic district, site or structure which is currently listed on or eligible for listing on the National
Register of Historic Places.
7.3. Standard Conditions of Approval
The following standard conditions of approval shall be a part of any approval or conditional approval issued by the CEO or
Planning Board. Where necessary to ensure that an approved project meets the criteria of this ordinance, the Planning Board
can impose additional conditions of approval. Reference to the conditions of approval shall be clearly noted on the final
approved site plan, and shall include:
1.) The owner of the wireless telecommunications facility and his or her successors and assigns agree to:
a.) respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential colocation applicant, in exchange
for a reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of preparing a response;
b.) negotiate in good faith for shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility by third parties;
c.) allow shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility if an applicant agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges for
colocation.
d.) require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility, based on community
rates and generally accepted accounting principles. This charge may include, but is not limited to, a pro rata share of the cost
of site selection, planning project administration, land costs, site design, construction and maintenance, financing, return on
equity, depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the above costs by the facility owner shall be accomplished at a reasonable
rate, over the life span of the useful life of the wireless telecommunications facility.
2.) Upon request by the municipality, the applicant shall certify compliance with all applicable FCC radio frequency
emissions regulations.
7.4. Standards for Antennas & Equipment installed on or in existing structures.
Wireless telecommunications facilities proposing to locate on existing buildings structures, flagpoles, or utility poles must
meet all the following criteria:
(1) Antennas, receivers, lightning rods, guy wires, and any other wireless telecommunications facility equipment shall be
attached to an existing building in such a manner as to not project above the roofline, ridgeline, peak, or steeple of the
structure as observed from public lands and ways, or from historic sites and buildings. Antennas to be mounted on buildings
with a flat roof shall be located at a distance of a 3 to 1 ratio from the edge of the roof based on the height of the antenna.
Any application to install an antenna project shall be approved by a Professional Engineer prior to review by the Planning
Board.
(2) A wireless telecommunications facility antenna or equipment attached to a building or structure roof shall not contrast
with the color, texture, or linear orientation of the roofing materials.
(3) No wireless telecommunications facility equipment shall be mounted on any structure or located on any property that is in
violation of the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, 1996 edition, or any other building code so adopted by the City
of Caribou council. Buildings or properties in violation of the Maine Uniform building Code or 2009 Edition of the
International building Code or any other building code so adopted by the City Council, or any structure in a dilapidated
condition shall be rehabilitated in a manner approved by the planning board prior to the attachment of wireless
telecommunications facility equipment.
(4) Wireless telecommunications facility equipment shall be designed to be visually compatible with the texture and color of
the background building material.
(5) Mitigation measures of architectural sitting of a wireless telecommunications facility shall conform to the dominant
architectural period of the host structure.
923
(6) Wireless telecommunications facility equipment shall be located on the structure so as to be visually compatible with the
rhythm and proportion of voids (windows and doors) and solids (facade) of the background structure.
(7) Ground facilities shall be screened from the street and all adjacent properties in all districts except the industrial district.
Buffering shall consist of evergreen vegetation that achieves 90 percent year round visual obstruction from all potential
viewer populations at the time of planting, solid wooden fencing, earth mounding, or combination thereof. The planning
board may approve a buffer which achieves less than 90 percent visual obstruction where the proposed ground facility is a
building and the planning board determines that the location, style, and architectural detailing of the building are visually
compatible with other buildings in the immediate vicinity of the site and with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(8) Wireless Communications antennas located on or in existing structures are not required to meet the set back requirements
of Wireless Communications Facilities Towers.
Section 8. Amendment to an Approved Application
Any changes to an approved application must be approved by the CEO or the Planning Board, in accordance with Section 5.
Section 9. Abandonment
A wireless telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered
abandoned. The CEO shall notify the owner of an abandoned facility in writing and order the removal of the facility within
ninety (90) days of receipt of the written notice. The owner of the facility shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the
notice to demonstrate to the CEO that the facility has not been abandoned.
If the Owner fails to show that the facility is in active operation, the owner shall have sixty (60) days to remove the facility. If
the facility is not removed within this time period, the municipality may remove the facility at the owner's expense. The
owner of the facility shall pay all site reclamation costs deemed necessary and reasonable to return the site to its preconstruction
condition, including the removal of roads, and reestablishment of vegetation.
If a surety has been given to the municipality for removal of the facility, the owner of the facility may apply to the Planning
Board for release of the surety when the facility and related equipment are removed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
Section 10. Appeals
An appeal of an administrative decision of the CEO or the Planning Board under this ordinance may be brought to the Board
of Appeals, as provided by Section 13-810 Appeals, of the Caribou Zoning and Land Use Ordinance. Written notice of an
appeal must be filed with the Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days of the decision. The notice of appeal shall clearly state
the reasons for the appeal. An enforcement action of the Code Enforcement Officer is not appealable to the Board of
Appeals.
924
Section 11. Administration and Enforcement
The CEO shall enforce this ordinance. If the CEO finds that any provision of this ordinance has been violated, the CEO shall
notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation, and ordering the action
necessary to correct it. The CEO shall order correction of the violation and may take any other legal action to ensure
compliance with this ordinance.
The Caribou City Council or their authorized agent, are authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for the
purpose of eliminating violations of this ordinance and recovering fines without court action. Such agreements shall not allow
a violation of this ordinance to continue unless: there is clear and convincing evidence that the violation occurred as a direct
result of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal official upon which the applicant reasonably relied to its
detriment and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith; the removal of the violation will result in a threat to
public health and safety or substantial environmental damage.
Section 12. Penalties
Any person who owns or controls any building or property that violates this ordinance shall be fined in accordance with Title
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violation continues after notification by the CEO shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 13. Conflict and Severability
13.1. Conflicts with other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this ordinance or of any
other ordinance, regulation, or statute, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
13.2. Severability
The invalidity of any part of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other part of this ordinance.
Historical Note: Section 13-770 was adopted by the City Council on March 12, 2012; Section 13-770 §7.4 was adopted by
the City Council on December 10, 2012.
Sec. 13-800 Administration and Enforcement.
1. General.
A. The CEO shall administer and enforce these Ordinances. No applications for land use permits shall be accepted
unless accompanied by any necessary fees, a copy of the deed to the property in question, a scaled site plan, and a
general narrative of intended work to be submitted by the owner, authorized agent, and/or contractor.
B. No land use permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the construction, alteration, enlargement, moving,
use, or change of use of any land or building unless the CEO determines that all of the requirements have been met
and that the development shall conform in all respects to the applicable provisions of these Ordinances and with all
other applicable federal, state, and local rules, laws, regulations, and ordinances.
C. If application is made for a land use permit only, the application shall be accompanied by a fee. The fee shall be
computed as follows: 1.) minimum fee: $5; 2.) $2 a thousand ($) for the first $10,000 of the estimated cost of
improvement; and 3.) $1 per thousand ($) for every additional thousand ($) over $10,000 of the estimated cost of
improvement or part thereof. If application is made for certificate of occupancy only, the application shall be
accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25).
2. Land Use Permit.
A. No building or structure shall be erected, altered, enlarged, or moved until a land use permit has been issued by the
CEO. Permits shall expire annually on March 31 and may be renewed once. There shall be no additional fee if the
original permit was issued within six (6) months prior to the March 31 expiration date. All intended construction
and land use as stated in the original permit shall begin within the term of the permit issuance date. All applications
for permits shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of these Ordinances.
B. Application for a land use permit shall be in writing and contain all information pertinent to the requirements of
these Ordinances, including a statement setting forth the intended use of the proposed new, altered, or relocated
building. The CEO shall issue the permit if they find, after proper examination of the application, that the building
or structure and its intended use will comply with the provisions of these Ordinances.
C. There shall be submitted with all applications for a land use permit, two (2) copies of a site plan drawn to scale
showing: the exact dimensions of the lot to be build upon; all buildings, existing and proposed (location, shape, size,
and height), setbacks; required off-street parking and loading spaces; existing, proposed, and such additional
925
information as may be necessary to determine and provide for enforcement of these Ordinances. A soil suitability test
shall be obtained for construction on land not served by public sewer.
D. One copy of the site plan shall be returned to the applicant when approved by the CEO who shall have marked such
copy approved and attested to same by their signature on such copy together with the permit. The second copy of
such application and plans, similarly marked, approved or disapproved, shall be retained by the CEO and shall be
kept on file as a public record. Failure of the CEO to issue written notice of their decision within thirty (30) days of
the date of filing of the application shall constitute refusal of the permit. A plumbing and electrical permit shall be
obtained before a building permit is issued.
E. If significant progress on construction has not been made within six (6) months from the date the permit was issued,
the permit shall expire. Furthermore, all previous building permits issued by the City prior to the passage of this
Ordinance shall expire six (6) months from the effective date of this Ordinance, unless significant progress in
construction is made within this six (6) month period.
3. Certificate of Occupancy.
A. No land use shall be changed in use, nor building or structure hereafter completed, altered, enlarged, or relocated, or
changed in use until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the CEO, stating that the proposed use complies
with other applicable provisions of these Ordinances and with all other applicable federal, state, and local rules,
laws, regulations, and ordinances. Any person who sells, leases, or occupies a new building in the City prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the CEO shall be in violation of these Ordinances and is subject to its
penalties.
B. An application for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be applied for at the same time of application for the land use
permit. No permit for the excavation, erection, repairs, or alterations to any building shall be issued until an
application has been made for a Certificate of Occupancy.
C. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for the following uses:
1. The increase in the number of dwelling units in a building.
2. The establishment of any home occupation.
3. A change in a non-conforming use of land or building.
4. The occupancy and use or change of use of vacant land except for the raising of crops.
5. A change in use of an existing building, whether or not alteration is involved.
D. Prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, the CEO shall check and determine that all requirements under
the applicable provisions of these Ordinances and with all other applicable federal, state, and local rules, laws,
regulations, and ordinances have been met.
E. Any person desiring to change the use, but not the structure of the building or structure erected, or the use of the
premises, shall apply in writing to the CEO for a Certificate of Occupancy setting forth the new use under the
application. The CEO, under finding after examination that such new use complies with the provisions of these
Ordinances, shall issue the Certificate of Occupancy applied for.
4. Code Enforcement Officer Shall Act.
The CEO shall act upon all applications for a land use permit or certificate of occupancy within fifteen (15) days after
receipt of an application. Notice of refusal to issue the land use permit or certificate of occupancy shall be given to the
applicant or their authorized agent in writing within fifteen (15) days of such application stating the reason for refusal.
5. Inspection.
A. At least three (3) days prior to commencing construction of improvements, the applicant shall notify the CEO in
writing of the time when the developer proposes to commence construction of such improvements, so that the CEO
can cause inspection to be made to assure that all specifications, requirements, and conditions of approval, if
applicable, shall be met during the construction of the improvements, and to assure the satisfactory completion of
required improvements and utilities.
B. If the CEO finds upon inspection of the improvements that any of the required improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed by the applicant, the CEO shall so report in writing
to the City Council, Planning Board, applicant, and developer. The City Council shall take any steps necessary to
preserve the City’s rights.
C. If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements it appears to be necessary or desirable
to modify the improvements, the CEO is authorized to approve minor modifications due to unforeseen
circumstances. The CEO shall issue any approval under these Ordinances in writing and shall transmit a copy of the
926
approval to the Planning Board. Revised plans shall be filed with the CEO. For major modifications, such as relocation
of rights-of-way, property boundaries, changes of grade by more than 1 percent, etc., the applicant shall obtain
permission to modify the plans from the Planning Board.
D. Prior to the sale of any lot, the applicant shall provide the CEO with a letter from a Maine Licensed Professional
Surveyor stating that all artificial monumentation shown on the Plan has been installed.
E. Upon completion of road construction and prior to a vote by the City Council, a written certification signed by the
Director of Public Works shall be submitted to the City Council, certifying that the proposed public way meets or
exceeds the design and construction requirements of these Ordinances. The applicant shall be required to maintain
all improvements and provide for snow removal on roads and sidewalks until acceptance of the improvements by the
City or their control is placed with a lot owners association. If there are any underground utilities, the servicing
utility shall certify in writing that they have been installed in a manner acceptable to the utility. “As built” plans
shall be submitted to the City Council.
6. Code Enforcement Officer.
A. It shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce the provisions of these Ordinances. If the CEO shall find that any
provision of these Ordinances are being violated, the CEO shall notify the property owner and the person
responsible for such violations in writing indicating the nature of the violations and ordering the action necessary to
correct it. The CEO shall send a copy of such notice to the City Council and said notice shall be maintained as part
of the permanent record. The failure of the CEO to follow the notice procedure set forth within this subsection shall
not prevent the City Council from taking any legal action to enforce these Ordinances and to pursue all available
legal remedies, including without limitation, injunctive relief, fines, and attorney fees. The CEO shall have the
authority to issue a Stop Work Order upon a finding that work has been commenced or completed prior to receipt of
all approvals required by these Ordinances or contrary to the terms of an approved site design. The CEO shall order
the removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions, materials, or work being done, or shall take any other action
authorized by these Ordinances to insure compliance with, or to prevent violation of, their provisions. Any
construction or site work not in conformity with an approved plan and/or permit shall constitute a violation of these
Ordinances. Work shall recommence only after such Order has been lifted.
B. The CEO shall maintain the current addresses and phone numbers of federal and state agencies with which an
applicant may want to check to determine what other rules, codes, laws, regulations, or ordinances apply to a
proposed development. In addition, the CEO shall maintain a current file of all pertinent local statutes, ordinances,
regulations, codes, and plans relating to land-use regulation. The CEO shall keep a complete record of all essential
transactions of the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or denied,
revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations investigated, violations found, and fees
collected. On a biennial basis the CEO shall submit a summary of such record for the shoreland areas as defined to
the Director of the Bureau of Land Quality Control within the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
C. The CEO shall conduct on-site inspections to insure compliance with all applicable laws and conditions attached to
approval. The CEO may enter any property at reasonable hours and enter any structure with the consent of the
property owner, occupant, or agent, to inspect the property or structure for compliance with the laws or ordinances.
If consent is denied they should obtain an administrative warrant before entering the property. The CEO may
revoke a permit after proper notification and an opportunity for a hearing if it was issued in error or if based on
erroneous information.
7. Violations.
A. The following provisions shall apply to all development plans reviewed and approved by the City.
1. A person, shall not convey, offer, or agree to convey any land in a development which has not been approved
by the Planning Board or CEO, whichever is applicable.
2. Any person after receiving approval from the Planning Board or CEO who constructs the development in a
manner other than depicted on the approved Plan(s) or amendment(s) or in violation of any condition imposed
shall be in violation of these Ordinances.
3. No public utility, water district, sanitary district, grading or construction of roads, grading of lands or lots,
construction of buildings, or any utility company of any kind may install services to any development, until a
Final Plan of such development shall be duly prepared, submitted, reviewed, approved, and endorsed and unless
written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under these Ordinances
has been issued. Following installation of service, the company or district shall forward the written
authorization to the CEO indicating that installation has been completed to the development.
4. No permit or certificate for a building or use shall be issued unless the development has been approved under
these Ordinances and Title 38, §481-490, if applicable.
927
5. Whenever a development is exempt from MRSA Title 38, §481-490, Site Location of Development, because of
the operation of Title 38, §488 (5), that fact must be noted on the Final Plan. The person submitting the Final
Plan for recording shall prepare a sworn certificate that must be expressly noted on the face of the Final Plan.
This certificate shall:
a. Indicate the name of the current property owner;
b. Identify the property by references to the last recorded deed in its chain of title and by reference to the
development plan;
c. Indicate that an exemption from Title 38, §481-490, has been exercised;
d. Indicate that the requirements of Title 38, §488, (5), have been and shall be satisfied; and
e. Indicate the date of notification of the Department of Environmental Protection under Title 38, §488, (5).
In the case of a subdivision, the exemption is not valid until recorded in the Aroostook County Registry of
Deeds, Northern Office. Recording must occur within ninety (90) days of the final subdivision approval or the
exemption is void.
6. Any person who sells, leases, or conveys for consideration any land, dwelling unit, or building in a development
approved under these Ordinances and exempt from Title 38, §481-490, because of the operation of Title 38,
§488, (5), shall include in the instrument of sale, lease, or conveyance a covenant to the transferee that all of the
requirements of Title 38, §488, (5), have all been and shall be satisfied.
B. In addition to "A" above, the following provisions shall apply to subdivisions reviewed and approved by the City.
1. No plan of a division of land within the City which would constitute a subdivision shall be recorded in the
Aroostook County Registry of Deeds, Northern Office until a Final Plan has been approved by the Planning
Board in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance contained within these Ordinances. Approval for the
purpose of recording shall appear in writing on the recording plan.
2. A person shall not sell, lease, or otherwise convey any land in an approved subdivision which is not shown on
the Plan as a separate lot.
3. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed before the road upon which the lot fronts is
completed in accordance with these regulations up to and including the entire frontage of the lot. No unit in a
multi-family development shall be occupied before the road upon which the unit is accessed is completed in
accordance with applicable standards contained within these Ordinances.
C. When any violation of any provision of these Ordinances shall be found to exist, the CEO, is hereby authorized and
directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, that may be appropriate or
necessary to enforce the provisions of these Ordinances in the name of the City of Caribou. The City Council, or
their authorized agent, shall take any steps necessary to preserve the City's rights, such as, but not limited to,
entering into an administrative consent agreement for the purpose of eliminating violations of these Ordinances and
recovering fines without Court action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use to continue unless
there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result
of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad
faith, or unless the removal of the structure or use shall result in a threat or hazard to public health and safety or shall
result in substantial environmental damage.
8. Fines.
Any person, firm, or corporation being the owner, authorized agent, contractor, or having control or use of any structure
or premises who violates any of the provisions of these Ordinances shall upon conviction be fined in accordance with
provisions of Title 30-A MRSA §4452. Each day such a violation is permitted to exist after notification shall constitute
a separate offense. Fines shall be payable to the "City of Caribou".
Sec. 13-810 Appeals.
1. Making an Appeal.
A. An appeal of an administrative decision of the Planning Board or CEO may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an
aggrieved party. Such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days of the decision appealed from, and not
otherwise, except that the Board of Appeals, upon a showing of good cause, may waive the thirty (30) day
requirement.
928
Note: For the purposes of this subsection, an administrative decision does not include enforcement actions. A
decision of the CEO to take enforcement action for violations of these Ordinances, or any permit issued pursuant to
these Ordinances, is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
B. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for
such appeal. For a variance appeal the applicant shall submit:
1. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing building, and other physical features pertinent to
the variance request; and
2. A concise written statement stating what variance is requested and why it should be granted.
C. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Planning Board or CEO shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers
specifying the record of the decision appealed from. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of ninety dollars
($90) to cover advertising and administrative costs. If the actual cost of advertising and notification exceeds the fee
paid, the applicant shall pay the balance. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within
forty-five (45) days.
2. Procedure on Appeal.
A. At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing on such appeal, the Board of Appeals shall cause to be
posted in three (3) prominent locations in the City a notice which includes:
1. The name of the person appealing.
2. A brief description of the property involved.
3. A brief description of the decision appealed from, or the nature of the appeal.
4. The time and place of the Board of Appeal's hearing.
B. At least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, the Board of Appeals shall also cause the City Clerk to give
similar written notice to:
1. All abbutting property owners of record whose properties lie within 200 feet of the affected property.
2. The person making the appeal, and
3. The Planning Board, the CEO, and any other parties of record.
3. Hearings.
A. The Board of Appeals may receive any oral or documentary evidence, but shall provide as a matter of policy for the
exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. Every party shall have the right to present their
case or defense by oral or documentary evidence to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct such crossexaminations
as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
B. The appellant's case shall be heard first. To maintain orderly procedure, each side shall proceed without
interruption. Questions may be asked through the Chair. All persons at the hearing shall abide by the order of the
Chair.
C. At any hearing, a party may be represented by agent or attorney. Hearings shall not be continued to other times
except for good cause. For example, if the Board of Appeals determines that the appeal before it was
inappropriately classified the Board of Appeals shall give the applicant the opportunity to amend the application and
continue the hearing until the public has been properly notified of the appeal's reclassification and of the time and
place when the hearing shall continue.
D. The CEO, or their designee, shall attend all hearings and may present to the Board of Appeals all plans,
photographs, or other material deemed appropriate for an understanding of the appeal.
E. The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in the proceedings, shall
constitute the record.
F. The record may be keep open after the hearing by order of the Chair until a date established by the order.
4. Decisions of the Board of Appeals.
A. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Planning Board or CEO, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
929
matter on which it is required to pass under these Ordinances, or to affect any variation in the application of these
Ordinances.
B. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals in an open session within thirty (30) days after the hearing, and shall
issue a written decision on all appeals.
C. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and conclusions as well as
the reasons or basis therefore, upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion presented, and the appropriate
order, relief, or denial thereof. Notice of any decision shall be mailed or hand delivered to the petitioner, their
representative or agent, the Planning Board, the CEO, and City Council within seven (7) days of the decision date.
D. Upon notification of the granting of an appeal by the Board of Appeals, the Planning Board or CEO shall
immediately issue a permit in accordance with the conditions of the approval, unless the applicant's proposal
requires additional review..
E. Appeals may be taken within forty-five (45) days from any decision of the Board of Appeals to the Superior Court.
F. Any Board of Appeals reconsideration of an original decision must be reconsidered and the proceedings completed
within thirty (30) days of the vote on the original decision.
G. The right to relief from the terms of these Ordinances granted by vote of the Board of Appeals in a specific case
shall expire if the work or change is not commenced within six (6) months thereafter and if the work or change is
not substantially completed within one year.
H. A second appeal of a similar nature shall not be heard by the Board of Appeals within one year from the date of
denial of the first appeal. However, re-appeal may be made to the Board if substantial new evidence shall be found
or an error or mistake in law or misunderstanding of fact shall have been found.
I. The Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and safeguards regarding location, character, fencing, screening,
landscaping, or other features as it may deem advisable in furthering the intent and purpose of these Ordinances.
J. The Board of Appeals, with the advice and assistance of the Planning Board and CEO, shall maintain a current map
indicating by means of appropriate symbols, colors, or other notations the locations in which it has taken approving
actions.
5. Variances.
The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide upon appeal a variation from the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance not in contradiction to the public interest in respect to a parcel of land or to an existing building
thereon, where a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. The Board of Appeals shall
consider conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance in granting any variance by majority vote. The
Board of Appeals shall not grant variances for uses forbidden ("NO") in any District indicated on the Caribou Land Use
Chart. Variances may be permitted only under the following conditions:
A. Variances are obtainable only for height, minimum lot size, frontage, structure size, setbacks and open space
requirements.
B. Variances can not, under any circumstances, be obtainable for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited.
Unless, after review by the Planning Board and the City Council, in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance,
relief of unnecessary hardship or determine wherein relief may be granted and substantial justice done where
conditions and safeguards are appropriate and in harmony, without derogating from the intent or purpose the Zoning
Ordinance, but not otherwise. All three (3) Boards (Council, Planning, and Appeals) shall review and concur in the
affirmative before a variance is granted for a use prohibited by the Board of Appeals.
C. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that all of the following criteria are met:
1. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted. Such hardship may be
found by the Board of Appeals where this Ordinance, as applied to the applicant's property, substantially
destroys or decreases the value of the property in question for any permitted use to which the land or property
can reasonably be put; and
2. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions
in the neighborhood; and
3. That the granting of a variance shall not alter the essential character of the locality; and
4. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner. Mere inconvenience to the
property owner shall not satisfy this requirement.
C. A disability variance may be granted by the Board of Appeals to a property owner for the purpose of making that
property accessible to a person with a disability who is living on the property. The Board shall restrict any variance
granted under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of structures necessary for
access to or egress from the property with the disability. The Board may impose conditions on the variance,
930
including limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives
on the property. For the purposes of this subsection, a disability shall have the same meaning as a physical or
mental handicap under Title 5 MRSA §4553.
E. The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to preserve the terms of the
Ordinance as much as possible, and it may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary, to this end.
F. A copy of all variances granted in Shoreland Areas by the Board of Appeals shall be submitted to the Department of
Environmental Protection within fourteen (14) days of the Board's decision.
G. If the Board of Appeals grants a variance under this subsection, a certificate indicating the name of the current
property owner, identifying the property by reference to the last recorded deed in its chain of title and indicating the
fact that a variance, including any conditions on the variance, has been granted and the date of granting, shall be
prepared in a recordable form by the Board of Appeals. This certificate must be recorded in the Aroostook County
Registry of Deeds, Northern Office by the applicant within ninety (90) days of the date of the final written approval
of the variance or the variance is void. The variance is not valid until recorded as provided in this subsection. For
the purpose of this subsection, the date of the final written approval shall be the date stated on the written approval.
H. The Board of Appeals shall notify the Chair of the City Council and the Planning Board in writing of any variance
granted under the provisions of the Ordinance.
6. Stay of Proceedings.
An appeal stays all legal proceedings related to the action appealed from unless the CEO or Planning Board, from whom
the appeal is taken, certifies to the Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with the CEO or Board of
Appeals, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the CEO's or Board of Appeal's opinion, cause
irreparable harm to property or create a threat to the life or health of any person including the appellant. In such case, the
CEO or Board of Appeals, if legally authorized by State law or local ordinance, may seek injunctive relief or, in
appropriate cases, refer the matter to the City Council for prosecution.
Historical Note: Section 13-810 §1C as amended April 24, 2006.
Sec. 13-820 Planning Board.
1. Appointment.
A. Planning Board members shall be appointed by the City Council and sworn in by the City Clerk or other person
authorized to administer oaths.
B. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members. Neither a municipal officer nor their spouse may be a member of the
Board.
C. The term of each member shall be three (3) years, except the initial appointments which shall be: 1 for one year, 1
for two (2) years, 1 for three (3) years, 1 for four (4) years, and 1 for five (5) years, respectively.
D. When there is a permanent vacancy declared, the City Council may within sixty (60) days of its occurrence be
required to appoint a person to serve for the unexpired term. A vacancy may be declared by the voting members of
the Board upon the resignation or death of any member, or when a member ceases to be a voting resident of the
City, or when a member fails to attend three (3) consecutive meetings, or fails to attend at least 75 percent of all
meetings during the preceding twelve (12) month period. When a vacancy is declared, the Chair of the Board shall
immediately so advise the Council in writing. The Board may recommend to the Council that the attendance
provision be waived for cause, in which case no vacancy will then exist until the Council disapproves the
recommendation.
E. Any member can be removed by the City Council in accordance with the Caribou City Charter.
F. Planning Board members are expected to be knowledgeable of laws, ordinances, regulations, and Board policies and
to abide by them.
2. Organization and Rules.
A. The voting members of the Board shall elect a Chair, a Secretary, or other officers as needed, from among its
members by a majority vote and create and fill such other offices as it may determine at the annual organizational
meeting which shall be held on the first regular Planning Board meeting in January, and the election shall follow
immediately thereafter. The term of all offices shall be (1) year(s) with eligibility for reelection.
931
1. The Chair shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the Planning Board. The Chair has the authority to
appoint all committees, to call all work sessions and to preside over executive sessions.
2. The Recording Secretary shall be responsible for the minutes and records of the Board, shall keep a record of all
resolutions, votes, transactions, correspondences, findings and conclusions of the Board and other duties as may
be normally carried out by the secretary. All records shall be deemed public and may be inspected during
normal business hours. Any member of the public may obtain a copy of the record from the Board upon
payment of the cost of reproduction, and postage.
3. The CEO shall be responsible for the agendas of regular meetings and special meetings with the Chair,
distribution of the notice of the meetings and hearings, correspondence of the Board, and other duties as may be
normally carried out by the secretary.
B. Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from voting on a particular matter shall be decided by a
majority vote of the members, except the member who is being challenged.
C. The Board shall hold at least one regular meeting of the Board each month.
D. No meeting of the Board shall be held without a quorum consisting of four (4) members.
E. Planning Board business shall be conducted in accordance with the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated and/or local
ordinances.
F. The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of business.
G. The Chair may call a special meeting of the Board.
3. Duties and Powers.
A. The Board shall:
1. Perform such duties and exercise such powers as are provided by ordinance/regulations and charter and the laws
of the State of Maine, to include:
a. The responsibility for the directing and overseeing the activity of the comprehensive planning program;
b. Reviewing subdivision proposals;
c. Facilitating the interpretation of land use ordinances;
d. Administering and issuing permits pursuant to land use ordinances;
e. Projecting a course, through community planning, for the City's future;
f. Undertaking duties to conduct community planning activity;
g. Conducting a municipal planning program;
h. Seeing that all Planning Board members have an obligation to act reasonably and promptly; and
i. Facilitating in obtaining public participation, public relations, and citizen involvement.
B. The Board may obtain goods and services necessary to its proper function within the limits of appropriations made
for the purpose.
4. Meeting Organization.
A. Regular Meetings.
1. Regular meetings of the Planning Board will be scheduled during the Annual Meeting. The meeting shall be at
the Caribou Municipal Building or other suitable meeting place. The Chair may schedule special meetings on
24 hours notice to the Planning Board members, City Manager, City Council Chair, CEO, and the media. If
there is no business scheduled at least seven (7) calendar days before the meeting the Assistant City Manager, in
consultation with the CEO, may cancel the meeting and shall inform the Planning Board, City Manager, and the
media of such.
2. All meetings shall be open to the public.
3. No official business may be conducted without a quorum present. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members.
It shall not include anyone who can not participate due to a conflict of interest. "Conflict of interest" means
direct or indirect pecuniary interest, which shall include primary benefit to any member of the person's
immediate family, their employer, or the employer of any member of the person's immediate family. It shall
also include a situation where the Board member, by reason of their interest, is placed in a situation of
temptation to serve their own personal interest, instead of the public's interest. Any question of whether a
member shall be disqualified from voting on a particular matter shall be decided by a majority vote of the
members present, except the member challenged.
4. In the event a quorum is not present, the Board members are authorized to request that the Chair reschedule the
meeting to another date and adjourn the meeting. If the date is other than a regular meeting date the
932
Corresponding Secretary shall have the responsibility of providing adequate notice to the Board members, City
officials, and the general public.
5. All comments addressed to the Board shall be made through the Chair.
6. All matters shall be decided by a roll call vote. A majority of the entire Board's voting members (3) is needed
to pass a motion. When a motion results in a tie vote the Chair of the Board shall vote to break the tie.
7. All decisions must be based on whether the applicant has provided sufficient evidence to prove that all
applicable law and ordinance requirements have been complied with.
B. Agendas.
1. Regular meeting agendas shall follow the following format:
a. Call to order and determine the presence of a quorum.
b. Public Hearing (if any is scheduled)
c. Minutes of the previous meeting and correspondence.
d. Old business.
e. New business.
f. Other.
g. Adjournment.
2. Agendas shall be posted in the City Office and mailed to the Board members at least seven (7) days before the
meeting.
3. New applications shall be received at the City Office's, Planning and Code Enforcement Office, no later than
ten (10) days to the meeting and shall be placed on the next available slot for new applications on the Board's
agenda, and the applicant so notified of the date and time. At that initial meeting the Board shall make written
findings whether the application is complete, and take all necessary steps to notify the applicant of the Board's
decision.
C. Work Sessions.
1. The Chair may, with the approval of the majority of the Board, call work sessions for the purpose of updating
the Comprehensive Plan, Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinances, Planning Board by-laws, and other
information work items relating to the Board's Activities, providing that the public is notified. A quorum shall
be present to conduct any business.
2. Work sessions are open to the public. The general public shall be barred from addressing the Board, unless a
majority of the Board permits the public to speak.
D. Executive Sessions.
No other matters may be considered in that particular Executive Session.
1. Upon the vote of at least 3/5 of the Board members, present and voting, the Board may call for an Executive
Session.
2. Within the Executive Session it shall be the Chair's responsibility to ensure that only that business for which the
session was called will be discussed, and no official action will be taken.
5. Hearings.
A. The Board, by majority vote at a regular or special meeting, may schedule a Public Hearing on an application within
the time limits established by state law or local ordinance.
B. The Board shall cause notice of the date, time, and place of such hearing, the location of the proposed building or
lot, and the general nature of the question involved, to be given to the person making application and to be posted in
three (3) prominent locations throughout the City at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. The Board shall also
cause notice of the hearing to be given to the City Council. The owners of the property abutting that property, or
impacted upon, for which the application is taken shall be notified by mail at least seven (7) days prior to the date of
the hearing.
C. The Board shall provide, as a matter of policy for exclusion, irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
D. Order of Business at a Public Hearing.
1. The Chair calls the hearing to order and determines whether there is a quorum.
933
2. The Chair then describes the purpose of the hearing, the nature of the case, and the general procedures to be
followed.
3. The Board decides whether the applicant has sufficient right, title, or interest to appear before the Board.
4. The Board determines whether it has jurisdiction over the application.
5. The Board determines which individuals attending the hearing are "interested parties". "Interested Parties" are
those persons who request to offer testimony and evidence and to participate in oral cross-examination. They
would include abutting property owners, property owners directly impacted by the application, and those who
might be adversely affected by the Board's decision. Parties may be required by the Board to consolidate or
join their appearances in part or in whole if their interests or contentions are substantially similar and such
consolidation would expedite the hearing. The City Council and the CEO shall automatically be made parties to
the proceeding. Interested parties will be required to state for the record their name, residence, business or
professional affiliation, the nature of their interest in the hearing, and whether or not they represent another
individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, state agency, or other legal
entity for the purpose of the hearing.
6. The Chair gives a statement of the case and incorporates into the record correspondences and reports filed with
the Board prior to the hearing. This material shall be available for public inspection.
7. The applicant is given the opportunity to present their case without interruption.
8. The Board and the interested parties may ask questions of the applicant through the Chair.
9. The interested parties are given the opportunity to present their testimony, starting with proponents followed by
opponents. The Board may call its own witnesses, such as the CEO.
10. The applicant may ask questions of the interested parties and Board witnesses directly.
11. All parties are given the opportunity to refute or rebut statements made throughout the hearing.
12. The Board shall receive comments and questions from all observers and interested citizens who wish to express
their views.
13. The hearing is closed after all parties have been heard. If additional time is needed, the hearing may be
continued to a later date. All interested parties shall be notified of the date, time, and place of the continued
hearing, and the reasons for the continuance.
14. Upon such request made prior to or during the course of the hearing, the Chair may permit persons participating
in any hearing pursuant to these by-laws to file written statements with the Board for inclusion in the record
after the conclusion of the hearing, within such time and upon such notification to the other participants as the
Chair may require.
15. Board members and its consultants have the right to prepare findings and conclusions at any public meeting
prior to the decision being finalized. The Board may waive any of the above rules upon good cause shown.
Any participant or other member of the public may obtain a copy of the record from the Board upon payment of
the cost of transcription, reproduction, and postage.
6. Decisions.
A. Decisions by the Board shall be made within the time limits established by state law and local ordinances and
regulations.
B. The final decision on any matter before the Board shall be issued as a written order signed by the Chair. The
transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in the proceedings, and
signed minutes of the meetings/hearing shall constitute the record. All decisions shall become a part of the record
and shall include a specific statement of findings and conclusions as well as the reasons or basis therefore, upon all
the material issues of fact, law, or discretion presented and the appropriate order, relief or denial therefore. At a
minimum, the record should specifically state that the applicant has/has not met all applicable state statutory
requirements, all applicable City ordinances, and all applicable City regulations, and those legal documents shall be
specifically referenced.
C. The Board, in reaching said decision, shall be guided by standards specified in the applicable statute, ordinance, or
regulation as well as by community goals and policies as specified in a comprehensive plan, if any, and by the
findings of the Board in each case.
D. Notice of any decision, including the findings and conclusions/minutes, shall be sent by mail or hand delivered to
the applicant, their representative or agent within fourteen (14) days of being rendered.
E. Decisions of the Board shall be immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be made public record.
The date of filing of each decision shall be entered in the official records and minutes of the Board.
7. Appeals.
Appeal of the decision of the Planning Board shall be heard by the Board of Appeals.
934
Historical Note: Section 13-820 §1b, 1c, 2A(1), 2b, 2c, 2f as amended March 4, 2008; Section 13-820 4(A)(1) & Section 13-
820 4(A)(3) as amended by City Council April 8, 2013.
Sec. 13-830 Board of Appeals.
1. Establishment and Administration.
The Board of Appeals is hereby established. The word "Board," when used in this Section, shall be construed to mean
the Board of Appeals. The Board use shall consist of five (5) members of qualified persons with legal, certifications in
zoning, or other applicable qualifications to hear administrative appeals. Appointment to the Board shall be by the City
Council for an indefinite period of time providing the qualification of appointment remains. Board members may be
removed by the City Council in accordance with the Caribou City Charter. The members of the Board shall receive a fee
of $25 per meeting or appeals plus mileage as set annually by the City Council for their services while under
appointment. Absence of a member from three (3) consecutive meetings without written explanation shall be construed
to be a resignation from the Board and shall require filling of the vacancy by action by the City Council. A vacancy shall
be filled for the unexpired term only. Neither a municipal officer nor his/her spouse may be a member of the Board.
Historical Note: Section 13-830 as amended October 12, 2011.
Sec. 13-831 Board of Appeals Bylaws Provisions
1. Meetings
1. The regular meeting of the Board shall be held as necessary.
2. Special meetings of the Board may be called by the Caribou Code Enforcement Officer or City Manager. At least
forty-eight (48) hours written notice of the time, place and business of the meeting shall be given each member of
the Board, the City Council, the Planning Board, City Manager and the Code Enforcement Officer.
3. The order of business at regular meetings of the Board shall be as follows: (a) roll call; (b) reading and approval of
the minutes of the preceding meeting; (c) action on held cases; (d) public hearing (when scheduled); (e) other
business; (f) adjournment.
4. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, except executive sessions. No votes may be taken by the
Board except in public meeting. The Board shall not hold executive sessions except as permitted by the Freedom of
Information Act.
5. All meetings will be conducted under Robert’s Rule.
2. Voting
1. A quorum shall consist of three (3) members of the Board.
2. No hearing or meeting of the Board shall be held, nor any action taken, in the absence of a quorum; however, those
members present shall be entitled to request the chairperson to call a special meeting for a subsequent date.
3. All matters shall be decided by a show of hands vote. Decisions on any matter before the Board shall require the
affirmative vote of a majority of those members present and voting, by in no case less than three (3) affirming votes.
4. A vote or by a lesser number than the required majority shall be considered a rejection of the application under
consideration.
5. If a member has a conflict of interest, that member shall not be counted by the Board in establishing the quorum for
the matter in which he or she has a conflict.
3. Reconsideration
1. The Board may reconsider any decision. The Board must decide to reconsider any decision, notify all interested
parties and make any change in its original decision within 30 days of its prior decision. The Board may conduct
additional hearings and receive and review additional evidence and testimony.
2. Reconsideration should be for one of the following reasons:
a. The record contains significant factual errors due to fraud or mistake regarding facts upon which the decision was
based; or
b. The Board misinterpreted the ordinance, followed improper procedures, or acted beyond its
jurisdiction.
Historical Note: Section 13-831 was added February 11, 2008 and amended October 12, 2011.
935
Sec. 13-840 Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses.
The City Council shall establish annually, on the advice of the Planning Board and CEO, a schedule of fees, charges, and
expenses for matters pertaining to these Ordinances. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the City Office, and may be
altered or amended after a public hearing by the City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been
paid in full by the applicant, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
Sec. 13-850 Amendments.
1. Initiation.
An amendment to these Ordinances may be initiated by:
A. The Planning Board, by majority vote of the Board;
B. City Council through a request to the Planning Board;
C. An individual, through a request to the Planning Board; or,
D. Written petition to the City Council of a number of voters equal to at least 10 percent of the number of votes cast in
the City at the last gubernatorial election.
2. Procedure.
A. Any proposal for an amendment shall be made to the Planning Board in writing stating the specific changes
requested. When a change in zoning boundaries is proposed, the application shall state the nature, extent, and location of
the boundary change proposal, and shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the areas to be changed, with
dimensions. When an amendment is proposed by other than the City Council or the Planning Board, a fee of ninety
($90) dollars shall accompany the proposal to cover the costs of hearings and advertisements.
3. Adoption of Amendment.
A. Within thirty (30) days of receiving an amendment, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
amendment, and unless the amendment has been submitted by the City Council or by a petition, the Board shall vote
whether to forward the amendment to the City Council. The Board shall make a written recommendation regarding
passage to the City Council prior to any action on the amendment by the City Council.
B. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice of the hearing shall be posted at
three (3) prominent locations throughout the City at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall
contain the time, date, and place of hearing, and sufficient detail about the proposed changes as to give adequate
notice of their content. If the proposed changes are extensive, a brief summary of the changes, together with an
indication that a full text is available at the City Clerk's office shall be adequate notice.
C. An amendment to these Ordinances may be adopted after a public hearing by:
1. A majority vote of the City Council if the proposed amendment is recommended by the Planning Board; or
2. Two/thirds (2/3) majority vote of the City Council if the proposed amendment is not recommended by the
Planning Board.
4. Repetitive Petitions.
No proposed change in these Ordinances which has been unfavorably acted upon by the City Council shall be considered
on its merits again by the City Council within one (1) year after the date of such unfavorable action, unless adoption of
the proposed change is recommended by unanimous vote of the Planning Board.
Historical Note: Section 13-850 §2A as amended April 24, 2006.
Sec. 13-900 Definitions.
1. Construction of Language.
The following definitions shall apply to the Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Caribou. In
the interpretation and enforcement of these Ordinances, all words other than those specifically defined in the Ordinance
shall have the meaning implied by their context in the Ordinance, their ordinarily accepted meaning, or as defined herein.
In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of the Ordinance, illustration, or table, the text
shall control.
A. The word "person" includes firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as
an individual or any other legal entity.
936
B. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural numbers includes
the singular.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel".
E. The words "used" or "occupied", as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words
"intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
F. The word "City" shall mean the City of Caribou, Maine.
G. The word "CEO" shall mean Code Enforcement Officer.
H. The term "Zoning Ordinance" shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Caribou.
I. The term "Subdivision Ordinance" shall mean the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Caribou.
2. Definitions.
Abandoned: The stopping of an activity, use, business, in addition to: actions taken by an owner or representative that
removes the major portion of materials, goods, equipment, facilities, or parts thereof necessary for the operation of the
activity, use, business. Also contains the element of abandoned and/or change to a less intensive use of the
property/structure.
Abutter: Any person, to include property owner, leasee, or tenant, whose property adjoins or is directly across the road,
street, right-of-way, stream, or waterway from the lot under consideration. For purposes of receiving testimony only,
and not for purposes of notification, the term "abutter" shall include any person who is able to demonstrate that their land
will be directly affected by the proposal under consideration or a party whom the Planning Board determines would be
impacted by the proposal.
Accessory Use or Structure: A use or structure which is customarily and in fact both incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the structure. The term "incidental" in reference to the principal use or structure shall mean subordinate
and minor in significance to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate the
principal use of the lot. In shoreland areas, a deck or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to
the principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the principal structure.
Agent: Any person having written authorization to act in behalf of a property owner, signed by the property owner.
Aggrieved Party: Any person whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a permit or
variance under an ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance has been granted; or any
other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such
permit or variance.
Agriculture: The production, keeping, or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals, including but not
limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products;
livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and green house products. Agriculture does include animal husbandry,
and the processing of goods carried out pursuant to a home food manufacturing license from the Maine Development of
Agriculture, but does not include forest management and timber harvesting activities. As an accessory use to the
principal use of the lot for agriculture, the sale of: produce and products actually grown, raised or processed on the
premises; or fresh produce purchased off-site to supplement sales during the growing season, and agriculturally related
products, provided that such produce and products do not occupy more than 25 percent of the space devoted to retail
sales.
For the purpose of this definition, "agriculturally related products" means items produced under a home food
manufacturing license from the Maine Department of Agriculture, such as jams and jellies, honey, cheese and dairy
products, homemade baked goods, herbs and spices, ice cream, and maple syrup. The allowed retail sales may be in
farm stand or stands in which a total of no more than five hundred (500) square feet are occupied by the sales activity.
For the purpose of this definition, the keeping of horses and horticulture, are considered to be uses separate from
agriculture.
Agricultural Products, Processing, and Storage: Establishments engaged in the manufacturing, processing, and/or
packaging of foods, dairy products, commercial composting, and storage of such products.
Agricultural Sales and Service: The use of buildings or land for the sale of equipment or products or services to those
engaged in agriculture.
937
Airport: Property that is maintained for the landing, refueling, and takeoff of aircraft and for the receiving and discharge
of passengers and cargo traveling by air, to include aviation-related facilities, structures, and property.
Airport Apron: The pavement area used or intended to be used for the parking and movement of aircraft.
Alteration: Any change, addition, or modification in construction, other than cosmetic or decorative; or any change in
the structural members of buildings such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
Amusement Facility: Any private, commercial premises which is maintained or operated primarily for the amusement,
patronage, or recreation of the public, containing table sports, pinball machines, video games, or similar mechanical or
electronic games, collectively, whether activated by coins, tokens, or discs, or whether activated through remote control
by the management.
Amusement Park: A park operated by an entity, other than a unit of government, with a predominance of outdoor games
and activities for entertainment, including motorized rides, water slides, miniature gold, batting cages, and the like.
Animal Husbandry: The breeding, raising, or keeping of livestock, other than customary household pets, for commercial
purposes. Animal husbandry does not include a kennel.
Antenna: Any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of
radio or electromagnetic frequency signals.
Antenna Height: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest
point of the structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. Measurement of tower height shall include antenna, base
pad, and other appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished grade of the facility site. If the support structure is
on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
Apartment: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for rental use by one family as a habitation
and which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing, and sanitary facilities. The term does not include
recreational vehicles or hotel/motel/inn units.
Applicant: A person applying for development approval. An applicant, owner, and a developer may be one in the same.
Aquaculture: The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.
Aquifer: A geological unit in which porous and permeable conditions exist and thus are capable of yielding usable
amounts of water.
Aquifer Recharge Area: An area that has soils and geological features that are conducive to allowing significant
amounts of surface water to percolate into groundwater.
Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater change of flooding in any
given year.
Artificial Monument: A man-made object used to mark and identify the corner or line of property boundaries. Artificial
monuments are to be in conformance with current standards of the Maine Board of Licensure for Professional Land
Surveyors. The term "artificial monument" includes the following:
1. A granite monument;
2. A concrete monument;
3. A drill hole in ledge;
4. A metal pipe or pin; or
5. A steel bar no less than l/2" in diameter and 3' in length.
Assisted Living Facility: Residences for the frail elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal care, and supervision of
self-administered medication. They may provide other services, such as recreational activities, financial services, and
transportation.
938
Automobile Graveyard: A yard, field, or other area used as a place of storage, other than temporary storage by an
establishment or place of business which is engaged primarily in doing auto body repair work for the purpose for making
repairs to render a motor vehicle serviceable, for three (3) or more unserviceable, discarded, worn out or junked motor
vehicles, bodies, or engines gathered together including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, and/or tractors.
Automobile Body Shop: A business engaged in body, frame, or fender straightening and repair, and painting and
undercoating.
Automobile Repair Garage: A place where, with or without the attendant sale of engine fuels, the following services
may be carried out: general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service,
such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair; over-all painting and undercoating of automobiles.
Automobile (Vehicle) Sales and Service: The use of any building or land area for the display and sale of new or used
automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreation vehicles, motorcycles, or similar motorized vehicles, including repair
facilities for such vehicles.
Automobile Service Station: A place where gasoline, or any other automobile engine fuel (stored in approved containers
or tanks), kerosene, or motor oil and lubricants or grease are retailed directly to the public on the premises; including
storage of unlicensed vehicles and not including body, frame, or fender straightening and repair.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT): The average number of vehicles per day that enter and exit the premises or travel over a
specific section of road.
Average Annual Daily Traffic (AADT): The average annual number of vehicles per day that enter and exit the premises
or travel over a specific section of road.
Aviation-Related: Any activity, use, facility, structure, service, property, or property right used or intended to be used
for any operational purpose related to, in support of, or complementary to, the flight of aircraft to or from an airport, to
include convenience concessions serving the public.
Babysitting: Taking care of a child or children for a short period of time while the parents are away, usually for
compensation.
Base Flood: Means the flood having a one percent change of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, alternately
referred to as the 100 year flood.
Basement: The enclosed area underneath a structure, typically having a masonry floor and walls, which comprise the
structure's foundation. The clear height up to the joists supporting the floor directly above shall be three (3) feet or
greater.
Bathroom: A room with a bathtub and/or shower, toilet, and washstand.
Bed and Breakfast: Any dwelling in which transient lodging with a breakfast (full or continental) are provided and
offered to the public for compensation for less than one week. The dwelling shall also be occupied by a permanent
resident. There shall be no provision for cooking in any of the individual guest rooms. If evening meals are served as
well, the establishment shall be considered an eating and lodging establishment for the purposes of licensing. (Licenses
are required for anyone renting one room and serving food.)
Boarding Home for Sheltered Care: A non-profit or for-profit boarding home for the sheltered care of persons with
special needs, which, in addition to providing food and shelter, may also provide some combination of personal care,
social or counseling services, and transportation.
Boarding House: Any residential structure where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation for a
period of at least one week, and where a family residing in the building acts as proprietor or owner. There shall be no
provision for cooking in any individual guest room.
Boathouse: A non-residential structure designed for the purpose of protecting or storing boats for non-commercial
purposes.
939
Boat Launching Facility: A facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft, and which may
include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Bottle Club: An establishment in which patrons primarily bring their own liquor for consumption on the premises.
Buffer: A part of a property or an entire property, which is not built upon and is specifically intended to separate and
thus minimize the effects of a land use activity (e.g. noise, dust, visibility, glare, etc.) on adjacent properties or on
sensitive natural resources.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals,
or personal property.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured between the average finished grade of the ground at the front of a
building and the highest point of the roof, not including chimneys, spires towers, or similar accessory structures.
Bulk Grain Storage: Establishments primarily engaged in the warehousing and storage of grain for resale or own use,
other than normal storage associated with on-site consumption.
Campground: Any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary living quarters, including,
but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles, or other shelters for which a fee is charged.
Campground, Summer/Winter: A campground for the accommodation of children or other organized groups for
educational or recreational purposes. The term is distinct from campground generally and does not include parks for
recreational vehicles.
Capital Improvements Program (CIP): A municipality’s proposed schedule of future projects listed in order of
construction priority, together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project.
Cardholder: "Cardholder" means a qualifying patient, a primary caregiver or a principal officer, board member,
employee or agent of a nonprofit dispensary who has been issued and possesses a valid registry identification card.
Catering Establishment: Any kitchen, commissary, or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or service
elsewhere or for food service on the premise during special catered events.
Cemetery: Property used for the interring of the dead.
Certificate of Compliance: A document signed by the CEO stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the
provisions of a Floodplain Management Ordinance.
Certificate of Occupancy: A document signed by the CEO stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, Building Code, and the Subdivision Ordinance of the
municipality.
Change of Use: A change from one category in the Land Use Permit Table to another, or the addition of a new category
of use to an existing use.
Child Day Care Facility: Any dwelling, building, or portion thereof which child day care services are provided including
any on-site outdoor play area. Child day care facilities shall be further differentiated by the following three
classifications:
Family Day Care Home: Any premises or dwelling unit other than the child's own home where the child care areas
are being used as a family residence, operated for profit or not for profit, in which child day care is provided at any
one time on a regular basis to three, four, five, or six children, who are not relatives of the caregiver. Day care
service for children in this type of facility is different from "babysitting."
Group Day Care Home: A facility in which care is provided for more than six (6), but less than twelve (12)
children, at any one time, where the child care areas are being used as a family residence.
Day Care Center: A facility which is licensed to provide care for seven (7) or more children at any one time where
the child care areas are not being used as a family residence.
Church: A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, designed, primarily intended, and used for the
conduct of religious services, excluding Sunday School.
940
Clinic: An establishment where patients are accepted for treatment by a group of physicians practicing medicine
together, but shall not offer domicilliary arrangements; medical or dental.
Club: Any association of persons organized for social, religious, benevolent, or academic purposes; whose facilities are
open to members and guests including fraternities, sororities, and social organizations.
Club, Private: Any building or rooms, which serves as a meeting place for an incorporated or unincorporated association
for civic, social, cultural, religious, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its
members and not for the general public.
Club, Recreational: Any building or land which serves as a meeting place or recreation area for an incorporated or
unincorporated association or group operated for the benefit of its members and guests and not open to the general
public, and not engaged in activities customarily carried on by a business for pecuniary gain.
Cluster Development: A development designed to promote the creation of open space by a reduction in dimensional and
area requirements.
Code Enforcement Officer (CEO): A person appointed by the municipal officers to administer and enforce an ordinance.
Reference to the CEO may be construed to include Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector, and the
like, where applicable.
Colocation: The use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one wireless telecommunications provider.
Commercial Composting: The processing and sale of more than 1000 cubic yards of compost per year.
Commercial Recreation: Any commercial enterprise which receives a fee in return for the provision of some recreational
activity, including but not limited to: racquet clubs, health facility, and amusement parks, but not including amusement
centers.
Commercial Use: Commercial shall include the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than home occupations, the
intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and services,
exclusive of rental of residential buildings and dwelling units.
Commercial Waste Hauler. Any person engaged in the collection and transportation of solid waste for a fee or other
compensation.
Commissary: A catering establishment, restaurant, or any other place in which food, containers, or supplies are kept,
handled, prepared, packaged, or stored.
Common Driveway: A vehicle accessway serving two dwelling units.
Common Open Space: Land within or related to a development, not individually owned, which is designed and intended
for the common use or enjoyment of the residents or the general public. It may include complementary structures and
improvements, typically used for maintenance and operation of the usable open space, such as for outdoor recreation.
Community Center: A building which provides a meeting place for local, non-profit community organizations on a
regular basis. The center shall not be engaged in activities customarily carried on by a business.
Community Residences for the Developmentally Disabled: A residential facility, licensed by the state, providing food,
shelter, and personal guidance, with supervision, to developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons whose require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community and shall include group homes, halfway
houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels.
Community Residential Home: A dwelling unit licensed to serve clients of the appropriate governmental department
that provides a living environment for unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including
such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of an
aged person, a physically disabled or handicapped person, a developmentally disabled person, a non dangerous mentally
ill person, and a child as defined in the appropriate statue.
Community Shelters for Victims of Domestic Violence: A residence providing food, shelter, medical care, legal
assistance, personal guidance, and other services to persons who have been victims of domestic violence, including any
children of such victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or
psychological welfare.
941
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of any required fee or guarantee, a
signed application, and all information required by the appropriate application, except as validly waived by the CEO or
Planning Board, whomever is responsible for conducting the review, to waive the submission of required information.
Comprehensive Plan: A document or interrelated documents adopted by the municipality's legislative body, containing
an inventory and analysis of existing conditions, a compilation of goals for the development of the community, an
expression of policies for achieving these goals, and a strategy for implementation of the policies.
Conditional Zoning: The process by which the municipal legislative body may rezone property to permit the use of the
property subject to conditions not generally applicable to other properties similarly zoned.
Condominiums: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is
designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions under a declaration, or an amendment to a
declaration, duly recorded pursuant to MRSA Title 33 Chapter 31. Real estate is not a condominium unless the
undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. Any real estate development consisting
exclusively of clustered, detached, single family residences is not a condominium, unless so designated in the
declaration.
Confined Feeding Operations: Specialized livestock production enterprises with confined beef cattle and hog feeding
and poultry and egg farms and accessory structures. These operations have large animal populations restricted to small
areas.
Conforming: A building, structure, use of land, or portion thereof, which complies with all the provisions of an
ordinance.
Congregate Housing: Apartments and dwellings with communal dining facilities and services, such as housekeeping,
organized social and recreational activities, transportation services, and other support services appropriate for
functionally impaired persons.
Congregate Housing, Elderly: A type of dwelling which is occupied by elderly persons and that provides shared
community space and shared dining facilities and normally also provides its residents with housekeeping services,
personal care and assistance, transportation assistance, recreational activities, and/or specialized shared services such as
medical support services. By "elderly" persons is meant a person 60 years old or older, or a couple that constitutes a
household and at least one of whom is 60 years old or older at the time of entry into the facility. By "shared community
space" is meant space designed to be used in common for the enjoyment and leisure of residents of the facility, such as,
by way of example only, reading rooms, sitting rooms, recreational rooms, rooms for entertaining quests and exercise
rooms. By "shared dining facilities" is meant a room or rooms designed for the serving of meals to residents sitting
together, plus the kitchen and ancillary facilities required to prepare the meals. An elderly congregate housing
development shall include either or both of the following types of residential units:
1. Dwelling units, as defined by this Section; and
2. Residential care units, which do not meet the definition of dwelling unit because they have no cooking facilities
within the units, but which normally consist of rooms with sleeping and sanitary facilities.
Additionally, the term "elderly congregate housing" includes specialized facilities that provide long-term residential care,
such as those designed specifically for persons with Alzheimer's Disease or other afflictions of the elderly for which
specialized care outside of a nursing home may be appropriate. Elderly congregate housing is distinct from
"convalescent home or rest home or nursing home," which is defined separately.
Conservation Easement: A non-possessory interest in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the
purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open space values of real property; assuring its
availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open space use; protecting natural resources; or maintaining air and
water quality.
Constructed: Includes built, erected, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises
which are required for construction. Excavation, fill, paving, drainage, and the like, shall be considered as part of
construction.
942
Construction Trailer: A temporary structure or structures, to include a mobile home, tractor trailer, or similar structure,
which is used in conjunction with construction activities and which is used or constructed in such a manner as to permit
daily occupancy and/or the storage of equipment and materials.
Continuing Care Retirement Community: An age-restricted development that provides a continuum of accommodations
and care, from independent living to long-term bed care, and enters into contracts to provide lifelong care in exchange
for the payment of monthly fees and an entrance fee in excess of one year of monthly fees.
Contract Zoning: The process by which the property owner, in consideration of the zoning of that person's property,
agrees to the imposition of certain conditions or restrictions not imposed on other similarly zoned properties.
Convalescent Home, Rest Home, or Nursing Home: A facility in which nursing care and medical services are performed
under the general direction of persons licensed to provide medical care in the State of Maine for the accommodation of
convalescent or other persons who are not in need of hospital care, but who do require, on a 24-hour basis, nursing care
and related medical services. A convalescent home, rest home, or nursing home is distinct from elderly congregate
housing.
Crawl Space: A space, usually about two (2) feet high, provided in a building in order to enable access to plumbing,
wiring, and/or equipment.
Curb Cut: The opening along the curb line or right-of-way line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the road.
Day Care Facility: “Day Care Facility” shall mean any dwelling, building, or portion thereof which child day care
services are provided including any on-site outdoor play area as permitted by the City and further defined under Section
13-900 (2).
Deck: An uncovered structure with a floor, elevated above ground level.
Decorative Changes: Repainting or re-siding; removing or replacing trim, railings, or other non-structural architectural
details; or the addition, removal, or change of location of windows and doors.
Deer Wintering Areas: Areas used by deer during the winter for protection from deep snows, cold winds, and low
temperatures, as identified by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
Demolition/Waste Disposal: A facility, including a landfill, operated by a public, quasi-public, or private entity which
purpose is to dispose of useless, unwanted, or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing,
including by way of an example, and not by limitation to, rubbish, garbage, scrap metals, junk, refuse, inert material,
landscape refuse, and demolition debris. The definition does not, however, include commercial hazardous waste
disposal facilities or recycling of products.
Density: The number of units per acre of land.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including buildings, landscaping, parking
areas, and streets.
Developer: A person who is developing the land. The developer, owner, and the applicant may be one in the same.
Development: Any man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, subdivisions,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
Dimensional Requirements: Numerical standards relating to spatial relationships, including but not limited to, setback,
lot area, shore or road frontage, and height.
Direct Watershed: That portion of the watershed which does not first drain through an upstream lake.
Disability, Physical or Mental: Any disability infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenial defect or mental
condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness, and includes the
physical or mental condition of a person that constitutes a substantial disability as determined by a physician or, in the
case of mental disability, by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory impairment that
requires special education, vocational rehabilitation, or related services.
943
District: A specified portion of the municipality, delineated on the Official Zoning Map, within which certain
regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
Drive-Up Facility: An establishment that, by design of physical facilities or by service, encourages customers to receive
a service or obtain a product that may be used or consumed in a motor vehicle on the premises while remaining in the
vehicle. Such as, but not limited to, Automated Teller Machines (ATMs).
Driveway: A vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving two (2) lots or less.
Drug Free Safe Zones: “Drug Free Safe Zones” in Caribou Code Section 8-105 are all public athletic fields, parks,
playgrounds and recreation facilities under the jurisdiction of the City of Caribou shall be designated as Drug-Free Safe
Zones in accordance with the State of Maine Title 17-A §1101(23). Any subject apprehended dealing drugs within 1,000
feet of any designated Drug Free Safe Zone shall be subject to enhance penalties (17-A MRSA Chapter 45).
Dwelling: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary
living quarters. The term shall include mobile homes and manufactured housing, but not recreational vehicles.
Single-Family: A building containing only one (1) dwelling unit for occupation by not more than one (1) family.
Two-Family (Duplex): A building containing only two (2) dwelling units, for occupation by not more than two (2)
families.
Multi-Family: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, such buildings being designed for residential
use and occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of one another; with the number of families
not exceeding the number of dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use by one family as a habitation and
which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing, and sanitary facilities. The term includes mobile homes,
but not recreational vehicles or hotel/motel/inn units.
Easement: A right, such as a right-of-way, afforded a person to make limited use of another's real property.
Elderly Housing Complex: A dwelling complex that is occupied by a minimum of ten (10) persons, 60 years of age or
older, and/or handicapped persons, as a residential living environment with other persons 60 years of age or older and/or
handicapped persons.
Emergency Operations: Operations conducted for the public health, safety, or general welfare, such as protection of
resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human beings, property, and
livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Enclosed, Locked Facility: "Enclosed, locked facility" means a closet, room, greenhouse or other enclosed area
equipped with locks and other security devices required by the State and this Ordinance that permits access only by a
cardholder or qualified person employed by the Registered Nonprofit Dispensary.
Engineered Subsurface Wastewater Disposal System: A subsurface wastewater disposal system designed, installed, and
operated as a single unit to treat 2000 gallons per day or more; or any system designed to treat wastewater with
characteristics significantly different from domestic wastewater.
Essential Services: The construction, alteration, or maintenance of gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam,
fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines,
poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or
supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not include
service drops or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
944
Excursion Service: A water-borne transport service established to ferry tourists and other persons non-resident to the
place of destination. This term shall also include sight-seeing and other recreational river cruises where there may not be
a specific point of destination.
Expansion: The addition of antennas, towers, or other devices to an existing structure.
Expansion of a Structure: An increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not
limited to, attached: decks, garages, porches, and greenhouses.
Expansion of Use: The addition of weeks or months to a business operating season; the addition of hours to a business
day; the use of more floor area or ground area; or the provision of additional seats or seating capacity.
Exterior Walls: Siding materials such as clapboards, shingles, and shakes, including synthetic or metal siding
manufactured to closely resemble clapboards, shingles, and shakes. This term shall also include masonry, wood boardand-
batten, and "Texture 1-11" exterior plywood, but shall not include artificial masonry, or fake board-and-batten made
from metal or plastic.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration, or its lawful successor.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.
Family: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Farm Stand: A structure designed, arranged, or used for the display and sale of agricultural products primarily grown or
produced on the premises upon which the stand is located. A farm stand may be located on premises that the products
are not grown upon, provided such premise is owned by the operator.
Fence: Any artificially constructed barrier of any material, or combination thereof, erected to enclose or screen areas of
land. To further distinguish types of fences: (a) a boundary fence encloses a parcel of property; and (b) a privacy fence
blocks part or all of the property from the view of the neighbors. Privacy fences may be solid and taller than other types
of fences. For the purposes of these ordinances, a fence is not an accessory structure.
Filling: Depositing or dumping any matter on or into the ground or water.
Final Plan: The final drawings on which the applicant's plan of development is presented for approval. In the case of a
final subdivision plan a copy shall be recorded in the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds.
Flag: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a
government, political subdivision, or other entity.
Flea Market: The sale of used merchandise customarily involving tables or space leased or rented to vendors.
Floating Slab: A reinforced concrete slab which is designed to withstand pressures both from below and above.
Flood Insurance Rate Map: The official map on which the Dept. of Housing and Urban Development or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones.
Floodplain: The lands adjacent to a body of water which have been or may be covered by the base flood.
Floodplain Soils: The following soil series as described and identified in the Soil Survey for Aroostook County, Maine:
Alluvial Hadley Medomak Winooski
Floodproofing: A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties, water and sanitary
facilities, structures, and contents of buildings.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
945
Floor Area, Gross: The sum, in square feet of the floor areas of all roofed portions of a building, as measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls.
Floor Area, Net: The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding the following: stairwells and elevator shafts,
equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading; and floors below the first or ground floor, except when used for
human habitation or service to the public.
Floor Area Ratio: A ratio derived by dividing the gross floor area of a building by the area of the lot.
Floor Area (Shoreland Areas): The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls,
plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
Forest Management Activities: Timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer
application, management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other
similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation, or maintenance of roads.
Forested Wetland: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters or taller. (6 meters =
19.865 feet).
Forestry: The operation of timber tracks, tree farms, forest nurseries, the gathering of forest products, or the performance
of forest services.
Foundation: The supporting substructure of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, basements, slabs,
sills, posts, or frostwalls (See: Permanent Foundation).
Freshwater Wetland: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested wetlands, which are:
1. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soils; and
2. Not considered part of a great pond, river, stream, or brook.
Frontage: The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line, between the intersections of the side lot lines with the
front lot line.
Frontage, Road: The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line, extending between the side lot lines along the road
right-of-way.
Frontage, Shore: The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line, between the intersections of the lot lines with the
shoreline at the normal high water line.
Frost Wall: A masonry foundation wall extending below the ground surface, supported by footings located below the
frost line to protect structures from frost heaves.
Functionally Water-Dependent Uses: Those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or
that require direct access to, or location in, inland waters and which cannot be located away from these waters. The uses
include, but are not limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, retail and wholesale fish
marketing facilities, waterfront dock and facilities, marinas, navigation aides, basins and channels, industrial uses
dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water and which cannot
reasonably be located or operated at an inland site.
Garage: An accessory building, or part of a principal building, including a car port, used primarily for the storage of
motor vehicles as an accessory use.
Gasoline Service Station: (See: Automobile Service Station)
Governmental Facility: A building(s) structure(s), and other facility(ies) intended to provide functions or services, other
than housing, normally provided by governmental entities.
946
Gravel Pit: (See: Mineral Extraction)
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten (10) acres, and any
inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of thirty (30) acres.
Group Home: A housing facility for mentally handicapped or developmentally disabled persons which is approved,
authorized, certified, or licensed by the State of Maine. A group home may include a community living facility, foster
home, or intermediate care facility.
Guest House: (See: Inn)
Hazardous Waste: A waste substance or material, in any physical state, designated as hazardous by the MDEP Board
under MRSA 38, §1303-A. It does not include waste resulting from normal household or agricultural activities. The
fact that a hazardous waste or part or a constituent may have value or other use or may be sold or exchanged does not
exclude it from this definition.
Height: The vertical measurement from a point on the ground at the mean finish grade adjoining the foundation as
calculated by averaging the highest and lowest finished grade around the building or structure, to the highest point of the
building or structure. The highest point shall exclude farm building components, flagpoles, chimneys, ventilators,
skylights, domes, water towers, bell towers, church spires, processing towers, tanks, bulkheads, or other building
accessory features usually erected at a height greater than the main roofs of buildings.
Height of a Structure: (See: Building Height)
High Intensity Soil Survey: A soil survey conducted by a Certified Soil Scientist, meeting the standards of the national
Cooperative Soil Survey, which identifies soil types down to 1/10 acre or less at a scale equivalent to the subdivision
plan submitted. The mapping units shall be the soil series. Single soil test pits and their evaluation shall not be
considered to constitute high intensity soil surveys.
Historic or Archaeological Resources: Means resources that are:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or eligible for listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered
historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs approved by the
Secretary of the Interior;
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have
been certified by Secretary of the Interior through the Maine Historic Preservation Commission; or
5.Areas identified by a governmental agency such as the Maine Historic Preservation Commission as having significant
value as an historic or archaeological resource and any areas identified in the municipality's comprehensive plan, which
have been listed or are eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Historic District: A geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites,
buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development and identified in
the municipality's comprehensive plan, which is listed or is eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places. Such historic districts may also comprise individual elements separated geographically, but linked by association
or history.
Historic Landmark: Any improvement, building or structure of particular historic or architectural significance to the
Town relating to its heritage, cultural, social, economic or political history, or which exemplifies historic personages or
947
important events in local, state or national history identified in the municipality's comprehensive plan, which have been
listed or are eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Historic Site/Structure: Means any land, site, or structure that is: (1.) Listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register; (2.) Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary of the
Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; (3.) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4.) Individually listed
on a local inventory of historic places.
Home Occupation: An occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a dwelling unit by a member of
the family permanently residing in the unit, for financial gain and which is clearly incidental to and compatible with the
residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
Homeowners Association: A community association which is organized in a residential development in which
individual owners share common interests in open space and/or facilities.
Horticulture: The cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers, and plants, including orchards, commercial greenhouses and
nurseries, and landscaping services.
Hospital: An institution providing, but not limited to, overnight health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical or
surgical care for the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories,
out-patient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices.
Hotel: A building in which lodging or meals and lodging are offered to the general public for compensation and in
which ingress and egress to and from the rooms are made primarily through an inside lobby or office.
House for Public Worship: “House for Public Worship” shall mean any building or place of assembly as so defined
under Title 13 MRSA Chapter 93.
Household Pet: Animals that are customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home. Household pets shall
include, but not be limited to, domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, domestic rabbits, domestic tropical
fish, and rodents.
Impervious Surface Ratio: A measure of the intensity of the land use that is determined by dividing the total area of all
impervious surfaces on the site by the area of the lot. For the purpose of these Ordinances, impervious surfaces include
buildings, structures, paved, and gravel surfaces.
Individual Private Campsite: An area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which is developed for
repeated camping by only one group, not to exceed ten (10) individuals, and which involves site improvements which
may include, but not be limited to, gravel pads, parking areas, fire places, or tent platforms.
Industrial Park or Development: A subdivision developed exclusively for industrial uses, or a subdivision planned for
industrial uses and developed and managed as a unit, usually with provision for common services for the users.
Industrial Use Dependent Upon an Airport: Industrial uses that involve aircraft, aircraft parts, or aircraft services; or
utilize air transportation to obtain goods or services, transport finished products or packaging, or provide services; and
which requires access to a runway.
Industrial Use, Heavy: The use of real estate, building, or structure, or any portion thereof, for assembling, fabricating,
manufacturing, remanufacturing, packaging, distribution, or processing operations.
Industrial Use, Light: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished
products or parts, including processing, fabricating, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and
distribution of such products, and excluding industrial processes which utilize extracted or raw materials, flammable or
explosive materials, or which will not create a nuisance by noise, smoke, vibration, odor, or appearance.
948
Inn: A building which contains a dwelling unit occupied by an owner or resident manager, in which up to ten (10)
lodging rooms or lodging rooms and meals are offered to the general public for compensation, and in which entrance to
bedrooms is made through a lobby or other common room. Inn includes such terms as guest house, lodging house, and
tourist house.
Intermediate Care Facility: A facility that provides, on a regular basis, personal care, including dressing and eating and
health-related care and services, to individuals who require such assistance, but who do not require the degree of care
and treatment that a hospital or skilled nursing facility provides.
Junkyard: A yard, field, or other area used as place of storage for:
1. Discarded, worn-out, junked plumbing, heating supplies, household appliances, and furniture;
2. Discarded, scrap, and junked lumber;
3. Old or scrap cooper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, plastic debris, waste, and all scrap iron,
steel, and other scrap ferrous or non-ferrous material, and
4. Garbage dumps, waste dumps, and sanitary landfills.
Kennels:
Animal Shelter, “means a facility that houses animals and operates for the purpose of providing stray, abandoned,
abuses or owner-surrendered animals with sanctuary or finding the animals temporary or permanent adoptive homes.”
Boarding Kennel, “means any place, building, tract of land or abode in or on which 3 or more privately owned
companion animals are kept any one time for their owners in return for a fee or compensation and includes a facility
where 3 or more companion animals are kept for training purposes for compensation.”
Breeding Kennel, “means a location where 5 or more adult female dogs, wolf hybrids or cats capable of breeding are
kept and some or all of the offspring are offered for sale, sold or exchanged for value or a location where more than 16
dogs or cats raised on the premises are sold to the public in a 12-month period. Breeding Kennel does not include a
kennel licensed by a municipality under Section 3923-C when the dogs are kept primarily for hunting, show, training,
sledding, competition, field trails or exhibition purposes and not more than 16 dogs are offered for sale, sold or
exchanged for value within a 12-month period.”
Rescue Group, “means an organization or individual that receives animals that have been abandoned, surrendered or
removed from an animal facility or that take in homeless dogs or cats and sells, gives or otherwise places the animals in
private homes. Rescue group does not include a facility licensed under chapter 723.”
Laundry, Self-Serve: A business that provides home type washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire to be used
by customers on the premises.
Level of Service: A description of the operating conditions a driver will experience while traveling on a particular road
or highway calculated in accordance with the provisions of the "Highway Capacity Manual", latest edition, published by
the National Academy of Sciences, Transportation Research Board. There are six (6) levels of service ranging from
Level of Service A, with free traffic flow and no delays to Level of Service F, with forced flow and congestion resulting
in complete failure of the roadway.
Line of Sight: The direct view of the object from the designated scenic resource.
Litter: Any garbage, solid waste, junk, rubbish, refuse, construction debris, demolition debris, and any other waste or
materials.
Livestock: Domestic animals kept or raised for use or profit, such as, but not limited to, cattle, horses, sheep, elk, deer,
buffalo, goats or pigs, that are typically kept outside of the home.
Long Term Care Facility: A distinct part of an institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under
medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours to two (2) or more patients who are not related to the
governing authority or its members by marriage, blood, or adoption.
949
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one building and the accessory buildings or uses
customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by an ordinance, and having frontage upon a
public street, right-of-way, or private way.
Lot Area: The land area enclosed within the boundary lines of the lot, not including the area of any land which is: part of
a right-of-way for a thoroughfare or easement, such as, but not limited to, surface drainage easements or traveled rightsof-
way (but not including any utility easement servicing that lot); or the land below the normal high-water line of a water
body; or upland edge of a wetland; or which is a forested or freshwater wetland.
Lot, Corner: A lot with at least two (2) contiguous sides abutting upon a street or right of way.
Lot, Coverage: The percentage of the lot covered by all buildings.
Lot, Interior: Any lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined below:
Front Lot Line: On an interior lot, the lot line abutting the street or right-of-way; or, on a corner lot each lot line
abutting the street or right-of-way; or, on a through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing primary access to
the lot; or, on a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street from which access is obtained.
Rear Lot Line: The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an
imaginary line between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet long, lying farthest
from the front lot line. On a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line of least dimension.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot, Minimum Area: The required area within a District for a single lot or use.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are recorded on a document or
map on file in the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds.
Lot, Shorefront: Any lot abutting a body of water.
Lot, Through: Any interior lot having frontages on two (2) or more parallel roads or rights of way, or lying between a
road and a body of water, or a right of way and a body of water, or between two (2) bodies of water, as distinguished
from a corner lot. All sides of through lots adjacent to roads, rights-of-way, and bodies of water shall be considered
frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required.
Lot Width, Minimum: The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot.
Manufacturing: The mechanical or chemical transformation of material or substance into new products, either finished
or semi-finished for use as raw material in another process, and including the assembling of component parts, the
manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials. The term also includes repair services, exclusive of motor
vehicles, where such services are performed in a facility larger than a Tradesman's Shop, as defined within this Section.
Marijuana: The dried leaves and flowering tops of the pistillate hemp plant that yield THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) and as
defined within Title 17-A M.R. S. A. Section 1101 (1).
Marina: A shorefront commercial facility with provisions for boat storage, boat launching, and the sale of supplies and
services for water-craft and their equipment and accessories.
Market Value: The estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing market conditions in a
sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with prevailing general price
levels.
Masonry-Type Skirting: Concrete, concrete blocks, brick, stone or similar materials which are arranged to resemble a
foundation.
950
Mechanized Recreation: Recreation activities which require the use of motors or engines for the operation of equipment
or participation in the activity.
Medical use: "Medical use" means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, delivery, transfer or
transportation of marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to treat or alleviate a registered
qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the patient’s debilitating medical
condition.
Mineral Exploration: The hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or extent of mineral
resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to restore the land to its
original condition. Mineral exploration shall not include testing for a quarry.
Mineral Extraction: Any operation which removes soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like
material from its natural location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site. Mineral extraction
shall not include the term quarry.
Mitigation Area: Property, to include wetlands and uplands, used or reserved for the purpose of avoiding, minimizing,
rectifying, reducing over time, or compensating for unavoidable environmental impacts or offsetting environmental
losses arising from development of the same or another parcel of property.
Mobile Eating Place: A mobile vehicle, including a pushcart, designed and constructed to transport, prepare, sell, or
serve food at a number of sites and shall be capable of being moved from its site at any time, not to remain at the same
site for more than seven (7) days at a time.
Mobile Home, Newer: A structural unit designed for occupancy and constructed after June 15, 1976, which the
manufacturer certifies is constructed in compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development standards, meaning structures transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is 14
body feet or more in width and are 750 or more square feet, and which are built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when connected to the required utilities, including the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the unit. This term also includes any structure
which meets all the requirements of this subparagraph, except the size requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974, US Code, Title 42, §5401, et seq.
Mobile Home, Older: A structural unit designed for occupancy and constructed before June 15, 1976, which has not
been constructed in compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development standards,
transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is 750 or more square feet, and which are built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when connected to the
required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the unit.
Mobile Home Park: A plot of land designed and/or used to accommodate three (3) or more mobile homes.
Mobile Home Park Lot: The area of land on which an individual mobile home is situated within a mobile home park and
which is reserved for use by the occupants of that unit. All lots shall be indicated on the mobile home park plan.
Mobile Home Subdivision or Development: A parcel of land approved under the Subdivision Ordinance for the
placement of a mobile home on individually owned lots.
Modular Homes: Those units which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with Title 10, chapter 957,
§9001 et seq., and rules adopted under that chapter, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, which are
not constructed on a permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on permanent foundations when
connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in
the unit.
Motel: A building or group of buildings in which lodging is offered to the general public for compensation, and where
entrance to rooms is made directly from the outside of the building. Motel includes such terms as tourist cabins and
tourist court. Any transient accommodations which does not meet the definitions of Bed and Breakfast, Hotel, or Inn
shall be deemed to be a motel for the purposes of an ordinance.
951
Motorized Vehicle: Any mechanically or electrically powered device, not operated on rails, upon which or by which a
person or property may be transported on the land. The definition shall include, but not be limited to: automobile, bus,
semi-trailer, tractor, truck, van, motorcycle, snowmobile, and moped.
Neighborhood "Convenience" Store: A store of less than 1,500 square feet of floor space intended to service the
convenience of a residential neighborhood.
Net Acreage: The total acreage available for development shown on a proposed plan, minus the area for roads or access
and the areas which are unsuitable for development.
Net Density: The number of units per net acreage.
New Construction: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an
ordinance.
Nightclub: An establishment primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by the drink that also offers entertainment.
Non-Conforming Lot of Record: A lot shown on a plan or deed recorded prior to the effective date of an ordinance or
amendment which does not meet the area, frontage, width or depth requirements of the District in which it is located.
Non-Conforming Structure: A structure which does not meet any one or more of the following dimensional
requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time
an ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-Conforming Use: Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not permitted in the District
in which it is situated or which does not meet the performance standards prescribed for it by an ordinance, but which is
allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the time an ordinance or subsequent amendments took
effect.
Nonprofit Dispensary: "Nonprofit dispensary" means a not-for-profit entity registered under Title 22 MRSA §2428 that
acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana or
related supplies and educational materials to cardholders. All ancillary real property structures or mechanisms utilized as
a mobile non-profit dispensary to include mobile units, vans, cars, trucks, trailers, motor homes, or other units not
specifically set forth, must adhere to and shall be regulated by this ordinance. A nonprofit dispensary is a primary
caregiver.
Normal High-Water Line of Waters: That line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of soils
due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic
and predominantly terrestrial land (by way of illustration, aquatic vegetation includes but is not limited to the following
plants and plant groups: Upland grasses, aster, lady slipper, wintergreen, partridge berry, sarsaparilla, pines, cedars, oaks,
ashes, alders, elms and maples). In the case of wetlands adjacent to rivers and Great Ponds, the normal high-water line is
the upland edge of the wetland, and not the edge of the open water. In places where the shore or bank is of such
character that the high water line cannot be easily determined (rock slides, ledges, rapidly eroding, or slumping banks)
the normal high water line shall be estimated from places where it can be determined by the above method.
Nursing Home: (See: Convalescent Home, Rest Home, or Nursing Home)
Off-Road Vehicles: A motor-driven, off-road, recreational vehicle capable of cross-country travel on land, snow, ice,
marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. For purposes of aquifer protection, off-road vehicle does not include; a
logging vehicle used in performance of its common functions, a farm vehicle used for farming purposes, or a vehicle
used exclusively for emergency, law enforcement, or fire control purposes.
100 Year Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Open Space: A use not involving: a structure; earth-moving activity; or the removal or destruction of vegetative corner,
spawning grounds, or fish, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat.
Ordinance: Any legislative action of the municipality's legislative body which has the force of law, including but not
limited to, any amendment or repeal of any ordinance.
952
Parabolic Antenna: (also known as a satellite dish antenna) An antenna which is bowl-shaped, designed for the reception
and/or transmission of radio frequency.
Parking Space: An area on a lot intended for the use of temporary parking of a personal vehicle. The size of each
parking space shall be exclusive of drives or aisles for the parking of vehicles and have a means of access to a public
street.
Parks and Recreation: Non-commercially operated recreation facilities open to the general public including, but not
limited to playgrounds, parks, monuments, green strips, open space, mini-parks, athletic fields, boat launching ramps,
piers and docks, picnic grounds, swimming pools, and wildlife and nature preserves, along with any necessary accessory
facilities, rest rooms, bath houses, and the maintenance of such land and facilities, but not including campgrounds,
commercial recreation, and amusement centers.
Passive Recreation: Outdoor recreational activities which involve no structural or mechanical components or facilities,
or earth moving, such as hiking, fishing, hunting, etc.
Patio: An uncovered floor, usually made of concrete, brick, or other masonry material, which is not elevated above the
surface of the ground in any manner.
Permanent Foundation: A permanent foundation means all of the following:
1. A full, poured concrete or masonry foundation;
2. A poured concrete frost wall or a mortared masonry frost wall, with or without a concrete floor;
3. A reinforced, floating concrete pad for which the municipality may require an engineer's certification if it is to be
placed on soil with high frost susceptibility;
4. At least 12 inches of compacted gravel;
5. At least 12 inches of crushed stones no larger than one inch in diameter;
6. Any foundation which, pursuant to the building code of the municipality, is permitted for other types of singlefamily
dwellings; and
7. Any foundation, reviewed and approved in writing by the CEO, using advanced technologies.
Permitted (Allowed) Use: Use which is listed as permitted use in the various Districts set forth in an ordinance. The
term shall not include prohibited uses.
Personal Property: Property which is owned, utilized, and maintained by an individual or members of their residence
and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was
purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
Personal Service Business: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services other than those provided by
professional offices , but not goods, as exemplified by beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair, photographic studios,
coin-operated laundries, fitness studios, advertising, and similar establishments.
Person: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership, association, two (2) or
more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Petroleum: Oil, gasoline, petroleum product, and their byproducts, and all other liquid hydrocarbons, excluding propane.
Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or Beyond the Normal High-Water Line
or Within a Wetland:
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months.
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months.
Pitched, Shingled Roof: A roof with a pitch of two (2) or more vertical units for every twelve (12) horizontal units of
measurement and which is covered with asphalt or fiberglass composition shingles or other approved materials, but
specifically excludes corrugated metal roofing material.
Planning Board: The Planning Board for the Municipality.
953
Pond: (See: Water Body)
Poultry: Domestic animals kept or raised for use or profit, such as but not limited to, ostrich, emu, chickens, ducks,
turkeys, geese, pigeons or pheasant that are typically kept outside of the home.
Preliminary Subdivision Plan: The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be
submitted for consideration.
Prime Farmland: Land that has the best combination of physical and chemical characteristics for producing food, feed,
forage, fiber and oil-seed crops, and meets all of the criteria established by the US Department of Agriculture.
Principal Structure: The building other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the use of
another building or use on the same premises.
Principal Use: The primary use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the same
premises.
Private Road: A private way meeting the municipality's road design and construction standards for a "Private" road.
Professional (Business) Offices: The place of business for doctors, lawyers, accountants, financial advisors, architects,
surveyors, psychiatrists, psychologists, counselors, real estate, insurance, and the like or in which a business conducts its
administrative, financial, or clerical operations, including financial institutions and other financial services, but not retail
sales, personal services, or the use of trucks as part of the business operation.
Public Facility: Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and roads, which are
owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
Public Improvements: The furnishing, installing, connecting, and completing all of the street grading, paving, storm
drainage, and utilities or other improvements approved by the municipality.
Public Utility: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board, or commission authorized to furnish gas,
steam, electricity, waste disposal, communication facilities, transportation, sanitary sewage disposal, cable, or water to
the public.
Public Utility Facility: A communications, electric, gas, cable, water, sewer, or other utility pipe, conduit, transmission
line, transformer, reducer, distribution apparatus, or other unoccupied structure necessary for the furnishing of utility
service.
Public Water System: A water supply system that provides water to at least fifteen (15) service connections or services
water to at least 25 individuals daily for at least thirty (30) days a year.
Quarry: A place where stone is excavated from rock.
Recent Floodplain Soils: (See: Floodplain Soils)
Reconstructed: The rebuilding of a road or section of a road to improve its serviceability.
Recording Plan: A copy of the Final Plan to be recorded at the Aroostook County Registry of Deeds.
Recreation: An activity pursued for leisure in order to refresh the mind or body, or a facility designed or equipped for
such pursuit.
Recreational Facility: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and other
customary and usual recreational activities.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle, or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, designed for temporary sleeping or
living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up coach, travel trailer, camping trailer, dependent
RV, self-contained RV, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must
remain with its tires on the ground, and must be currently registered with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
954
Recycling Center: A building that is not a junkyard in which used materials, such as, but not limited to, newspaper,
cardboard, magazines, glass, and metal cans, are separated and processed prior to shipment to others who will use these
materials to manufacture new products.
Recycling Collection Point: An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of
recoverable resources. No processing of such items would be allowed at the collection point.
Registered Cultivation Facility: “Registered Cultivation Facility” shall mean any site used for the cultivation of
Marijuana whether at the location and a part of a Registered Nonprofit Dispensary or an associated offsite location
meeting all State requirements pursuant to the licensing of the Dispensary.
Registered Nonprofit Dispensary: "Registered Nonprofit Dispensary" means a nonprofit dispensary that is registered by
the department pursuant to Title 22 MRSA §2428, subsection 2, paragraph A.
Repair: To take necessary action to fix normal damage or storm damage.
Replacement System: A system intended to replace: (1.) an existing system which is either malfunctioning or being
upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or (2.) any existing overboard wastewater
discharge.
Research and Development Facility: A laboratory or other facility for carrying on investigation on the natural, physical,
or social sciences, or engineering and development of end products as an extension of such investigation. Such a facility
does not engage in he manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of research and
investigation.
Residential Health Care Facility: Residence usually occupied by the frail elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal
care, and health monitoring services under the supervision of a processional nurse and that may provide other services,
such recreational, social, and cultural activities, financial services, and transportation.
Residential Use: Any land use which includes a dwelling unit used as a principal use.
Restaurant: An establishment where meals are prepared and served to the public for consumption for compensation.
Standard Restaurant: A business involving the preparation and serving of meals for consumption on the premises,
requiring moderate amounts of time between the period of ordering and serving of the meal.
Fast Food Restaurant: A business involving the preparation and serving of meals for consumption on the premises
or off the premises, normally requiring short amounts of time between the period of ordering and serving of the meal
which is served in edible or disposable containers.
Drive-In Restaurant: A business involving the preparation and serving of meals for consumption on the premises in
a motor vehicle or off the premises, normally requiring shore amounts of time between the period or ordering and
serving of the meal which is served in edible or disposable containers.
Rest Home: (See: Convalescent Home, Rest Hone, or Nursing Home)
Resubdivision: The division of an existing subdivision or any change in the Plan for an approved subdivision which
effects the lot lines, including land transactions by the subdivider not indicated on the approved Plan.
Retail Business: A business establishment engaged in the sale, rental, or lease of goods, commodities, or services to the
ultimate consumer for direct use or consumption and not for resale.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electrical
transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary sewer main, stormwater main, shade trees, or other auxiliary
uses, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right-of-passage has been recorded for the use.
Riprap: Rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control and soil stabilization,
typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or less.
955
River: A free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that point at which it provides
drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25) square miles to its mouth.
Riverine: Means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Road: A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles, consisting
of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated
passage of motorized vehicles.
Runway Protection Zone: A trapezoidally-shaped area centered about the extended runway center line at either end of
the runway and beginning beyond the end of the area usable for the takeoff and landing of aircraft where, due to the
higher potential for the occurrence of aircraft accidents, land use is necessarily restricted.
Safe Children Zone: means on or within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a public or private elementary or
secondary school or on or within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a day care center licensed pursuant to Title
22, section 8301-A.
Satellite Receiving Dishes: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is
in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include, but not be
limited to, what are commonly refereed to as satellite earth stations, TVROs (television reception only satellite dish
antennas), and satellite microwave antennas.
Schools:
Public and Private - including Parochial School: An institution for education or instruction where any branch or
branches of knowledge is imparted and which satisfied either of the following requirements:
a. The school is not operated for a profit or a gainful business; or
b. The school teaches courses of study which are sufficient to qualify attendance there as in compliance with State
compulsory education requirements.
Commercial School: An institutions which is commercial or profit-oriented. Examples thereof are dancing, music,
riding, correspondence, aquatic schools, driving or business.
Seasonal Dwelling: A dwelling unit lived in for periods aggregating less than seven (7) months of the year and is not the
principal residence of the owner.
Self-Service Storage Facility: A building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that consists
of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of customer's goods or wares.
Service Business: (See: Personal Service Business)
Service Drop: Any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water body provided that:
1. In the case of electric service:
a. the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely upon the premises of the
customer requesting service or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
b. the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
2. In the case of telephone service:
a. the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone wires to existing utility poles;
or
b. the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement underground is less than one thousand
(1,000) feet in length.
956
Setback: The horizontal distance from a lot line to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space, or other regulated
object or area.
Setback from Water: The horizontal distance from the normal high water line to the nearest part of a structure.
Shopping Center: Any concentration of two or more retail stores or service establishments under one ownership or
management.
Shoreland Zone: The land area located no less than within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of any great pond or river; 250 feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; seventy-five (75)
feet of the normal high-water line of a stream; or as may be indicated on the official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Sight Distance: The length of an unobstructed view from a particular access point to the farthest visible point of
reference on a roadway. Used in an ordinance as a reference for unobstructed road visibility.
Sign: A display surface, fabric or device containing organized and related elements (letter, pictures, products, or
sculptures) composed to form a single unit, designed to convey any name, identification, description, display,
illustration, or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or land in view
of the general public, and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, or business. In cases
where matter is displayed in a random or unconnected manner without an organized relationship, each such component
shall constitute a sign. A sign shall include writing, representation, or other figure of similar character within a building
only when illuminated and located in a window. Signs shall include:
Animated: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a
permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution
or business shall not be considered banners.
Billboard: A sign, structure, or surface which is available for advertising purposes for goods or services rendered
off the premises.
Canopy: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective
cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.
Changeable Copy: A sign or portion thereof on which the message changes more than eight (8) times per day with
characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the
sign. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a sign on which the copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical
indication of time or temperature shall be considered a changeable copy sign.
Flashing: A sign, which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, winks, or blinks with varying
degrees of light intensity, shows motion, or creates the illusion of motion or revolves in a manner to create the
illusion of being on or off. Signs which indicate the time temperature shall not be considered flashing signs.
Freestanding: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and are
independent from any building or other structure.
Incidental: A sign , generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located,
to include signs such as: "no parking", "entrance", "exit", "loading only", and similar directives.
Internally Illuminated: A sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outlines illuminated by electric
lighting or luminous tubes as part of the sign.
Marquee: Any sign attached to a permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and
projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the
weather.
Non-Conforming Sign: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of an ordinance.
957
Official Business Directional Sign (OBDS): A sign erected and maintained in accordance with the Maine Traveler
Information Services Act, 23 MRSA §1901, et. seq. which points the way to public accommodations and facilities or
other commercial facilities.
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind,
suspended from a rope, wire, or string usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
Portable/Temporary Movable: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a
sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to "A" or "T" frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for
advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from a public right-of-way, unless said
vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
Projecting: Any sign affixed or attached to a building or a wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more
than eighteen (18) inches beyond the surface of the building or wall.
Residential: Any sign located in a residential zoning district for residential uses that contains no commercial
message except advertising goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering
such service at such location conforms with all requirements.
Roof: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure,
and extending vertically above the highest point of the roof.
Suspended: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such
surface.
Wall: Any sign attached parallel to, but within six (6) inches of, a wall, or erected and confined within limits of an
outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one
sign surface.
Window: Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an
activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes, or
glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
Sketch Plan: Conceptual maps, renderings, and supportive data describing the project proposed by the applicant for
initial review prior to submitting an application for approval.
Solid Waste. Useless, unwanted solid materials with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing. Other common
words used for solid waste include trash, rubbish, garbage, junk, and refuse. Solid waste includes refuse-derived fuel,
but does not include source separated recyclables / compostables, septic tank sludge, or wastewater treatment sludge.
Stable, Private: An accessory building in which sheltered animals are kept for the use of the occupants of the premises
and not for remuneration, hire, or sale.
Stable, Public: An accessory building in which sheltered animals are kept for the use of the occupants for remuneration,
hire, sale, boarding, riding, or show.
Stream: A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two (2) perennial streams as
depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map, or if not
available, a 15-minute series topographic map, to the point where the body of water becomes a river, or flows to another
waterbody or wetland within a shoreland zone, or as depicted on the official municipal shoreland zoning map, or as
further described in the applicable overlay District standards, whichever is applicable.
Street: An existing state, county, or municipal way dedicated for public use. The term "street" shall not include those
ways which have been discontinued or abandoned.
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, goods, or property of any kind,
together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive of fences. The term
includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks and satellite receiving dishes, but in land areas
outside of shoreland areas, signs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, and parking lots are not defined as structures.
958
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots within any 5 year period that begins on or after
September 23, 1971, whether accomplished by sale, lease, development, buildings or otherwise. The term "subdivision"
shall include the division of any structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more dwelling units or
combination thereof within a 5 year period;
1. In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into 3 or more lots within a 5 year period, the first
dividing of the tract or parcel, unless otherwise exempted herein, shall be considered to create the first 2 lots and the
next dividing of either of these first 2 lots, by whomever accomplished, unless otherwise exempted herein is
considered to create a 3rd lot, unless:
a. Both dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained one of the lots for the subdivider's own use
as a single family residence or for usable open space land as defined in Title 36, §1102, for a period of at least 5
years before the second dividing occurs; or
b. The division of the tract or parcel is otherwise exempt under this definition.
2. The dividing of a tract or parcel of land and the lot or lots so made, which dividing or lots when made are not subject
to this ordinance, do not become subject to this ordinance by the subsequent dividing of that tract or parcel of land
or any portion of that tract or parcel. The Planning Board shall consider the existence of the previously created lot
or lots in reviewing a proposed subdivision created by a subsequent dividing.
3. Any lot of more than 40 acres shall be counted as a lot for the purpose of this definition.
4. A division accomplished by devise, condemnation, order of court, gift to a person related to the donor by blood,
marriage, or adoption or a gift to the municipality or by the transfer of any interest in land to the owner of land
abutting that land does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of that transferor in
any transfer or gift within this paragraph is to avoid the objectives of this definition. If the real estate exempt under
this paragraph by gift to a person related to the donor by blood, marriage, or adoption is transferred within 5 years to
another person not related to the donor of the exempt real estate by blood, marriage, or adoption, then that exempt
division creates a lot or lots for the purpose of this definition.
5. The division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots and upon each of which lots permanent dwelling
structures legally existed before September 23, 1971 is not a subdivision.
6. In determining the number of dwelling units in a structure, the provisions regarding the determination of the number
of lots shall apply, including exemptions from the definition of a subdivision of land.
7. Nothing in this ordinance may be construed to prevent the municipality from enacting an ordinance under its home
rule authority which expands the definition of subdivision or which otherwise regulates land use activities.
8. The grant of a bona fide security interest in an entire lot that has been exempted from the definition of subdivision
under paragraph 4, or subsequent transfer of that entire lot by the original holder of the security interest or that
person's successor in interest, does not create a lot for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the
transferor is to avoid the objectives of this ordinance.
9. For the purposes of this definition, a new structure or structures includes any structure for which construction began
on or after September 23, 1988. The area included in the expansion of an existing structure is deemed to be a new
structure for the purposes of this ordinance.
10. For the purposes of this definition, a tract or parcel of land is defined as all contiguous land in the same ownership,
provided that lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract or
parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof.
Substantial Damage: Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
959
Substantial Expansion: Floorspace increase of 25 percent or new materials or processes not normally associated with the
existing use. In shoreland areas, if any portion of a structure is less than the required setback from the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, that portion of the structure shall not be expanded in floor area or
volume, by 30 percent or more, during the lifetime of the structure.
Substantial Improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has
been damaged and is being restored before the damage occurred. For purposes of this definition "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not however,
include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or for any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places of a State Inventory of Historical Places.
Substantial Review: A substantial review of an application, as required by law at the time of the application, shall
consist of a review of that application to determine whether the application complies with the review criteria and other
applicable requirements of law.
Substantial Start/Construction: Following the issuance of a permit, if completion of 30 percent of a permitted structure
or use measured as a percentage of estimated total cost is not made within one (1) year of the date of the permit, the
permit shall lapse and become void.
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal System: A collection of treatment tank(s), disposal area(s), holding tank(s) and pond(s),
surface spray system(s), cesspool(s), well(s), surface ditch(es), alternative toilet(s), or other devices and associated
piping designed to function as a unit for the purpose of disposing of wastes or wastewater on or beneath the surface of
the earth. The term shall not include any wastewater discharge system licensed under Title 38 MRSA §414, any surface
wastewater disposal system licensed under Title 38 MRSA §413 Subsection 1-A, or any public sewer. The term shall
not include a wastewater disposal system designed to treat wastewater which is in whole or in part hazardous waste as
defined in Title 38 MRSA Chapter 13, subchapter 1.
Sustained Slope: A change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially maintained or exceeded
throughout the measured area.
Swimming Pool: An outdoor man-made receptacle or excavation designed to hold water to a depth of at least 24 inches,
primarily for swimming or bathing, whether in the ground or above the ground.
Theater: A facility operated by an entity for the showing of motion pictures or dramatic or musical performances.
Timber Harvesting: The cutting and removal of trees from their growing site, and the attendant operation of cutting and
skidding machinery, but not the construction or creation of roads. Timber harvesting does not include the clearing of
land for approved construction.
Tract (Parcel) of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, provided that lands located on opposite sides of a
public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract (parcel) of land unless such road was established by the
owner of land on both sides thereof.
Tradesman Shop: An establishment occupied by a craftsperson or a person in a skilled trade, including, by way of
example only, plumbing, carpentry, or electrical work. The term also shall include establishments engaged in he repair
of electrical goods and appliances, watches, jewelry, equipment, furniture, or other goods, exclusive of motor vehicles,
where such services are the primary use and not accessory to another use, such as retail sales. The shop may include
work space, storage space, and office space.
Trail: A route or path, other than a roadway, and related facilities, developed and used primarily for recreational or
transportation activities, including but not limited to, hiking, walking, cross-country skiing, snowmobiling, horseback
riding, bicycling, and dogsledding.
Travel Trailer: (See: Recreational Vehicle)
960
Tributary Stream: A channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water, whether intermittent or
perennial, and which is characterized by the lack of upland vegetation or presence of aquatic vegetation and by the
presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material or bedrock, and
which flows to a water body or wetland as defined. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined
elsewhere in this Section, and only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the
receiving water body or wetland.
Trucking/Distribution Terminal: An establishment primarily engaged in furnishing trucking or transfer services with or
without storage.
Undue Hardship: The words "undue hardship" shall take its statutory definition and include all of the following:
1. That the land in question can not yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and
2. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions in
the neighborhood; and
3. That the granting of a variance shall not alter the essential character of the locality; and
4. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner. Mere inconvenience to the
property owner shall not satisfy this requirement.
A variance is not justified unless all elements are present in the case.
Upland Edge: The boundary between upland and wetland.
Use: The manner in which land or a structure is arranged, designed, or intended, or is occupied.
Usable Marijuana: "Usable marijuana" means the dried leaves and flowers of the marijuana plant, and any mixture or
preparation of those dried leaves and flowers, but does not include the seeds, stalks and roots of the plant and does not
include the weight of other ingredients in marijuana prepared for consumption as food.
Usable Open Space: That portion of the common open space which due to its slope, drainage characteristics, and soil
conditions can be used for active recreation, horticulture, or agriculture. In order to be considered usable open space, the
land must not be; poorly drained or very poorly drained, have ledge outcroppings, or areas with slopes exceeding 10
percent.
Used Merchandise Sale: The outdoor sale of used articles, conducted for more than five (5) consecutive days or for
more than two (2) weekends per year, and shall require a permit from the CEO. Used Merchandise Sales includes flea
markets.
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of a zoning ordinance. Variances permissible under the zoning ordinance are
limited to dimensional and area requirements. No variance shall be granted for the establishment of any use otherwise
prohibited, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of non-conformities in the immediate or adjacent
areas.
Vegetation: All live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and under
4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 above ground level.
Veterinary Hospital or Clinic: A building used for the diagnosis, care and treatment of ailing or injured animals which
may include overnight accommodations, The overnight boarding of healthy animals shall be considered a kennel.
Volume of a Structure: The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as measured
from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Waiver: (Not to be confused with "variance" which applies only to the Zoning Ordinance.) A relaxation of the terms of
the Subdivision Ordinance or Site Design Review Ordinance; to waive submission of information otherwise required by
the Ordinance when that information is not necessary in order to make a determination that the standards of the
Ordinance and the criteria of the Statute are met. The applicant retains the burden of proof that the standards and criteria
are met. The CEO and Planning Board have no power to waive any statutory criteria.
Warehousing/Storage: The storage of goods, wares, and merchandise in a warehouse.
961
Water Body: Shall include the following:
Pond or Lake: Any inland impoundment, natural or man-made, which collects and stores surface water.
Stream or River: A free flowing drainage outlet, with a defined channel lacking terrestrial vegetation, and flowing
water for more than three (3) months during the year.
Water Crossing: Any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river or stream, whether under, through,
or over the water course. Such projects include, but may not be limited to, roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines,
sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings.
Weeds: All grasses, annual plants, and vegetation. Weeds shall not include cultivated flowers, gardens, trees, or shrubs.
Wetlands Associated with Great Ponds and Rivers: Wetlands contiguous with or adjacent to a great pond or river, and
which during normal high water, are connected by surface water to the great pond or river. Also included are wetlands
which are separated from the great pond or river by a berm, causeway, or similar feature less than 100 feet in width, and
which have a surface elevation at or below the normal high water line of the great pond or river. Wetlands associated
with great ponds or rivers are considered to be part of that great pond or river.
Wetland: (See: Freshwater Wetland and Forested Wetland)
Wholesale Business/Sales: The use of land and/or buildings engaged in the selling of merchandise to retailers to
industry, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users or other wholesalers as distinguished from the
sale to the general public.
Yard: The area between a structure and the property boundary.
Yard Sale: All general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a premise for the purpose of disposing of personal
property. Yard sale includes garage sales, porch sales, tag sales, and the like. They shall occur for not more than five (5)
consecutive days or for not more than two (2) weekends a year or they shall be considered a "Used Merchandise Sale" as
defined in this Section.
Historical Note: Adopted 7/14/97; Section 13-745 as amended 9/24/98; Sections 13-204 & 13-900 as amended
5/14/01.Section 13-745 was adopted on 8/24/98; Section 13-900 as amended October 25, 2010; Section 13-900 Kennels
as amended by the City Council February 13, 2012; Section 13-900 Condominiums added by City Council June 9, 2014.
962
Dimensional Requirements Minimum Setback Dimensions
Zoning District Minimum Lot Size Minimum Lot Frontage Maximum Lot C o v e r a g e Principal and Accessory Structures
Front
(from ROW)
Side
(Each) Rear Maximum Height
R-1
Single Family Dwelling: 9,000 SF
Two Family Dwelling 10,500 SF
Other Allowed Use: 12,000 SF
Single Family Dwelling: 85'
Two Family Dwelling: 95'
Other Allowed Use: 100'
30% 20' 5' 10' 35'
R-2
Single Family Dwelling: 9,000 SF
Two Family Dwelling 10,500 SF
Multi Family Dwelling: 12,000 SF
Plus 1,500 SF for Each Additional
Dwelling Unit.
Other Allowed Use: 10,500 SF
Single Family Dwelling 75'
Two Family Dwelling 85'
Multi Family Dwelling 95'
Plus 10' for Each Additional
Dwelling Unit
Other Allowed Use: 85'
30% 20' 5' 10' 35'
RC-2
43,560 SF 150'
30' 15' 15' 60'
R-3
Single Family Dwelling: 43,560 SF
Two Family Dwelling: 65,000 SF
Multi Family Dwelling: 87,000 SF
Plus 10,000 SF for Each Additional
Dwelling Unit
Other Allowed Use: 65,000 SF
Single Family Dwelling: 150'
Two Family Dwelling: 160'
Multi Family Dwelling: 175'
Plus 10' for Each Additional
Dwelling Unit
Other Allowed Use: 160'
30% 30' 15' 15' 35'
C-1
100% 0' 0' 0' 45'
C-2
50% 10' 10' 10' 45'
I-1
43,560 SF 100'
75% 20' 10' 20' 45'
I-2
43,560 SF 100'
40% 20' 10' 20' 45'
H-1
W/Public Sewer: 9,000 SF
WO/Public Sewer: 20,000 SF
75'
40% 40' 10' 20' 0'
Main St
Albair Rd
Van Buren Rd
Presque Isle Rd
Grimes Rd
Access Hwy
Sweden St
Madawaska Rd
Fort Fairfeld Rd
York St
East Presque Isle Rd
Powers Rd
River Rd
West Gate Rd
Plante Rd
Bog Rd
Washburn St
West Presque Isle Rd
Bowles Rd
Belanger Rd
Grimes Mill Rd
Baird Rd
Doyle Rd
Hardison Rd
Emond Rd
Buck Rd
Green Ridge Rd
Old Washburn Rd
Orgren Rd
Connor Line Rd
Kelly Rd
Bailey Rd
Noyes Rd
Vance Rd
Woodland Rd
Lombard Rd
Nabraska Rd
Brissette Rd
Thompson Rd
Limestone St
Sawyer Rd
Caribou Lakes Rd
Watson Memorial Dr
Glenn St
Fort St
Bennett Dr
Camp Ground Rd
High St
Mains Siding Rd
Cross Rd
Water St
Griffin Rd
Collins St
Rose St
Lynn Dr
Belyea Rd
Park St
Sincock St
Lower Lyndon St
Russ St
Sullivan Dr
Maysville Siding Rd
Solman St
Spring St
Dow Siding Rd
East Green Ridge Rd
Railroad St
Page Av
Solar Dr
Otter St
Pioneer Av
Richards Rd
Brook St
Vesta Dr
Aldrich Dr
Crosby Av
Elmwood Av
Harvest Rd
Mitchell Rd
Hatch Dr
Lyndon St
Katahdin Av
Paris Snow Dr
Coolidge Av
Old Van Buren Rd
North St
Spruce Ridge Rd
Ouellette Rd
Roberts St
Dahlgren St
Vaughan St
McGraw Siding Rd
Armco Av
Garden Cir
Mayo St
Wilbur Av
Cedar Hill Ln
Laurette St
Meadow Brook Dr
Violette St
Corriveau St
Haines St
Grove St
Mecon St
Farrell St
Kitinger Dr
Alpha St
80
20
25
75
26
91
23
79
24
29
22
92
82
21
28
90
78
18
81
19
27
Legend
TownshipBoundaries
Lot Lines
Brooks and Streams
Rivers, Lakes and Ponds
2008 Inland Wading Waterfowl Habitat
1989 Numbered Non-Forested Wetlands
CaribouShorelandZoning
General Development District
General Development II District
Limited Residential District
Resource Protection District
Stream Protection District
1 inch = 2,000 feet
0 1,000 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000
Feet
MAP NOTES:
1. THIS MAP IS INTENDED FOR PLANNING PURPOSES ONLY
AND SHOULD NOT BE USED FOR CONVEYANCES.
2. THE DEPICTION OF THE BOUNDARIES OF THE ZONES
ON THIS OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP IS FOR
ILLUSTRATIVE PURPOSES ONLY. FOR PURPOSES OF
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANCE, THE EXACT BOUNDARIES OF THE
ZONE SHALL BE DETERMINED BY ON-SITE INSPECTION AND
MEASUREMENT FROM THE NORMAL HIGH WATER LINE OR
UPLAND EDGE OF A WETLAND.
3. THIS MAP IS BASED ON THE USGS 7.5’QUADRANGLE
PROVISIONAL MAP WITH ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
DERIVED FROM THE ORTHO 2F DATA AS ACCESSED FROM
THE MAINE OFFICE OF GIS DATA CATALOG WEBSITE,
(http://megis.maine.gov/catalog/).
_____________________ Date_____________
Town Clerk
Date: 03/23/09
City of
Caribou, Maine
Shoreland Zoning Map
Chapter 14 Caribou Emergency Management Agency
ARTICLE I ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION
Section
14-101 Generally
14-101.1 Appointment of Director; Duties and Responsibilities
14-102 Rules and Regulations
14-102.1 Emergency Proclamation; Mayor’s Powers
14-103 Mayor to Report to Council
14-103.1 Mayor’s Duties and Responsibilities
14-104 Emergency Operational Plans
14-105 Caribou Emergency Management Agency Forces
14-106 No Municipal or Private Liability
14-107 Compensation for Injuries
14-108 Right-of-Way; Penalty; Jurisdiction
14-109 Violation of Regulations
14-110 Saving Clause
960
Chapter 14 Caribou Emergency Management Agency
ARTICLE I ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION
Sec. 14-101 Generally
(a) There is created a Caribou Emergency Management Agency in compliance and conformity with the
provisions of Title 37-B MRSA Sec. 701 et seq., hereinafter referred to as the Agency.
(b) The City Manager shall be responsible for the Agency’s organization, administration and operation.
The City Manager may employ such permanent and temporary employees as he deems necessary and prescribe
their duties.
(c) The City Council shall advise the City Manager and Director all matters of civil preparedness, review
the existing operations organization to ascertain the Agency’s ability to cope with its responsibilities and accept or
reject, such rules and regulations submitted to it under Section 14-102 of this article.
Sec. 14-101.1 Appointment of Director; Duties and Responsibilities
The City Manager shall, with the consent and approval of the City Council, appoint a Director who shall
coordinate the activities of all City departments, organizations and agencies for civil preparedness within the City
and maintain liaison with other civil preparedness agencies, public safety agencies and have such additional duties
and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the City Manager.
Sec. 14-102 Rules and Regulations
The Director shall prepare under the direction and control of the City Manager such policies as may be
deemed necessary for the administration and operational requirements of the Agency, which policies must be
approved by the City Council prior to becoming effective. The City Council shall accept, amend, or reject same.
Sec. 14-102.1 Emergency Proclamation; Mayor’s Powers
The Mayor shall have the power and authority, after consultation with the City Council to issue a
proclamation that an emergency exists under the conditions specified in Title 37-B MRSA Sec. 742. The
proclamation may declare the fact that an emergency exists in any or all sections of the City. A copy of such a
proclamation shall be filed within twenty-four (24) hours with the City Clerk.
(a) Notwithstanding the above, when consultation with the City Council would result in a
substantial delay in an effective response in alleviating or preventing an emergency or disaster, the Mayor is
authorized to take whatever actions are necessary to prevent the loss of life and property in the City.
(b) Whereas, the Caribou City Council is charged with the responsibility for the well being of
citizens residing within said City; and
(c) Whereas, the Caribou City Council is in session only at special times, and when the Mayor is
not available, they have empowered the City Manager, or in his absence the Director of Caribou Emergency
Management Agency, with the authority to proclaim an emergency state for or within the said City should it exist.
Sec. 14-103 Mayor to Report to Council
The Mayor and/or the Director shall be responsible to submit a full report to the City Council of actions
taken as soon as the City Council can convene.
962
Sec. 14-103.1 Mayor’s Duties and Emergency Powers
(a)During any period when an emergency or disaster exists or appears imminent, the Mayor or
representative designated above may promulgate such regulations and to preserve critical resources within the
purpose of this section. Such regulations may include but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles or to facilitate the movement
of persons from areas within or without the City.
(2) Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed hazardous to them.
(3) Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. Nothing in this
article shall be construed to limit the authority or responsibility of any department to proceed under powers and
authority granted to them by State statute or City ordinance.
(b)The Mayor or Director shall be authorized to request aid and/or assistance from State or any other
political subdivision of the State and shall render assistance to other areas or political subdivision under
provisions of Title 37-B MRSA.
(c) It is further proclaimed and ordered that during the existence of said local emergency the powers,
functions and duties of the emergency organization of this City shall be those prescribed by state law, by
ordinances and resolutions of this City, and by the Caribou Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan, as
approved by the City Council.
(d) The provisions of the above subsections will terminate at the ending of the declared emergency.
Sec. 14-104 Emergency Operational Plans
The City Manager will cause to be prepared an emergency operations plan for the City of Caribou which
shall be submitted to the City Council for approval. Amendments to the operational plan shall be submitted to the
City Council for approval.
It shall be the responsibility of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned
and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness. The City plan shall be reviewed
periodically by the Mayor in conjunction with all City department heads and the Director.
Sec. 14-105 Caribou Emergency Management Agency Forces
“Caribou Emergency Management Agency Forces” shall mean the employees, equipment and facilities of
all City departments and agencies, Boards and Commissions suitable for, or adaptable to civil preparedness and in
addition it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained from
volunteer persons and agencies.
Sec. 14-106 No Municipal or Private Liability
Immunity from liability shall be set forth in Title 37-B MRSA Sec. 822.
Sec. 14-107 Compensation for Injuries
All members of the Caribou Emergency Management Agency Forces shall be deemed to be employees of
the States when engaged in training for or on duty, and shall have the rights of State employees under the
Workmen’s Compensation Act and as specified in Title 37-B MRSA Sec. 823.
963
Sec. 14-108 Right-of-Way; Penalty; Jurisdiction
Personnel and equipment required to respond to an emergency of disaster shall have the right-of-way over
all public ways and roads and anyone failing to grant said right-of-way shall suffer penalties as specified under
Title 37-B MRSA Sec. 828.
Sec. 14-109 Violation of Regulations
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the Provisions of this article or of the regulations or
plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the
C.E.P. organization as herein defined in the enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulation or plan
issued thereunder.
Violators of the above are guilty of a Class E crime.
Sec. 14-110 Saving Clause
Should any section or part thereof of this Chapter be declared invalid by the court, the same shall not
affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
Historical Note: Adopted 8/12/85; amended 9/28/87.
964
Chapter 15 Nylander Museum
ARTICLE I GENERALLY
15-101 Board of Trustees Established; Appointment; Term; Purpose
969
Chapter 15 Nylander Museum
ARTICLE I GENERALLY
Sec. 15-101 Board of Trustees Established; Appointment; Term; Purpose
Whereas, it is desirable and necessary that all of the collections sold by the late Olof
Nylander to the City of Caribou and all other collections donated by others and kept in the
Nylander Museum be properly cared for, preserved, added to, and maintained for the use of the
public, and for the public good, and for the maintenance, upkeep, and repair of the Nylander
Museum, for which said collections are maintained.
That there be established a board of trustees of the Nylander Museum to manage and
control all its affairs, composed of at least five (5) voting members and one non-voting member,
ex-officio, who shall be elected by the City Council of the City of Caribou within thirty (30) days
after the acceptance of this ordinance by the City Council of the City of Caribou, as hereinafter
provided, but none of such members of the Caribou City Council shall be eligible for such office
of trustees, and whenever any of said trustees becomes a member of said City Council, he shall
automatically cease to be such trustee.
As soon as convenient after the members of said board have been appointed, said trustees
shall hold a meeting in the City of Caribou, and organize by the election of a President and
Clerk, and, when necessary, all other needful officers and agents.
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of President, Treasurer, or Clerk, it shall be
promptly filled by said Board of Trustees. The City Council shall appoint trustees of the Board
in the following manner: Two (2) trustees for a period of one year; two (2) trustees for a period
of two (2) years; three (3) trustees for a period of three (3) years. The City Council shall appoint
a member of the City Council or the City Manager to serve as a non-voting member, ex-officio,
in addition to the seven (7) voting trustees, who shall serve at the City Council’s pleasure. The
respective terms of the trustees shall expire with the end of the municipal year, and whenever a
trustee’s term shall terminate for any reason before his term shall have expired, the City Council
shall appoint a new trustee to finish the unexpired term.
The Board of Trustees shall ordain and establish such by-laws as are necessary for their
own convenience and the proper management of the affairs of the Nylander Museum. Members
of the Board shall be eligible to any office under the Board and shall be sworn into office by a
Justice of the Peace, Notary Public, or the City Clerk of the City of Caribou.
___________________________
Historical Note: Adopted May 2, 1983; Amended by the City Council on April 27, 2015.
971
Chapter 16 Community Alcohol and Drug Education Team (CADET)
ARTICLE 1 CADET
Section
16-101 Preamble
16-102 Appointment and Tenure
16-103 Responsibility
16-104 Bylaws
16-105 Compensation Benefits
16-106 Purpose
16-107 Funding
16-108 Reporting Requirements
976
Chapter 16 Community Alcohol and Drug Education Team (CADET)
ARTICLE I CADET
Sec. 16-101 Preamble
Whereas, the Caribou area Community Alcohol and Drug Education Team (CADET) has existed since
1991, under the auspices of the Caribou School Department, to pursue the following mission:
The Community Alcohol and Drug Education Team, a group of concerned citizens,
Recognizes the fact that substance abuse is a widespread problem that will require a
varied and ongoing commitment from all segments of the community.
The functions of this team will be to develop formalized educational programs, facilitate
Community education and access to assistance, and promote a climate that positively
encourages community change.
It has as its goal the decrease of alcohol, tobacco, and other drug abuse and dependency.
Whereas, throughout its six year history, CADET has enjoyed strong and continuous support from the
Caribou Board of Education; and a number of very effective programs and initiatives in the area of
substance abuse prevention and intervention have been implemented in the Caribou school;
Whereas, the members of CADET now believe that its base of support and its activities must be moved
into the “community as a whole” for greater participation and effectiveness; and to accomplish such,
CADET should become an agency of the City of Caribou; and
Whereas, the Federal Drug Free Communities Act of 1997 provides for significant grants to any
community in America that can sustain, for six months, a strong, high participation, anti-drug coalition
(including parents, teachers, businesses, law enforcement officers, churches, doctors, policy makers and
others).
Sec. 16-102 Appointment and Tenure
IT IS THEREFORE ADOPTED by the Caribou City Council pursuant to Sec. 2.11 of the Caribou City
Charter, as follows:
(a) The Caribou area Community Alcohol and Drug Education Team (CADET) is hereby designated
an agency of the City of Caribou, composed of five members of the public to be appointed by the City
Council, and four ex-officio members, one member of the City Council to be appointed by the City
Council, one from Eastern Aroostook RSU #39 to be appointed by the Eastern Aroostook RSU #39
School Board one from the Caribou Police Department to be appointed by the Chief of Police, and one
from Caribou Medical Center to be appointed by the Board of Directors of Cary Medical Center; said
nine members to be designated as Team Leadership. Public members shall be appointed for year three
terms; except however initial appointments shall be made as follows: two for three year terms, two for
two year terms and one for a one year term. Ex-officio members shall serve indefinitely, at the pleasure
of the appointing authority. Members may be residents of Caribou or any other community which is
part of the Eastern Aroostook RSU #39.
978
Sec. 16-103 Responsibility
(b) The City Manager shall be responsible for the organization, administration and operation of
CADET; except however, said responsibilities may be delegated to and withdrawn from Team
Leadership as the City Manager shall deem appropriate.
Sec. 16-104 Bylaws
(c) Team Leadership shall adopt by-laws providing for the officers, organization and activities of the
team; including a provision for the appointment by Team Leadership of an unlimited number of
additional team members; which by-laws shall be approved by the City Manager.
Sec. 16-105 Compensation Benefits
(d) No member of CADET, other than employees of the city in other capacities serving ex officio
pursuant to section (a) and any person who may be specifically employed by the city for CADET related
activities, shall receive any compensation for CADET activities, nor shall they be deemed an agent or
employee of the city entitled to any customary employment benefits, specifically including but not
limited to workers’ compensation.
Sec. 16-106 Purpose
(e) The purpose of CADET shall be to develop formalized educational programs, facilitate
community education and access to assistance, and promote a climate that positively encourages
community change. It has as its goal the decrease of alcohol, tobacco, and other drug abuse and
dependency; and to seek and administer grant funds from any appropriate source, including but not
limited to the Federal Drug Free Community Support Program.
Sec. 1-107 Funding
(f) All grant application seeking funds in excess of $2500.00 shall be approved by the City Council,
and all funds of the Caribou Alcohol and Drug Education Team shall be administered through the City
Manager’s office; except however, CADET may maintain an independent revolving account, not to
exceed a balance of $1000.00 at any one time, for the purpose of conducting team activities. Said
amount shall be audited annually at the direction of the City Council.
(g) There shall be no appropriation of city tax revenues for CADET activities
Sec. 16-108 Reporting Requirements
(h) CADET shall file an annual report of activities with the City Manager on or before January 31st
of each year for the preceding year.
_________________
Historical Note: Adopted March 3, 1998; Section 16-102 as amended November 9, 2009.
979





CHAPTER 17 – GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Ordinance adopted on December 9, 2013
By the
City Council of the City of Caribou, Maine
Chapter 17 is hereby created and established with the General Assistance Ordinance and
Appendixes as prepared by the Maine Municipal Association dated September 2013 in
compliance with Title 22 MRSA § 4305.
Chapter 17 is available in the City Clerk’s Office as well as on the City of Caribou’s website at:
http://www.cariboumaine.org/index.php/government/city-ordinances/


Chapter 18 – Caribou Municipal Airport
ARTICLE I AIRPORT ADMINISTRATION
18-101 AIRPORT DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED
18-102 AIRCRAFT REGULATIONS
18-103 PENALTY
ARTICLE II AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
18-201 Purpose
18-202 Committee Membership
18-203 Committee Officers
18-204 Meetings
ARTICLE I AIRPORT ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 18-101 Airport Department Established
There is hereby established a department known as the Caribou Municipal Airport
Department. The airport shall be operated by City Manager, acting as Airport Manager pursuant
to rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA). The Airport
Manager, or his authorized agents, shall have responsibility to enforce all rules promulgated by
the city council, the state of Maine and the FAA and shall, at their discretion, provide for an
orderly use of the airport and its facilities.
Sec. 18-102 Aircraft Regulations
1. Definitions: The following words and phrases used in this section shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACROBATIC FLYING: Any intentional airplane maneuver or stunt not necessary to air
navigation, or operation of aircraft in such manner as to endanger human life or safety by the
performance of unusual or dangerous maneuvers.
AIRCRAFT: Any aeroplane, airplane, gas bag, flying machine, balloon, any contrivance now
known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air, except a
parachute or other contrivance used primarily as safety equipment.
2. Exceptions To Applicability: The provisions of this section shall not apply to public aircraft
of the federal government, or of a state or territory, or of a political subdivision of a state or
territory, or to aircraft licensed by a foreign country with which the United States has a
reciprocal agreement covering operation of such aircraft.
3. Minimum Height Limits For Aircraft: Except while taking off or landing at an established
landing field or airport, no person shall fly or permit any aircraft to be flown within the city,
except at a height sufficient to permit a reasonably safe emergency landing, which in no case
1001
shall be less than one thousand feet (1,000'); provided, that the provisions of this subsection
may be deviated from when special circumstances render a departure necessary to avoid
immediate danger or when such departure is required because of stress of weather conditions
or other unavoidable cause.
4. Operators Of Aircraft To Be Licensed: No person shall operate any aircraft within or over the
city unless such person has first been issued an airman certificate by the Federal Aviation
Agency (FAA) and unless such aircraft shall have first received a certificate of airworthiness
from the FAA.
5. Operation Subject To Federal Air Traffic Rules: No person shall operate any aircraft over or
within the city in violation of any valid air traffic or other rule or regulation established by the
FAA.
6. Acrobatic Flying Prohibited: Acrobatic flying by any person flying over any portion of the
city is hereby prohibited.
7. Landing At Other Than Established Airport Prohibited: Except in case of emergency, no
person shall land any aircraft within the city except upon a regularly established airport field
or landing place.
8. Lights Or Night Operation Of Aircraft: All aircraft when flying within or over the corporate
limits at night shall have lights and other equipment required for such flying by the rules,
regulations or orders of the FAA.
9. Noise By Aircraft Operation: Unnecessary noise by operators of aircraft within or over the
city is hereby prohibited.
10. Dropping Objects From Aircraft Prohibited: No person in any aircraft shall cause or permit to
be thrown out, discharged or dropped within the corporate limits, any object or thing, except
loose water or loose sand ballast when absolutely essential to the safety of the occupants of
the aircraft and except as provided in subsection 11 of this section.
11. Permits Required For Exhibition Flights, Carrying Of Banners, Distribution Of Circulars,
Loudspeaking Devices And Carrying Of Explosives. No person shall make exhibition flights
by carrying banners on, distributing circulars from, or operating a loud speaking device from
any aircraft flying within or over the corporate limits without first obtaining a permit to do so
from the Airport Manager, and payment of a permit fee in such amount as established by the
city council for each flight. The Airport Manager shall issue such permit if the person who
will operate the aircraft, in carrying out any of the objects named in this section, is duly
licensed by the FAA, the aircraft to be used is licensed by the FAA, and the safety or lives or
the inhabitants of the city will not be endangered by the proposed flight; provided, that the
permits provided for in this section may be issued by the Airport Manager for up to six (6)
months rather than for individual flights, if the safety or lives of the inhabitants of the city
will not be endangered by such permit and a permit fee in such amount as established by the
city council is paid. The six (6) month permit shall be revoked upon violation of any
provision of this chapter.
1002
Sec. 18-103 Penalty
It shall be a class B misdemeanor for any person to violate any rule or regulation promulgated by
the city council, or any reasonable direction of the Airport Manager made to maintain the orderly
use of the airport and its facilities.
ARTICLE II AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
18-201 Purpose
The purpose of the Airport Advisory Committee is to advise the City Council and Airport
Manager on issues related to the improvement and operation of the Caribou Municipal Airport.
The Airport Advisory Committee derives all its authority from the City Council and as such shall
only have those powers specifically granted by Council Order. The Advisory Committee’s vision
is to provide aviation, operational, development and business advice to City Management as well
as foster a sustainable City Department that operates independently from the City tax base to the
extent practicable. The Airport Committee shall:
1. Support and assist in the management and development of the airport;
2. Promote airport safety and operational efficiency;
3. Collaborate with the community and foster good public relations;
Cooperate with organizations working for the general benefit of the airport, its neighborhood and
the City
18-202 Committee Membership
The Committee shall be composed of (7) seven voting members appointed by the Mayor subject
to confirmation by the City Council. The membership shall be three-year terms and include four
(4) Citizens of Caribou qualified to vote in City affairs who may or may not hold a pilot’s
certificate, one (1) incumbent City Councilor, two (2) persons who need not be residents of
Caribou but own property at the airport or who base an aircraft at the Caribou Municipal Airport.
The Airport Manager shall attend all meetings of the Committee and may take part in all
discussions but may not vote.
No person who serves as an FBO at Caribou Municipal Airport or who works as an employee for
the FBO may serve on the Airport Advisory Committee.
18-203 Committee Officers
Annually the Committee shall elect a Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary. The Chair shall be
responsible for the orderly conduct of the meetings and in his or her absence the Vice Chair shall
assume this responsibility. The secretary shall keep a record of all meetings which shall be
delivered to the Airport Manager within two weeks following each meeting.
1003
The Chair shall regularly attend City Council meetings to advise/inform the City Council of
business/actions at the airport.
18-204 Meetings
The Committee shall meet on a monthly basis at a time and place convenient for the majority of
members. All meetings must be held in public session with proper notice to the public in
accordance with M.R.S.A.
___________________________
Historical Note: Chapter 18 as adopted by City Council May 14, 2018.
1004
APPENDIX
1029
Appendix A
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING REFUSE COLLECTION
1. Area around cans. Refuse cans, and areas around them, shall be kept in a sanitary
condition.
2. Container construction. All refuse containers shall be metal, and of such size and
construction that they can be handled easily by collectors. The 30-gallon refuse
can is recommended.
3. Weight when filled. No receptacle shall be filled to such a degree that it will weigh
over 150 lbs.
4. Collection. The collector of the refuse shall not be required to pick up refuse
unless the same is properly prepared for the collection by the tenant, or owner in
conformance with these rules and regulations. Rubbish, such as tree clippings,
cartons, crates and boxes that are larger than can be contained in the receptacles,
must be so secured or prepared that they can be handled easily by the collectors.
5. Ashes separate. Ashes shall be kept in a separate receptacle. Other rubbish and
garbage may be kept together in one container.
6. Cover for garbage. Any receptacle containing garbage shall be covered with a
tight fitting cover.
7. Cover for other rubbish. Receptacles containing ashes or other rubbish only, shall
be covered so that they will not fill with rain, water or snow.
8. Liquids. Containers shall not contain any liquid or semi-liquid waste.
9. Inflammable materials. No explosive or highly inflammable material shall be
placed for collection, either separately, or with other refuse.
Historical Note: Adopted June 4, 1980
1031
Councilor Smith introduced the following ordinance:
Ordinance No. 2, 2015 Series
City of Caribou
County of Aroostook
State of Maine
AN ORDINANCE REGARDING THE SALE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
The City Council of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, pursuant to the
requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Section 2.ll (7) does ordain the following:
The City Council of the City of Caribou hereby authorizes the sale of municipally owned property
located at Tax Map 031, Lot 011, Lot 032, and Lot 090 of the 2013 Tax Maps. The lots to be sold
are more accurately depicted on the following page labeled Exhibit A.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to execute any and all documentation necessary for the
conveyance of said property.
This ordinance, being introduced on February 9,2015 andapublic hearing being held on
February 23,2015 was duly passed by the City Council of the City of Caribou, Maine, this 23
day of February 2015.
,,2.:)
David Martin, Councilor
Councilof
ilor Councilor
Theriault, Councilor
J F Clerk
Gary
councilor smi t h introduced the following ordinance:
Ordinance No. 10, 2015 Series
City of Caribou
County of Aroostook
State of Maine
AN ORDINANCE REGARDING THE SALE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
The City Council of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, pursuant to the
requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Section 2.ll (7) does ordain the following:
The City Council of the City of Caribou hereby authorizes the sale of municipally owned property
located at Tax Map 03 I , Lot 03 I , 039, 060, 097 , Lot 102 of the 2013 Tax Maps.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to execute any and all documentation necessary for the
conveyance of said property.
This ordinance, being introduced on July 13,2015 and a public hearing being hetd on August 10,
2015 was passed by the City Council of the City of Caribou, Maine, this
15
Aiken, David Martin,
Shane
.f
Philip J. Councilor
Joan Theriault, Councilor
J
Councilor Smì f introduced the following ordinance:
Ordinance No. 11, 2015 Series
City of Caribou
County of Aroostook
State of Maine
AN ORDINANCE REGARDING THE SALE OF MTINICIPAL PROPERTY
The City Council of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, pursuant to the
requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Section 2.ll (7) does ordain the following:
The City Council of the City of Ca¡ibou hereby authorizes the sale of municipally owned properry
located at Tax Map 005 Lot 015, Map 008 Lot 020, and Map 36 Lots 104 and 106 of the ZOLSTax
Maps.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to execute any and all documentation necessary for the
conveyance of said property.
This ordinance, being introduced on september 14,2015 and a public hearing being held on
October 2015 was duly passed by the city council of the city of caribou, Maine, this ) octo 1
J II,
David Martin, Councilor
City Clerk
ì
J
P. McDono
Councilor Itnlrl¿rr..¿ the following ordinance :
Ordinance No. 7, 2016 Series
City of Caribou
County of Aroostook
State of Maine
AN ORDINANCE REGARDING THE SALE OF MTINICIPAL PROPERTY
The City Council of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, pursuant to the
requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Section 2.11 (l) does ordain the following:
The City Council of the City of Caribou hereby authorizes the sale of municipally owned property
located at Tax Map 34, Lot 84, Lot 828 of the 2015 Tax Maps.
This ordinance, being introduced on April 11 ,2016 and a public hearing being held
on Apri L 25 ,2016 was duly passed by the City Council of the City of Caribou,
Maine, 2 rdav of April 2016.
) Guty
J
id Councilor
McDougall,
ault, ilor
or v
Attest:
ith
14rtt
Kalen H ll, Deputy City Clerk
cilor
Councilor McDonough introduced the following ordinance
Ordinance No. 9, 2016 Series
City of Caribou
County of Aroostook
State of Maine
AN ORDINANCE REGARDING THE SALE OF MLINICIPAL PROPERTY
The City Council of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, pursuant to the
requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Section 2.ll (7) does ordain the following:
The City Council ofthe City of Caribou hereby authorizes the sale of municipally owned property
list below of the 2015 Tax Maps.
Map Lot Location
36 Presque lsle Rd
30 23 96 River Rd
31 186 Lyndon St
33 7 Limestone St
33 11-A Limestone St
38 86-A 180 Limestone St
31 153 17 Fenderson St
31 L54 Fenderson
34 L85 197 Limestone St
This being introduced on June 27,2016 and a public hearing being held on July I 1,
2
2016, duly City Council of the City of Caribou, Maine, this July I l,2016.
Martin, Councilor
J
oan Councilor
II,
J
Councilor
Smi th
introduced the following ordinance
Ordinance No. 11, 2016 Series
City of Caribou
County of Aroostook
State of Maine
AN ORDINANCE REGARDING THE SALE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
The City Council of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, pursuant to the
requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Section 2.II (7) does ordain the following:
The City Council of the City of Caribou hereby authorizes the sale of municipaliy owned property
list below of the 2QI5 Tax Maps.
Map Lot Location
Also known as Lot A of the plan titled "Boundary Survey Property of
the City of Caribou being Lots 12-20, Lot 23 and associated paper
streets of the former Tibbetts Ierrace Subdivision, May 20-
32 1"19-F Truman Street December L,2OO4' recorded in Book 40, Page 1368
32 L19-G Truman Street
Also known as Lot J of the plan titled "Boundary Survey Property of
the City of Caribou being Lots 12-20, Lot 23 and associated paper
streets of the former Tibbetts Ïerrace Subdívision, May 20-
December 1,2OO4" recorded in Book 40, Page L368
31 L05 Washburn St
Gaty
This ordinance, being introduced on August 22,2016 and a public hearing being held on
S 12,2al6 was duly passed by the city council of the city of caribou, Maine, this
0 /t 20t6.
Da Martin,
u,
J
-2
J
J
Councilor McDonou gh introduced the following ordinance
Ordinance No. 13,2017 Series
City of Caribou
County of Aroostook
State of Maine
AN ORDINANCE REGARDTNG THE SALE OF MUNtCtPAL PROPERTY (HTLLTOP ELEMENTARY)
The City Council of the City of Caríbou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, pursuant to the
requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Section 2.IL {7l.does ordain the following:
The City Council of the City of Caribou hereby authorizes the sale of municipally owned property located
at approximately 19 Marshall Avenue (formerly known as Hilltop Elementary). The property to be sold is
more accurately depicted on the following pages labeled Exhibit A
The City Manager is hereby authorized to execute any and all documentation necessary for the
conveyance of said property.
This ordinance, being introduced on December 27,2077 and a public hearing being held on January 8,
2018 was duly passed by the City Council of the City of Caribou, Maine, this 8th day of January 2018.
{Lx}tuß{<
Ñ¡cole cote
David Martin
Theriault
R. Mark Goughan
Hugh A.
Phillip J,
Attest:
,/* ílr¿
tÇ/t-
/?
il
Clerk
Exhibit A: Description of Property
Being a certain lot or parcel of land situated on the westerly side of Marshall Avenue
and being a part of Lot 18, Township "H", Range 2 now Caribou, Aroostook County,
Maine and being further bounded and described as follows, to wit:
1. Beginning at a l-inch iron pipe, capped #1219, found on the westerly line of
Marshall Avenue at the southeasterly corner of land of Marilyn P. Hewitt as recorded
in the Southern District of the Aroostook Registry of Deeds in Book 5507, page 133
also being the southeasterly corner of Lot 90 according to a plan of survey entitled,
"Property of Downing Construction Company, Part of lots numbered thirteen (13) and
eighteen (18), H Township, Caribou, Aroostook County, Maine", dated May 1959 and
recorded in Plan Book 15, page 43, said iron pipe is also shown as plan point (2) on a
plan of survey entitled, "Boundar5r Survey, Property of William H. Drost and Pearl V.
Drost being A Part of Lot 18, Township H, Range 2 in Caribou, Aroostook County,
Maine" as surveyed by Blackstone Land Surveying, P.A. May 15 - June 13, 2001. This
plan is not recorded but is maintained in the files of Blackstone Land Surveying, P.A.
as job #6O33;
2. Thence on a Maine State Grid North bearing of South 2o29'East along the westerly
line of Marshall Avenue 354.0 feet to an iron pin set;
3. Thence South 88" 1 I' West 2 18.0 feet to an iron pin set;
4. Thence South 58o54'West 215.0 feet to an iron pin set;
5. Thence South 87"31'West 348.3 feet to an iron pipe set;
6. Thence North 2"29'West along the land of Ca¡lJ. Soderberg as recorded in Book
4283, page 83, 454,4 feet to an iron pipe set;
7. Thence North 87o31'East along the southerþ line of land of Mark A. McCrossin
and Donna M. McCrossin as recorded in Book 352I, page 223,land of Lynn R. McNeal
and Betty L. McNeal as recorded in Book 1152, page 4B7,land of Charles H. Barnes
and Donna M. Barnes as recorded in Book 1063, page 440, and along the land of
Hewitt 755.0 feet to the point of beginning.
Containing 7.14 acres
All iron pipep set a¡e f -inch by 36-inch black iron pipe set 2 - 2 L l2 feet into the
ground with a yellow plastic identification cap #1,21,9 affixed to the top. Al1 iron pins
set are S/8-inch by 3O-inch smooth iron pin set flush to the ground with a yellow
plastic identification cap #L279 affrxed to the top.
Bearings and distances are from a partial boundary survey as surveyed by Blackstone
Land Surveylng, P.A.,7 Hatch Drive, Suite 260, Caribou, Maine O4736, September 15,
2OL7 and revised December 22,2OL7.
Exhibit A: Description of Property
( )rclinnncc .' S+fù
\
3t' Introduced by Councilo, È44" b*t-,r"1
1 C) , zola
Ordinance No. 05, 2018 Scries
City of Caribou
County of Aroostook
State of Maine
An Ordinance Approving the Sale of 0.1I acres near York Street and Sincock Street.
WHEREAS, the City of Caribou is a Local Unit of Govcrnmcnt undcr thc State of Maine and is
granted home rule autlrority under Maine Revised Statutes, 'l'itle 30-4, $3001 ; and
WHERBAS. the City of Calibou is recognized as a body corporatc with all rights and powers
granted under the law, which includes engaging iu real estate transactions; and
WHEREAS, the City owns and controls approximately 0. 1 I acres of property, which is
described in Exhibit A of this ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the city's divesting of such properly would serve a greater public purpose to
positivcly rcsolve conflicts with ownership, occupancy and ascess onto adjacent lands. and to
increase the taxable amount of lands in the cornrnunity.
NOW THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of
Maine, pursuant to the requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Scction 2.1 I , does ordain thc
following:
Scctign l. $urnlus l,ands
'l'hat property (hereafter "Property") which is described in Exhibit A, which is attached hereto, is
deemed surplus and may be appropriately disposed of by the City Manager.
F*ction ll. Sale of thrì.,llrcnsrtï
Due ro the lack of developrnent potentialof the Property and the ability to maintain the peace of
the community through resolving encroachments and future conflicts belween property owners
adjacent to the Property, the City Manager shall fìrst offer the Property to the owner of property
identified as Map 29 Lot 0l l.
S,eqtiq¡r l-!,, $,eyc r¡r liilitv
if ;;t pàrt of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circurnstances shall, for
any reason, be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstjtutional or invalid, such
juàgment shall not affect, impair of invalidate thc rernainder of this ordinance or the application
iticieof to other persons and circumstances, but shall be confined to its opcration to thc section,
subclivision, senlence or pafi of the section and the pemons and circumstances directly involved in
thc controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intenr of rhe Òity Council that this section would have been adopted if such invalid section.
provisions, subdivision, scntencc or part of a scction or application had not been included.
Scstion I I I.,ïostjgs sn4 triff'ûctive,Date
This ordinance shall become effective 30 days after adoption by the Council and after publishing
of this ordirrarrce in acçordance with the City of Caribou charter, Section 2.12(c), (d) and (e).
This Orclinance \yirs
Caribou this ql*l)
duly passed
day of
lo
Il, {Ì,r lnr
l{o&
by a majority of the City Çouncil of the City of
. 201 8.
Nicole
¿].,:)þ4,þ *k
'jr-1por*-¡'
€-
Mark Co
Attest
Phili pJ.
''.]/1¿'a*g*x*t'
l'heriault, Councilor
Farrin, City Clerk
Exhibit A: Legal f)escripfion of thc Properfy
Being a certain lot or parcel of land situated on the westerly side of York Street and
the southerly side of Sincock Street being a part of Lot 13, Township "H", Range 2
now Caribou, Aroostook County, Maine and being further bounded and described as
follows, to w¡t:
L. Beginning at plan point (E) on the northwesterly line of York Street being the
northeasterly corner of land of Lawrence W. Newell as recorded in the Southern
District of the Aroostook Registry of Deeds in Book 2147, page 225;
2, Thence on a Maine State Grid North bearing of North 87"23' West along the land
of Newell 77.1.feet;
3. Thence North 30'36' East along the land of The Mil¡târy Bureau of the
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management of the State of Maine
as recorded in Book 3401, page 103, Second Parcel (Parcel One) and Parcel Three,
83.3 feet to an iron pipe set;
4. Thence South 70'40' East 67.7 feet to an iron pipe set on the northwesterly line of
York Street;
5. Thence South 29"00' West along the northwesterly line of York Street 60,4 feet to
the point of beginning.
Containíng 0,11acres
The iron pipes set are a I inch by 36 inch black iron pipe set 2 - 2 L/2 feet into the
ground with a yellow plastic identification cap ü1219 affixed to the top.
Bearings and distances are calculated from a plan of survey entitled, "Boundary Retracement
Survey, Property of The Military Bureau of the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency
Management of the State of Maine being A Part of Lot 13, Township "H", Range 2, Caribou,
Aroostook County, Maine" as surveyed by Blackstone Land Surveying, P,A.,7 Hatch Drive, Suite 260,
Caribou, Maine O4736,January 12- March 24,2016, said plan is not recorded but is maintained in
the files of Blackstone Land Surveying, P.A' as job #7834.
,tilt¡tt.+*++*,tr**rl.,irÈ¡t¡t¡l*¡l**!t*rÈtilt¡Í**r+,{.rt****r+¡*¡i*'lii,i+ri++ttt*,f**t't¡t¡}**'l'*t*'++i**'}**ft+**¡t(*
Surveyor's Note: Th¡s is part of the land conveyed to the City of Caribou in Book 1906, page 348.
Page 1 of 2
Erhibit A: Legal Description of thc Property
Depiction of the Property


CHAPTER 17 – GENERAL ASSISTANCE

Ordinance adopted on December 9, 2013 By the
City Council of the City of Caribou, Maine


Chapter 17 is hereby created and established with the General Assistance Ordinance and Appendixes as prepared by the Maine Municipal Association dated September 2013 in compliance with Title 22 MRSA § 4305.

Chapter 17 is available in the City Clerk’s Office as well as on the City of Caribou’s website at: http://www.cariboumaine.org/index.php/government/city-ordinances/

Councilor McDonough introduced the following ordinance:
)
Ordinance No. 17, 2013 Series City of Caribou
County of Aroostook State of Maine

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING CHAPTER 17 - GENERAL ASSISTANCE

Short Title: An ordinance establishing General Assistance Guidelines.

The City Council of the City of Caribou, County of Aroostook, State of Maine, pursuant to the requirements of the City of Caribou Charter, Section 2.11 (1) does ordain the following:

Section 1: Chapter 17 is hereby created and established with the General Assistance Ordinance and Appendixes as prepared by the Maine Municipal Association dated September 2013 in compliance with Title 22 MRSA §4305.

Section 2: Upon adoption by the Caribou City Council the City Clerk is directed to file a copy with  the  Department   of  Health  &  Human   Services  (DHHS)  in  compliance  with  Title  22
M.R.S.A. §4305(4).

This ordinance, being introduced on November 25, 2013 and a public hearing being held on December   ,  013 was duly passed by the City Council of the City of Caribou, Maine, this 9th dayofD	mber2013.


David Genthner Sr, Councilor

GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
 
The Municipality of	Caribou 	
 
enacts the following General
 


Assistance Ordinance. This Ordinance is filed with the Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS) in compliance with Title 22 M.R.S.A. §4305(4).

Signed the _9th	day of	December	, _2013_, by the municipal officers:



 


David R. Genthner, Sr.
 
)
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
APPENDIXB




The City of Caribou adopts GA Appendix B for the period of

November  1, 2013 -September 30, 2014.  This appendix is filed with the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) in compliance with Title 22 M.R.S.A. Section 4305(4).
Signed t	h of December, 2013 by the municipal officers:



David Martin

David R Genthner, Sr.

GENERAL



ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE

Prepared by Maine Municipal Association September 2013
 
)
GENERAL ASSISTANCE  ORDINANCE






The Municipality of	Caribou	enacts the following General Assistance Ordinance.  This Ordinance is filed with the Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS) in compliance with Title 22 M.R.S.A. §4305(4).

Signed the _9th	day of	December	, _2013_, by the municipal officers:








Gary Aiken, Mayor	David Martin




Kenneth G. Murchison, Jr.	Philip McDonough, II




Joan L. Theriault	Shane McDougall





David R. Genthner, Sr.
 
)
TABLE OF CONTENTS



GENERAL ASSISTANCE  ORDINANCE
Article I- Statement of Policy	1
Article II - Definitions	3
Section 2.1 - Common Meaning of Words	3
Section 2.2 - Special Definitions	3
Applicant.	3
Application Form	3
Basic Necessities 	 3
Case Record	4
Categorical Assistance	4
•	I	Claimant	4
Deficit 	4
Disabled Person 	5
Dwelling Unit.	5
Eligible Person	5
Emergency	5
General Assistance  Program 	5
General Assistance Administrator 	5
Household 	6
lncome 	6
Initial Applicants 	8
Just Cause 	8
Lump Sum Payment 	8
Material Fact. 	8
Maximum Levels of Assistance 	8
Misconduct 	8
Municipality	9
Municipality of Responsibility	9
Need	9
Net General Assistance Costs	9
Period of Eligibility	9
Pooling of Income	9
Real Estate	9
Recipient	10
Repeat Applicants	10
Resident	10
Resources	10
30-	Day Need	11
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants	11
Unmet Need	11
Work Requirements	11
Article Ill - Administrative Rules and Regulations	13
Section 3.1 - Confidentiality of Information	13
Release of Information	13
Information from Other Sources; Penalty	13
Misuse of Information	14
Section 3.2 - Maintenance of Records	14
Case Records	14
Retention of Records	15
Article IV -Application Procedure	16
Section 4.1 - Right to Apply	16
Who May Apply	16
Application Via Telephone	16
Written Application Upon Each Request.	16
11
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice 	17
Section 4.2 - Application Interview 	17
Section 4.3 - Contents of the Application 	17
Section 4.4 - General Assistance Administrator's Responsibilities at the Time
of the Application 	18
Application Requirements 	18
Eligibility Requirements 	19
Applicant Rights 	19
Reimbursement/Recovery 	19
Section 4.5 - Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application 	20
Section 4.6 - Action on Applications 	21
Written Decision 	21
Content. 	21
Section 4.7 -Withdrawal of an Application 	22
Section 4.8- Temporary Refusal to Accept Application 	22
Section 4.9- Emergencies 	23
Disqualification 	23
Assistance Prior to Verification 	24
Telephone Applications 	24
Limitation on Emergency Assistance 	24
Section 4.10 - Residence 	26
Moving/Relocating 	26
Institutions 	26
Temporary Housing 	27
Disputes 	27
Article V - Eligibility Factors 	28
Section 5.1 - Initial Application 	28
Initial Application 	28
Subsequent Applicants 	28
111
)
Section 5.2 - Eligibility for Categorical Assistance	29
Section 5.3 - Personal Property	29
a)	Liquid Assets	29
b)	Tangible Assets	30
c)	Automobile Ownership	30
d)	Insurance	31
e)	Transfer of Property	31
Section 5.4- Ownership of Real Estate	31
a)	Principal Residence	31
b)	Other Property	33
Section 5.5 - Work Requirement	33
Employment; Rehabilitation	33
Verification	34
Ineligibility	34
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct	35
Just Cause	35
Applicant's Burden of Establishing Just Cause	36
Eligibility Regained	36
Dependents	36
Exemptions	37
Section 5.6 - Municipal Work Program	37
Consent	38
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client's GA Debt	38
Limitations	38
"Workfare First" Policy	40
Work-Related  Expenses	42
Disqualification	42
Eligibility Regained	42
Reports	43
 

 






iv





..................................................................................................•...................   -...--------
 

Section 5.7 - Use of Resources	44
Minors	44
Mental or Physical Disability	45
Written Notice; Disqualification	45
Forfeiture of Benefits	46
Section 5.8 - Period of Ineligibility	46
Work Requirement	46
Fraud	47
Section 5.9- Unemployment Fraud	47
Article VI - Determination of Eligibility	48
Section 6.1 - Recognition of Dignity and Rights	48
Section 6.2- Determination; Redetermination	48
Section 6.3 - Verification	49
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility	49
Applicant's responsibilities	49
Initial Applicants	49
Repeat Applicants	50
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants	50
Overseer's responsibilities	50
Redetermination of eligibility	51
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information	52
Section 6.4 - Fraud	52
Period of Ineligibility	52
Right to a Fair Hearing	53
Reimbursement	53
Dependents	53
Section 6.5 - Period of Eligibility	54
Section 6.6 - Determination of Need	54
Income for Basic Necessities	55
v
 
)
Use-of-Income Requirements	56
Calculation of Income and Expenses	57
Consolidation of Deficit.	58
Section 6.7- Income	58
Income Standards	58
Calculation of lncome	59
Types of lncome	59
a)	Earned income	59
b)	Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs	60
c)	Court-Ordered Support Payments	61
d)	Income from Other Sources	61
e)	Earnings of a Son or Daughter	61
f) Income from Household Members	61
g)	The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income	62
h)	Lump Sum Income	62
Section 6.8 - Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance	64
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance	64
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities	64
·	A)  Food	65
B)	Housing	66
Rental Payments to Relatives	66
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives	67
Mortgage Payments	67
Liens	69
Property Taxes	70
Housing Maximums	71
C)	Utilities	72
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water	72
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated
Hot Water	73
VI
 
Non-Electric Utilities	73
D)	Fuel	73
E)	Personal Care and Household Supplies	73
F)	Other Basic Necessities	74
1)	Clothing	74
2)	Medical	74
3)	Hospital Bills	75
4)	Dental	76
5)	Eye Care	76
6)	Telephone Charge	77
7)	Work-Related Expenses	77
8)	Travel Expenses	77
9)	Burials, Cremations	77
10)	Capital Improvements	78
Section 6.9 - Burials; Cremations	78
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice	78
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased	79
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members	79
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members	80
Proration of Familial Responsibility	80
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility	81
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others
Can Contribute	81
Burial Expenses	81
Cremation Expenses	82
Section 6.10 - Notice of Decision	82
Written Decision	82
Contents	82
Disbursement of General Assistance	83







Vll
 

Article VII - The Fair Hearing•.	84
Section 7.1 - Right to a Fair Hearing	84
Section 7.2 - Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing	84
Written Request.	84
Scheduling the Fair Hearing	85
Section 7.3- The Fair Hearing Authority	85
Section 7.4- Fair Hearing Procedure	86
Claimant's Failure to Appear	87
Section 7.5 - The Fair Hearing Decision	88
Article VIII - Recovery of Expenses ...................................................••.	90
Recipients	90
Recipients Anticipating Workers' Compensation Benefits	90
Recipients of SSI	91
Relatives	91
Article IX - Severability .............................................................•...........................•.	92



Appendixes

Appendix A - GA Overall Maximums Appendix B - Food Maximums Appendix C - GA Housing Maximums Appendix D - Electric Utility Maximums Appendix E - Heating Fuel
Appendix F - Household & Personal Items

Appendix G -Mileage Rate Appendix H - Funeral Maximums
Appendix I- Definition of Misconduct (26 MRSA § 1043(23))








viii
 



ARTICLE I


Statement of Policy


The Municipality of _Caribou	administers a program of general assistance (GA) available to all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in accordance with the standards of eligibility as provided within this ordinance, Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301 et seq.


Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant while encouraging self-reliance.  The program will strive to help eligible persons achieve self-maintenance by promoting the work incentive.  When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other than financial through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services.  The general
assistance program will place no unreasonable restrictions on the personal rights of the applicant or recipient, nor will there be any unlawful discrimination based on sex, age, race, nationality, religion, sexual orientation or disability.	The municipality is committed to including qualified individuals with disabilities, in municipal services, programs, and activities.  As a result, the municipality will promote a GA program that when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.  GA applicants with physical or mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation in order to access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged to provide the municipality with advance notice regarding the accommodation request.


The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all applications for assistance and requests for fair hearings.  GA applicants will be provided information regarding their rights and responsibilities under the GA program.  Within 24 hours of receiving an
application, the administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether or not

assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for the decision.  The administrator will also provide the applicant written notice that the applicant may appeal to the municipal fair hearing authority if dissatisfied with the decision.  When an


1





-- -------------------- ------
 


applicant is determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted except when the administrator issues non-emergency assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare assignment  (see section 5.6 of this ordinance).

The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each applicant and recipient.  These records are confidential as a matter of law (see 22 MRSA  §4306).

The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the administrator will be available.  The administrator, or other designated person/entity, will be available to take applications in the event of an emergency at all other times.  A copy of this ordinance and Maine General Assistance law will be readily available to any member of the public upon request.  Notice to this effect will be posted.


\
































2
 

ARTICLE II


Definitions


Section 2.1-Common Meaning of Words


Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this ordinance will have their common meaning.

Section 2.2-Special Definitions


Applicant.  A person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized representative, an application for general assistance or who has, in an emergency, requested assistance without first completing an application.  In addition, all persons on whose behalf an authorized application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits have been granted shall be considered applicants.

. \
Application Fonn. A standardized form used by the general assistance administrator for

the purpose of allowing a person to apply for general assistance and confirming the fact that a person has made application. The application form must be signed by the applicant to be considered complete.

Basic Necessities. Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, non-elective essential  medical services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription drugs, basic telephone service where it is necessary for medical reasons, property taxes when a tax lien placed on the property threatens the loss of the applicant's place of residence, and any other commodity or service determined essential by the municipality.

"Basic necessities" do not include:

 
•	Phone bills

•	Cable or satellite dish television
•	Mail orders
 
•	Vehicle payments

•	Credit card debt**

•	Furniture

•	Loan re-payments**
 



3





------------------- -----
 
)
•	Cigarettes

•	Alcohol

•	Pet care costs

•	Vacation costs

•	Legal fees

•	Late fees

•	Key deposits

•	Security deposits for rental property(except for those situations where no other
 


permanent lodging is available unless a security deposit is paid, and a waiver, deferral or installment arrangement cannot be made between the landlord and tenant to satisfy the need for
the immediate payment of the security deposit or payment in full) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(1)).
 

**Repayments of loans or credit will be treated as having been spent on basic necessities when the applicant can provide verification of this fact.


Case Record. An official file containing application forms; correspondence; narrative records and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient; written decisions regarding eligibility including reasons for those decisions as well as the types and amounts of assistance provided; and all records concerning an applicant's request for fair hearing and those fair hearing decisions.

Categorical Assistance. All state and federal income maintenance programs.


Claimant.  A person who has requested a fair hearing.


Deficit.  An applicant's deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance for the household as provided in section 6.8 of this ordinance less the household income as calculated pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive number. If the household income is greater than the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance, the household has no deficit.









4
 

Disabled Person. A person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due to a physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician or qualified mental health provider.

Dwelling Unit. A building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit (22 M.R.S.A. §4301(2)).

Eligible Person. A person who is qualified to receive general assistance from the municipality according to the standards of eligibility set forth in this ordinance (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)). "Eligible Person" does not include a fugitive from justice as

defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4).


Emergency. Any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of a person At the municipality's option, a situation which is imminent and which may result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the individual or municipality if not resolved immediately. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(4), 4308(2), 4310).

General Assistance Program. A service administered by a municipality for the immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their families.  A general assistance program provides a specific amount and type of aid for defined needs during a limited period of time and is not intended to be a continuing "grant-in-aid" or "categorical" welfare program.  This definition shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of each municipality to provide general assistance to a person each time that the person is in need and is found to be otherwise eligible to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(5)).

General Assistance Administrator. A municipal official designated to receive applications, make decisions concerning an applicant's right to receive assistance, and prepare records and communications concerning assistance.   He or she may be an elected overseer or an authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare director, or caseworker  (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12)).



5





 
 

Household. "Household" means an individual or a group of individuals who share a dwelling unit.  When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals, even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist between individuals residing in the dwelling unit, eligible applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata share of the actual costs of the shared basic needs of that household according to the maximum levels of assistance established in the municipal ordinance. The pro rata share is calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire household by the total number of household members. The income of household members not legally liable shall be considered as available to the applicant only when there is a pooling of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).

Income. "Income" means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the household including:
 

•	Net remuneration for services performed
•	Cash received on either secured or unsecured credit
•	Payments received as an annuity, retirement or disability benefits
•	Veterans' pensions and/or benefits
•	Retirement accounts or benefits
•	Workers' compensation

•	Unemployment  benefits

•	Federal and/or state tax returns
•	Benefits under any state or federal categorical assistance
 

program such as, TANF, Supplemental Security Income, Social Security and any other payments from governmental sources (unless specifically prohibited by any law or regulation)
•	Court ordered support payments, e.g., child support
•	Income from pension or trust funds
•	Household income from any

other source, including relatives or unrelated household  members
•	Student loans

•	Rental income




6
 
)
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets that must be liquidated

for the purposes of deriving income:


1)	Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, governmental entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets by state or federal law;

2)	Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such as taxes, retirement fund contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and from work, special equipment costs and child care expenses; or

3)	Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are full-time students and who are not working full time.

In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the calculation shall be a 30-day period commencing on the date of the application.  This prospective calculation shall not disqualify an applicant who has exhausted income to purchase basic necessities, provided that the income does not exceed the income standards established by the municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).

4)	Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being counted as income for purposes of GA.  These programs include:
•	Food Stamps (7 USCS § 2017(b))
•	Li-Heap (42 uses§ 8624)

•	Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)

•	Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))

•	Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit program, only so long as the money is spent on basic necessities. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7))
•	Aspire Support Service Payments (10-144 CMR Chapter 323)










7
 

Initial Applicant. A person who has not applied for assistance in this or any other municipality is considered an initial applicant.
I	Just Cause. A valid. verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying with one or more conditions of eligibility or from attending a scheduled fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A(5)).


I		Lump Sum Payment. A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of money issued to an applicant or recipient. Lump sum payment includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or
settlement portions of social security benefits, workers' compensation payments, unemployment benefits, disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or money received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards, property damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment includes only the amount of money available to the applicant after payment of required deductions has been made from the gross lump sum payment. A lump sum payment does not include conversion of a non-liquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary expenses. (22 MRSA § 4301 (8-A)).

Material Fact. A material fact is a fact that necessarily has some bearing on the determination of an applicant's general assistance eligibility, and which would, if disclosed to the administrator, have some determinable effect on the calculation of eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance.

Maximum Levels of Assistance. The amount of financial assistance for a commodity or service as established in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the actual cost of any such basic necessity, whichever is less.

Misconduct. For purposes of the GA work requirement (see 22 MRSA §4316-A) misconduct shall have the same meaning as misconduct defined in 26 MRSA §1043 (23).   (See Appendix I of this ordinance for the official definition of misconduct.) Generally, employees are guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her



8
 

duties or obligations to the employer.  Employees who engage in a pattern of irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer's interest may also be found guilty of misconduct.

Municipality. Any city, town or plantation administering a general assistance program.


Municipality of Responsibility. The municipality which is financially liable for the support of an eligible person at the time of application (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(9), 4307).

Need. The condition whereby a person's income, money, property, credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for the individual and the individual's family are less than the maximum levels of assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(10), 4308).

Net General Assistance Costs. Those direct costs incurred by a municipality in providing assistance to eligible persons according to standards established by the municipal officers.  These do not include the administrative expenses of the general assistance program (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(11), 4311).

Period of Eligibility. The time for which a person has been granted assistance. The period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance provided, however, in no event shall this period extend beyond one month (22 M.R.S.A. §4309(1)).

Pooling of Income. "Pooling of income" means the financial relationship among household members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses.  Municipalities may by ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption that persons sharing the same dwelling unit are pooling their income.  Applicants who are requesting that the determination of eligibility be calculated as though one or more household members are not pooling their income have the burden of rebutting the presumed pooling of income.

Real Estate. Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other things affixed to the land (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 (13)).
 
·1
I	Recipient.  A  person who has applied for and is currently  receiving general assistance.

Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants  are repeat applicants.  For purposes of this ordinance repeat and subsequent shall have the same meaning.

Resident. A person who is physically present in a municipality with the intention of remaining in that municipality in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no other residence.  A person who applies for assistance in a municipality who is not a resident of that municipality or any other municipality is the responsibility of the municipality where the person first applies. That municipality must take an application and grant assistance to the applicant if he/she is eligible, until he/she establishes a new residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).

Resources.  Resources include any program, service, or other sources of support which are an alternative to or supplement for general assistance.  There are two kinds of resources: "available" and "potential".	Potential resources are programs, services, non­ liquid assets, or trusts that typically require people to apply in writing and/or wait a
period of time before eligibility is determined or the potential income is released.


Potential resources include but are not limited to any state or federal assistance program, employment benefits, governmental or private pension program, available  trust funds, support from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and jointly held resources where the applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential resources include the TANF (previously known as

AFDC) program, Food Stamps, fuel assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar programs.

Available resources include resources which are immediately available to the applicant or which can be conveniently secured by the applicant without delay, such as cash on hand or in bank accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and available market, or support from relatives which is being made available at the time of application and for
 

which the applicant does not have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g., relocation beyond the immediate region).  At the discretion of the GA administrator a necessary minimum balance required by a financial institution in order to obtain free checking or in order to maintain the account shall not be considered an available resource.

The municipal GA administrator reserves the right to inform GA clients of services, commodities or facilities made available by private organizations or charities.  Although GA applicants/recipients  may be informed of the existence of a charitable resource and/or organization, GA eligibility shall not be based or conditioned on the use of a private charitable resource(s).

30-Day Need. An applicant's 30-day need is the sum of the household's prospective 30-day costs, from the date of application, for the various basic necessities.  For the purpose of this calculation, the 30-day cost for any basic need shall be the household's actual 30-day cost for the basic necessity or the maximum 30-day cost for the basic necessity as established by this ordinance, whichever is less.

Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Are repeat applicants who have not applied for assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly employed or receiving support from a public benefit or private source and who have unexpectedly become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through no fault of their own.

Unmet Need. An applicant's unmet need is the household's 30-day need as established by section 6.6 of the ordinance less the household income as calculated pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive number. If the household income is greater than the household's 30-day need, the household does not have an unmet need.

Work Requirements. Work requirements are those obligations the municipal administrator places on applicants for general assistance as directed and/or authorized
I

11
 

by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent such obligations ensure a continuing potential eligibility for general assistance when complied with, result in ineligibility when violated, and are not merely optional, discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements include registering for work, looking for work in good faith, accepting all suitable job offers, maintaining employment, performing workfare, and participating in training, educational, or rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in securing employment.



















































12





------------	-------------- ----------···--·-----------	-	------------------	------------	--------------	-·   ....--.-.-----------------------
 









ARTICLE Ill


Administrative Rules and Regulations


The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general assistance. Section 3.1-Confidentiality of Information
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient of general assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general public, unless the applicant or recipient states in writing what information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4306).


Release of Information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the right to review their case records. No record will be released to a third party, however, unless the administrator receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly authorizing the release of his or her records to the specified parties.  Whenever the administrator releases any information, he/she will make a notation in the applicant's file stating to whom the record was released and the date.  The administrator may charge a reasonable fee for the reproduction of any records when appropriate.

Information from Other Sources; Penalty. Information furnished to the municipality by the Department of Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential.  The general assistance administrator will also comply with laws relating to the confidentiality of vital statistic records such as those concerning birth, marriage and death. (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).

Any representative of a financial institution (except national banks) or any employer of a general assistance applicant who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator in order to verify an applicant's eligibility must state in writing the reason for the refusal.  Any such person who refuses to provide information, without just cause, may be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100.  Any person, including the applicant, who knowingly and willfully makes a false representation of a


13
 

material fact to the administrator is committing a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314, 4315).

Misuse of Information. Misuse of any information relating to an applicant or recipient is a punishable offense (22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2)).

Section 3.2-Maintenance of Records


The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general assistance records (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are necessary to:

a)	provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;

b)	document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and

c)	ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or judicial review of a decision by the general assistance administrator.

1	Case Records. The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record, either in paper format or digital format for each applicant or recipient.  Each case record

will include at least:


 
•	household applications

•	budget sheets

•	information concerning the types and amounts of assistance provided
•	narrative statements describing the nature of the emergency situation whenever general assistance is granted in amounts greater than the applicant's mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
 
deficit or unmet need, whichever is less)
•	written decisions

•	requests for fair hearings and the fair hearing authority decisions
•	workfare participation records

•	repayments to the municipality
•	narrative writings documenting the need for general assistance, the



14
 

 
results of home visits, collateral information, referrals, changes in status
•	client authorization(s) for the release of GA information and/or reason(s) for the release of confidential information
 
•	adjustments in aid, and suspension or termination of eligibility
•	physician's documentation

•	Supplemental Security Income (SSI) interim assistance reimbursement authorization forms
•	vendor forms
 



Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant to either the applicant's or recipient's application or the administrator's decisions.

Retention of Records. General assistance records shall be retained for a minimum of three full years.  The three year period shall coincide with the State's fiscal year which begins July 1 and ends on the following June 30.  Records may be destroyed after three years by one of the two preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e., supervised shredding, burning or appropriate digital deletion/destruction  process.  In the event a client's records contain SSI reimbursement forms, the client's records should be maintained so that the municipality may seek reimbursement.























15




L-- ---------
 


ARTICLE IV


Application Procedure


Section 4.1-Right to Apply


Who May Apply.  Anyone may apply for general assistance.  The head of the family,

any other responsible household member, or an authorized representative must apply in person, except in special emergency situations as provided in section 4.9 of this ordinance or except when the applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the municipality has made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter residents to be eligible for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. §4304(3)).  In such cases, the administrator may require a representative to present a signed statement documenting that he/she is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf
of the named applicant.  The applicant or representative must complete a written application and any other required forms so that the administrator can determine
)	eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4308).  With notice, all members of the household receiving general assistance may be required to physically present themselves to the administrator.  Note that fugitives from justice are ineligible for general assistance.

Application Via Telephone. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in person due to illness, disability, lack of child care, lack of transportation or other good cause, and he/she cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will accept an application by telephone.  The telephone application process will include the administrator receiving written verification by mail and visiting the applicant's home with his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).

Written Application Upon Each Request. Each request for assistance will be administered in accordance with these guidelines.  The administrator will make an independent determination of eligibility for general assistance each time a person applies (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4308, 4309).





16
 

Applications Accepted; Posted Notice. Application forms will be available during regular business hours at the municipal office and when the general assistance administrator is conducting interviews with applicants.  Notice will be posted stating when and where people may apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available to take emergency applications at all other times.  In addition, the posted notice shall include the fact that the municipality must issue a written decision on all applications within 24 hours, and the DHHS toll-free telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or complaints.  Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only during the regular hours established and posted by the administrator.  In an emergency, however, the administrator or his or her designee will be available to accept applications
for assistance whenever necessary (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).


Section 4.2-Application Interview


Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each applicant personally before making a decision.  The interview will be conducted in private, although the applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, friend or family member.

Section 4.3-Contents of the Application


At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory information:

a)	applicant's name, address, date of	household members for whom the birth, Social Security number or	applicant is seeking assistance; appropriate United States Customs
and Immigration Services (USCIS)	c)  total number of individuals living with documentation, and phone number;		the applicant;

b)	names, date(s) of birth, and Social	d)  employment and employability Security number(s) or appropriate		information;

USCIS documentation of other




17
 

I I I '

)
e)	all household income, resources,	h)  penalty for false representation;

assets, and property;
i)	applicant's permission to verify

f)	household expenses;	information;


g)	types of assistance being requested;	j)	signature of applicant and date.





In the event an initial applicant is unable to provide identification records (e.g., Social Security card/number) because the record may have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the initial applicant may be provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in order to obtain copies of identification records. Provided the initial applicant makes a good faith effort to obtain the item/record sought, GA required to cure an immediate and/or emergency need shall not be withheld.  In such cases the municipality may elect to provide only a prorated amount of GA, e.g., five day's worth, while the applicant proceeds to obtain the required information.

Section  4.4-General  Assistance  Administrator's   Responsibilities  at  the  Time  of  the Application

The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their rights and responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with applying for and receiving general assistance, including application requirements, eligibility guidelines, applicant rights, and applicant reimbursement obligations.

Application Requirements. The administrator will help the applicant fill out the  application form as described in the preceding section. The administrator will inform the applicant of any other information or documentation that the applicant will have to provide in order for the administrator to evaluate the applicant's eligibility for assistance. The administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release of information form or reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain the applicant's signature or written authorization.



18





 	    -----------------------------·------·----     -
 

Eligibility Requirements. The administrator will inform, either verbally or in writing, the applicant of the eligibility requirements of the program, including:

•	the income standard of need;

•	the applicant's ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resource-related responsibilities, as described in the section immediately below;

•	the financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending household income on non-basic necessities; and

•	the disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud, failing to perform work-related assignments without just cause, or failing to make a good faith effort to secure potential resources when the requirement to attempt to obtain those resources has been explained to the applicant in writing.

Applicant Rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their rights to:

•	review the municipal General Assistance ordinance and Maine General Assistance law;
•	apply for assistance;

•	receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of applying for assistance;

•	confidentiality;

•	contact the DHHS;

•	challenge the administrator's decision by requesting a fair hearing.


Reimbursement/Recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant that he/she must reimburse the municipality for the amount of general assistance he/she has been granted in the event of a subsequent ability to pay. The municipality may also, as appropriate, contact the client's legal representative to inform him or her of the client's obligation to repay the municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking repayment from a recipient, the municipality also may recover the amount of assistance granted to a recipient during the previous 12 months from any relative legally liable for


19
 
)
the applicant's support (spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25, see Article

VIII, "Recovery of Expenses") (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4318, 4319).  Whenever applicable, the administrator will explain the various liens a municipality may place against a recipient's real or personal property, such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the Workers' Compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI "interim assistance agreement" lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, "Recovery of Expenses".

Section 4.5-Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application


The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to provide accurate, complete and current household information and verifiable documentation concerning:

•	Income

•	Resources

•	Assets

•	Employment

•	Use of income

•	Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant's support
•	Any change in this information from a previous application that would affect household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §4309).

In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation that shows the applicant:

a)	has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without just cause or been discharged from employment for misconduct;

b)	has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a part-time basis, has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has satisfactorily performed all workfare assignments or had just cause not to perform those assignments;




20
 
)
c)	has made use of all available and potential resources when directed in writing to such a program by the administrator, including, but not limited to, other government benefit programs or the assistance of liable relatives of sufficient means; and

d)	has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative program when appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program by the administrator, in order to diminish the applicant's need for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §4316-A, 4317).

Section 4.6-Action on Applications


Written Decision. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to  the applicant concerning his or her eligibility within 24 hours after the applicant submits a written application. Assistance will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period except when the municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to section 5.6 of this ordinance) to issue assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare assignment (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4316-A, 4321).  A written decision will be given
each time a person applies, whether assistance is granted, denied, reduced or terminated.

Content.  The written decision will contain the following information:


a)	the type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the applicant's ineligibility;

b)	the period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;


c)	the specific reasons for the decision;


d)	the applicant's right to a fair hearing; and








21
 

e)	the applicant's right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the municipality has acted illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).

Section 4.7-Withdrawal  of an Application An application is considered withdrawn if:
a)	the applicant requests in writing that his or her application be withdrawn; or


b)	the applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other form needed by the general assistance administrator.

Section 4.8-Temporary  Refusal to Accept Application


Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily refuse to accept applications. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to, the following:

a)	When the applicant's conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or when the applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the applicant will be asked to leave, and if the applicant refuses to leave, the police may be summoned. The applicant will be informed that an application will only be accepted when his or her conduct is under control.

b)	If the administrator believes that an applicant's behavior presents a threat to the health or safety of the public or to a municipal employee, or if such behavior is violent, or if an applicant has engaged in abusive, disruptive or harassing behavior and has been required to leave on more than one occasion, then the applicant may be required to designate a third party to apply for assistance on his or her behalf and the applicant may be prohibited from entering the municipal building;







22
 


c)	When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant that person may be required to provide written verification that he/she has been duly authorized to act as a representative for the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).

Section 4.9-Emergencies


An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the applicant which if not alleviated immediately could reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of the applicant or a member of the household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(4)).  Although they may be considered otherwise
ineligible to receive general assistance, persons who apply for assistance to alleviate an

emergency may be granted assistance, except as provided below, if they do not have sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency need and have not had sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).

A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the municipality determines that an emergency is imminent and that failure to provide assistance may result in undue hardship and unnecessary costs to either the client or the municipality.

Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving General Assistance due to a violation of sections 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9 or 6.4 of this ordinance is ineligible to receive emergency assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(A)).   However, dependents of a disqualified person may be eligible for assistance.  For the purposes of this section, "dependents" are defined as: 1) a dependent minor child; 2) an elderly, ill or disabled person; or 3) a person whose presence is required to provide care for any child under the age of 6 years or any ill or disabled member of the household (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309(3)).


In the event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire household by the total number of household members.



23
 

Assistance Prior to Verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator that he/she needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending verification, the assistance within 24 hours, provided that:

a)	after interviewing the applicant the administrator has determined that the applicant will probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information is completed; and

b)	the applicant submits documentation when possible, to verify his or her need.

The administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the applicant's statements about needing emergency assistance.  No further assistance will be authorized until the applicant's eligibility is confirmed (22
M.R.S.A. § 4310).


Telephone Applications.  If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in person due to illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and if there is no authorized representative who can apply on behalf of the applicant, the administrator shall accept an application over the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).

The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone application if the applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the information either by visiting his or her home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his or her eligibility through any other means.

Limitation on Emergency Assistance. Applicants are not automatically eligible for emergency assistance.  If applicants had income which could have been used to prevent all or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which are not basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general assistance to replace the misspent money (22 MRSA § § 4308(2) & 4315-A).

All applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator with verifiable documentation demonstrating that the applicant did not have sufficient income to avert




24
 

the emergency situation.  According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the amount of money necessary for the household to avoid the emergency and the amount of income available to the household during the applicable time period.

a)	The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application for emergency assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was created by a negative account balance for a commodity or service (such as rent, mortgage or utility payments), and the negative account balance was created over a longer period of time.  In such cases, the applicable time period shall be the consecutive length of time the account balance has been in the negative.

b)	The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to the applicant's ability to provide for his or her basic necessities for the applicable time period, including evidence of all income and resources received over that period of time.

c)	The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household's basic necessities during the applicable time period, per month, in accordance with the maximum levels established by this ordinance for the specific basic necessity or the actual monthly cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with averting the particular emergency situation for which the applicant is seeking assistance.

d)	From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable time period, the administrator shall subtract the total income and lump sum payments available to the household for the applicable time period as well as the total general assistance actually received during the applicable time period.

e)	The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the difference yielded by the computation in subsection (d), even when such a grant will not totally alleviate the emergency situation.





25
 


f)	The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency assistance in life threatening situations or for initial applicants; that is, persons who have never before applied for general assistance.

g)	Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a municipality from electing to alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost-effective manner available, provided such a determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is in conformance with general assistance law.

Section  4.10-Residence


The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible persons applying for assistance who are residents of this municipality.  A resident is a person who has no other residence and is physically present in this municipality and who intends to remain here and establish a household.

The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance to eligible persons who apply here and who are not residents of this municipality or any other municipality.  If a person who is not a resident of any municipality applies in this municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance until he/she establishes a residence in another municipality (22
M.R.S.A.	§ 4307).


Moving/Relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or transporting an applicant or recipient into another municipality unless the person requests assistance to relocate to another municipality.  If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible and grants financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this municipality will be responsible for providing assistance to the applicant for 30 days after he/she moves provided the recipient remains eligible.

Institutions.  If a resident of this municipality enters an institution located in another municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home, or




26
 

hospital) and requests assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the responsibility of this municipality for up to 6 months after he/she enters the institution if the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4307 and §4313 are met.  The municipality thereafter retains responsibility for an applicant in an institution only if the applicant has maintained a home in this municipality to which he/she intends to return.  The municipality also recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering the institution (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).

Temporary Housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary lodging are considered institutions if the municipality grants financial assistance for, makes arrangements for, or advises or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging.

Note: Municipalities which illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the denial, the applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant for up to 6 months and may be subject to other penalties (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).

Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another municipality but that municipality disputes its responsibility the administrator will notify the DHHS in Augusta (287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003).  If the applicant applies in this municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance until the DHHS has concluded which municipality is responsible for providing assistance.  If another municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover the amount due from the other municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4307(5), 4307(6)).

















27
 

I I I


)
ARTICLEV


Eligibility Factors


A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is in need and has complied with the eligibility requirements set forth below.

Section 5.1-lnitial Application


Initial Application. For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need will be the sole condition of eligibility.  The exception to this general rule, as provided by law, applies to all applicants, including initial applicants, who are disqualified for a defined period for quitting employment without just cause or for being discharged from employment for misconduct (22 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23)) (see section 5.5 of this ordinance) and to fugitives from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4) (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301(3)). An initial applicant is a person who has never before applied for general

assistance in any municipality in Maine (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(1)).


"Need" means that the applicant's income (including prorated income, where applicable), property, credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall maximum level of assistance contained in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the
applicant's 30-day need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have adequate income or other resources available to provide basic necessities.

Subsequent Applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat applicants. Repeat applicants are people who have applied for general assistance at any time in the past. Repeat applicants are also people on whose behalf a general assistance application was made at any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant was not a dependent minor in the household.  For repeat applicants to be eligible for
general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other eligibility requirements. The eligibility of repeat applicants may also be adversely affected to the extent they have not used their income and resources to secure basic necessities.




28
 
)
Section 5.2-Eligibility for Categorical Assistance


Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general assistance if the applicant is otherwise eligible.  Benefits received from other assistance programs will be considered as income when determining need, with the exception of Food Stamps, which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken into consideration when determining need (7 U.S.C. § 2017 (b)).

In addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant will not be considered as income; that is, the administrator will always compute the heating needs of an applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs associated with his or her fuel needs (42 U.S.C. §8624(f)).  The calculation of general assistance for heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection (c) under "Types of Income" at section 6.7 of this ordinance. For several additional exceptions please refer to the definition of "Income" in this ordinance (see page 7, subsection 4).

Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within 7 days after being advised in writing to do so by the general assistance administrator.  Persons who, without just cause, make no good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be disqualified from receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).

Section 5.3-Personal Property


a)	Liquid Assets.  No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including but not limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, retirement accounts, life insurance policies and other marketable security, will be eligible for general assistance unless and until he or she uses these assets to meet his or her basic needs, and thereby exhausts them.  At the discretion of the GA administrator, liquid assets do not mean a reasonable minimum balance necessary for obtaining free checking.  Although one checking account per



29
 
..
I

I
household may be allowed, any monies over the minimum required to obtain free checking are to be considered available liquid assets.

b)	Tangible Assets.  No person owning or possessing personal property, such as but not limited to: a motor vehicle (except as provided immediately below in subsection c), or a boat, trailer, recreation vehicle or other assets that are convertible into cash and are non-essential to the maintenance of the applicant's household, will be eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may be made when a person is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable repeat applicant as defined in Section 2.2 or when reasonable efforts to convert assets to cash at fair market value are unsuccessful.  Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment and other equipment used for the production of income are exempt from the above category and are not considered available assets.

c)	Automobile Ownership. Ownership of one automobile per household will not make a person ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for transportation to employment or for seeking employment, obtaining medical care, rehabilitation or training facilities, or for any other reason the GA administrator determines reasonable for the maintenance of the applicant's household. Recipients of general assistance who own an automobile with a market value greater than $8000 may be required, with written, 7-day notice, to make a good faith effort to trade that automobile for an automobile with a market value of less than $8000.  Any income received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade
down must be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or trade down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in disqualification (22
M.R.S.A. § 4317).


The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any car payment or vehicle maintenance cost including insurance for which the applicant is responsible.   However, provided the vehicle value is $8000 or less and the applicant is utilizing the vehicle for any of the above mentioned "essential"




30
 
I





)
reasons, the municipality in its discretion may choose to not consider reasonable

car payments, reasonable car insurance and reasonable associated costs of maintenance as "misspent" income.  General assistance for travel-related needs shall be computed in accordance with section 6.8(F)(7), (8) "Work Related/Travel Expenses."

d)	Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a non-contributory basis or that is required as a condition of employment will not be a factor in determining eligibility for general assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may, at the discretion of the GA administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.

e)	Transfer of Property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general assistance will not be granted general assistance to replace the uncompensated value of the transferred asset.  Assistance will be denied within a 120-day limit up to the uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a 120-day disqualification will be issued.  There will be a presumption that the applicant transferred his or her assets in order to be eligible for general assistance whenever property is sold for less than the fair market value or when the transfer occurred within 30 days prior to applying for general assistance unless the applicant can demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.

Section 5.4-0wnership of Real Estate


a)	Principal Residence. For purposes of General Assistance solely, the applicant's principal residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt resource, even if temporarily unoccupied because of employment, job training, education, illness or disaster, provided there is demonstrated an intent to return.
If the applicant owns land in excess of the minimum lot size for the zone or

district in which the home is located, then that land may be considered a potential resource if:


31
 
)
1.	The applicant has received General Assistance for the last 120

consecutive days; and


2.	The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any mortgagee will release any mortgage, any co-owners agree to the sale, zoning or other land use laws do not render the sale illegal or impracticable}; and

3.	The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into a marketable condition (e.g., the applicant can pay for any necessary surveys); and

4.	The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of the household; and

5.	A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land in question can be sold at fair market value, for an amount which will aid the applicant's financial rehabilitation; and

6.	No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be unduly burdensome or inequitable.

If the above conditions are met, then the administrator may condition the receipt of future assistance on the applicant's good faith efforts to sell, or render saleable, land which could be used to provide necessary support for the applicant (e.g., the applicant owns 100 "excess" acres.  Sale of 10 of the acres would provide for the necessary support and therefore not all the land need be sold at the present time.)  Assistance shall not be denied during the time that the applicant is making a good faith effort to sell or render saleable the land in question.

Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance the obligations under this section shall also cease.




32
 


b)	Other Property. If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that occupied as the principal residence, continued eligibility will depend on the applicant making a reasonable effort to:

1.	Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the property into cash which can be applied toward meeting present need; or

2.	Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present need.  Applicants who transfer their excess property to a third party in order to become eligible for general assistance will be ineligible.

If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital improvement payment, the municipality may claim a lien againstthe property. The lien shall not be enforceable until the time of sale of the property or upon the death of the recipient (see also section 6.8 of this ordinance) (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4320).


Section 5.5-Work Requirement


All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for work, work to the extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the work requirements, unless the applicant is exempt from such requirements as provided below.

Employment; Rehabilitation. All unemployed applicants and members of their households who are 16 years of age or older and who are not attending a full-time primary or secondary school intended to lead to a high school diploma will be required to accept any suitable job offer and/or meet with job counselors, attend employment workshops and rehabilitative services, except as provided below (see "Exemptions"). Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator that they are available for work and are actively seeking employment.

A "suitable job" means any job, which the applicant is mentally and physically able to perform. "Available for work" means that applicants must make themselves available for


33
 
)
work during normal business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying with the work requirement.

Verification.  Unemployed  applicants or applicants  employed on a part-time basis will be required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of employment at the  time of each application.  At a minimum, such documentation shall consist of a list of the employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the employer representative contacted.  "Pursuit of employment" means actually submitting a written application or applying for a job in person when reasonable, or submitting a
written application or letter of inquiry to employers.


For the duration of any repeat applicant's period of unemployment or partial employment, the administrator will establish the number of employers per week to whom each non-exempt applicant shall be required to apply in order to fulfill his or her
work search requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required by the
•,
administrator shall be reasonably related to the number of potential employers in the region and the number of hours in the week the applicant has available for work search activities after considering all time the applicant must devote to existing employment obligations, workfare obligations, and required classroom or on-site participation in job training, educational, or rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will not be expected at the time of the initial application, but will be a condition of eligibility for subsequent assistance.

Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application, applicants will be considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they, without just cause:

a)	refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;


b)	refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable and appropriate;  recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same places




34
 
)
repeatedly will not be considered to be performing a diligent worksearch and will

be disqualified;


c)	refuse to accept a suitable job offer;


d)	refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitation program that would assist the applicant in securing employment;

e)	fail to be available for work; or


f)	refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the municipal work program (see section 5.6).

Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct. No applicant, whether an initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full-time or part-time job without just cause or who has been discharged from employment for misconduct (see Appendix I, 26 MR.S.A. §  1043 (23) for the definition) will be eligible to receive general assistance of any kind for a 120-day period from the date of separation from employment (22 M.R.S.A. § §4301(8), 4316-A  (1-A)).

Just Cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse to comply with the work requirements of this section without just cause.  With respect to any work requirement, just cause will be considered to exist when there is reasonable and verifiable evidence that:

a)	the applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which prevents him/her from working;

b)	the work assignment pays below minimum wages;

c)	the applicant was subject to sexual harassment;

d)	the applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job tasks, or to meet piece work standards;





35





-  - ---------- ----
 
)
e)	the applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training or

rehabilitation program;

f)	the applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or disabled family members; or

g)	any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of Labor, or any other verifiable reason the administrator considers reasonable and appropriate will be accepted as just cause. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5)).

Applicant's Burden of Establishing Just Cause. If the administrator finds that the applicant  has violated a work-related  rule without just  cause,  it shall be the  responsibility of the applicant to establish the presence of just  cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).

Eligibility Regained. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they become employed or otherwise satisfy the administrator that they are complying with the work requirement by fulfilling the work requirement or requirements they violated.

For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed, "employment" shall mean employment by an employer as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § § 1043 et seq., or the performance of a service for an employer who withholds from the employee a social security tax pursuant to federal law.

The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain eligibility after a disqualification for workfare violations are detailed in section 5.6 of this ordinance, under "Eligibility Regained".

Dependents. Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the person's household who is not capable of working, including:

a)	a dependent minor child;

b)	an elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
(-


36
 




)
ARTICLE VII


The Fair Hearing


Section 7.1-Right to a Fair Hearing


Within 5 working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination of assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or failure to act. lhe appllcant or his or her authorized representative has the right to request a fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A.	§ 4322). The right to review a decision of the general assistance administrator
is a basic right of the applicant to a full evidentlary hearing and is not limited solely to a

review of the decision.


Section 7.2-Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing


Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all clalman ts will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that are not dear requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in
writing by the general assistance administrator.  If the client is satisfied with the
adjustment or explanation, the administrator will make an entry in the case record and
file any correspondence lnvorved.


Written Request.  To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized representative, must make a written request within 5 working days of receiving the administrator's decision to grant, deny, reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10
working days after any other act or failure to act.  The administrator will make avallable
a printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the claimant in completing it if necessary. On the printed form, the claimant will give the foHowing Information:

a)	the decision on which review is sought;

b)	the reason(s) for the claimant's dissatisfaction and why the claimant believes he/she Is eligible to receive assistance; and
 





c)	the relief sought by the claimant.


The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has been

withdrawn (in writing) by the claimant.


Scheduling the Fair Hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request the fair hearing authority must meet and hold the hearlng within 5 working days. The administrator will notify the claimant In writing when and where the hearing will be held (22 M.R.S.A. §4322).  In addition to the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice of fair hearing sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant's rights to:

a)	be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be represented by legal counsel or other spokesperson at the hearing, at the claimant's own expense;
b)	confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the hearing against the

claimant; and

c)  present witnesses on his or her own behalf.


Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take into consideration the convenience of the claimant and hearing authority.  The claimant will be given timely notice to allow for preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary information about the hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case.


Section 7.3-The Fair Hearing Authority

The munlclpal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that will determine, based on all the evidence presented at the fair hearing, whether the clalmant(s) were eligible to receive assistance at the time they applied for GA.  The FHA is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that general assistance is administered In accordance with the state law and local ordinance.
 





The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or more persons appointed by the municipal officers to act as the FHA , or, if designated, the board of appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691 (22 M.R.S.A. §4322). In determining the organization of the fair hearing authority, the municipal officers wlll use the followlng criteria. The person(s) serving as FHA must:

a)	not have participated In the decision which is the subject of the appeal;

b)	be Impartial;

c)	be sufficiently skilled In interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence and the facts necessary to make a fair determination: and
d)	be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the claimant the laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and interpreting to the administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate policies, practices or actions.


Section 7.4-Fair Hearing Procedure

When a claimant requesting a fair hearing Is notified of the date, lime, and place of the hearing in writing, he/she will also be given adequate preliminary information about the hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant shall be permitted to review his or her file prior to the hearing.  At a minimum, the claimant wlll be told the following information, which will govern all fair hearings. All fair hearings wlll:
a)	be conducted privately, and will be open only to the clalmant, witnesses, leg I counsel, or others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance administrator, his or her agents, counsel and witnesses;

b)	be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority;

c)	be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the

requirements of due process;
 





d)	allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present their positions for themselves or with tile aid of others, lncludlng legal counsel;

e)	give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or documentary evidence, offer rebuttal; question witnesses presented at the hearing: and examine all evidence presented at the hearing;
f}   result In a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the hearing; and
g)   be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given lo the claimant and filed with evidence introduced at the hearing.  The fair hearing authority will allow the claimant to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any arguments without undue interference.   Information that the claimant does not  have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair hearing decision or made part of the hearing record. Any material reviewed by the fair hearing
authority must be made available to the claimant or his or her representative.  The

claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript If he/she wishes to pursue court action.


The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which

reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs (22
M.R.S.A.	§ 4322).


Claimant's Failure to Appear. In the event the claimant fails to appear, the FHA will send a written notice to the claimant that the GA administrator's decision was not altered due to the claimant's failure to appear.  Furthermore, the notice shall indicate that the claimant has 5 working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA administrator information demonstrating "just cause," for failing to appear.
For lhe purposes of a claimant's failure to appear at a fair hearing, examples of · ust

cause" Include:

a)	a death or serious Illness In the famOy;
 




)
b)	a personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from attending the

hearing;

c} an emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents the party from attending the hearing;
d}  an obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in the conduct of his or
her affairs could reasonably conclude takes precedence over the attendance at the hearing; or
e)  lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect, excusable inadvertence, or excusable mistake.


If the claimant (or their attorney) establishes just cause, the request for the hearing will

be reinstated and a hearing rescheduled.


In the event a claimant who is represented by legal counsel falls to appear at a fair hearing, legal counsel shall not testify In place of the claimant on matters of 'fact' but
)	may cross examine witnesses and make 'legal' arguments on behalf of the claimant.


Section 7.5-The Fair Hearing Decision


The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within 5 working days after completion of the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the following:

a)	a statement of the issue;

b)	relevant facts brought out at the hearing;

c)	perUnent provisions In the law or general assistance ordinance related to the decision; and

d)	the decision and the reasons for It.


A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The hearing record and the case record will be maintained by the general assistance administrator.
 







The written notice of the decision will state that If the claimant Is dissatisfied with the fair hearing decision, he/she has a further legal right to appeal the decision pursuant to the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule SOB. To take advantage of this right, tile clalmanl must file a peutlon for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of receipt of the fair hearing decision.


When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the claimant. the assistance will be provided within 24 hours.
 





ARTICLE VIII


Recavery of Expenses


Recipients. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or his or her executors or administrators in a civil action.  However, prior to recovering assistance granted, the municipality shall Koffset" the value of any workfare performed by a GA recipient. at a rate not less than minimum wage.


Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance, the municipality will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by notifying him/her in writing and discussing it with the recipient. The municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs If, as a result of the repayment, the person would again become eligible for general assistance {22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).


Recipients AntlclpaUng Workers' Compensation Benefits. The municipality shall claim a lien for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump sum payment made to that recipient under the Workers' Compensation Act or similar
law of any other state (22 M.R.S.A. §4318, 39 A M.R.S.A. § 106). After issuing any
general assistance on behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is receiving Workers' Compensation, the munlcfpallty shall nle a notice of the municlpal lien with the general assistance recipient and the Office of Secretary of State, Uniform Commercial Code division.


The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC 1 form which must be signed by the recipient of general assistance who has applied for or is receiving Workers' Compensation.  Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who is receiving Workers' Compensation benefits and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be found ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required
 





signature . The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that flling to the recipient's Worker's Compensation attorney, if known, the applicant's employer or the employer's insurance company, and, at the administrator's discretion, to the Workers' Compensation Board. The lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum Workers' Compensation benefit Is issued.


Recipients of SSI.  All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their Supplemental Security Income (SSI) assistance Is pending or suspended, and which therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to sign a statement on an Interim Assistance Agreement form distributed by the DHHS that authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI payment to the municipality and/or the slate in repayment for the general assistance granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who may be applying for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and who refuses to sign the Interim Agreement SSI authorization form will be found inellgible to receive general assistance untll he or she provides the required signature (22
M.R.S.A. § 4318).


Relatives.  The spouse of an applicant. and the parents of any applicant under the age of 25, are liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. §4319}.  In addition, grandchildren, children, parents and grandparents are liable for the burial costs of each other. The municipality considers these relatives to be available resources and liable for the support of their relatives in proportion to their respective ablllty. The municipality may complain to any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the behalf of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
 





)
ARTICLE IX


SeverablCty

Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalld, such decision shall not Invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
 
Appendix A
A listing of the overall maximum levels of assistance.

Comparison	Overall Maximums
# in Household	2014/15	2015/16	2016/17	2017/18	2018/19	2019/20
One	$514.00	$603.00	$609.00	$618.00	$622.00	$640.00
Two	$547.00	$620.00	$624.00	$642.00	$662.00	$696.00
Three	$653.00	$747.00	$750.00	$760.00	$773.00	$816.00
Four	$851.00	$946.00	$948.00	$965.00	$1,016.00	$1,100.00
Five	$941.00	$1,036.00	$1,037.00	$1,049.00	$1,112.00	$1,180.00
Six	$1,010.00	$1,111.00	$1,112.00	$1,124.00	$1,187.00	$1,255.00

Add $75 for each additional person

Historical Note: Appendix A was amended by the City Council on August 11, 2014, November 9, 2015, September 12, 2016, November  13, 2017, November  13, 2018 and October 15, 2019.

Appendix B
The maximum amounts allowed for food are established in accordance with the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan. As of October 1, 2019, those amounts are:

Number in Household	Weekly Maximum	Monthly Maximum
1	$45.12	$194.00
2	$82.56	$355.00
3	$118.37	$509.00
4	$150.23	$646.00
5	$178.60	$768.00
6	$214.19	$921.00
7	$236.74	$1,018.00
8	$270.70	$1,164.00

NOTE: For each additional person add $146.00 per month.

Historical Note: Appendix B was amended by the City Council on October 27, 2014, November  13, 2017, November  13, 2018 and October 15, 2019.

Appendix C
A listing of the maximum levels of assistance for housing (both heated and unheated).

Unheated	Heated

Number of Bedrooms	Weekly	Monthly	Weekly	Monthly

0	$113	$487	$137	$587
1	$117	$502	$147	$634
2	$133	$572	$173	$743
3	$186	$799	$236	$1,015
4	$192	$826	$251	$1,079
Historical Note: Appendix C was amended by City Council on October 27, 2014, November 9, 2015, September 12,
2016, November  13, 2017, November  13, 2018 and October 15, 2019.
 
Appendix D
NOTE: For an electrically heated dwelling also see Appendix E - Heating Fuel. But remember, an applicant is
not automatically entitled to the "maximums" established - applicants must demonstrate need.

1)	Electricity Maximums for Household  Without Electric Hot Water: The maximum amounts allowed for utilities, for lights, cooking and other electric used excluding electric hot water and heat:

Number in Household
1	Weekly
$14.00	Monthly
$60.00
2	$15.70	$67.50
3	$17.45	$75.00
4	$19.90	$86.00
5	$23.10	$99.00
6	$25.00	$107.00

NOTE: For each additional person add $7.50 per month.

2)	Electricity Maximums for Households With Electrically Heated Hot Water: The maximum amounts allowed for utilities, hot water, for lights, cooking and other electric uses excluding heat:

Number in Household	Weekly	Monthly
1	$20.65	$89.00
2	$23.75	$102.00
3	$27.70	$119.00
4	$32.25	$139.00
5	$38.75	$167.00
6	$41.00	$176.00

NOTE: for each additional person add $10.00 per month.

NOTE: When the dwelling unit is heated electrically, the maximum amount allowed for heating purposes will be calculated by multiplying the number of gallons of fuel allowed for that month by the current price per gallon. When fuels such as wood, coal and/or natural gas are used for heating purposes, they will be budgeted at actual rates, if they are reasonable. No eligible applicant shall be considered to need more than 7 tons of coal per year, 8 cords of wood per year, 126,000 cubic feet of natural gas per year, or 1000 gallons
of propane.

Historical Note: Appendix D was amended by the City Council on November 9, 2015, November  13, 2017 and October 15, 2019.

Appendix E
Heating Fuel
The Council may amend the number of gallons as they see fit from time to time.

Month	Gallons	Month	Gallons
September	50	January	225
October	100	February	225
November	200	March	125
December	200	April	125
		May	50
 
Appendix F
The Council may amend these monthly numbers as they see fit from time to time. Personal & Cleaning Maximums

Number in Household	Monthly
1-2	$45.00
3-4	$50.00
5-6	$55.00
7-8	$60.00


Appendix G

Mileage Rate

This municipality adopts the State of Maine travel expense reimbursement rate as set by the Office of the State Controller. The current rate for approved employment and necessary medical travel etc. is 44 cents (44<C) per mile.

Please refer to the Office of the State Controller for changes to this rate: Telephone: 626-8420 or visit:
http ://www.state.me.us/osc/



Appendix H

Funeral Maximums

Burial Maximums

The maximum amount of general assistance granted for the purpose of burial is $1,475. Additional costs may be allowed by the GA administrator, where there is an actual cost, for:


•	the wholesale cost of a cement liner if the cemetery by-laws require one;
•	the opening and closing of the grave site; and
•	a lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able to provide a cemetery lot in a municipally owned cemetery or in a cemetery under municipal control, the cost of the cemetery lot in any other cemetery will not be paid by the municipality.

The municipality's obligation to provide funds for burial purposes is limited to a reasonable calculation of the funeral director's direct costs, not to exceed the maximum amounts of assistance described in this section. Allowable burial expenses are limited to:

•	removal of the body from a local residence or institution
•	a secured death certificate or obituary
•	embalming
•	a minimum casket
•	a reasonable cost for necessary transportation
•	other reasonable and necessary specified direct costs, as itemized by the funeral director and approved by the municipal administrator
 
Cremation Maximums

The maximum amount of assistance granted for a cremation shall be $1,025. Additional costs may be allowed by the GA administrator where there is an actual cost, for:

•	a cremation lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery
•	a reasonable cost for a burial um not to exceed $55
•	transportation costs borne by the funeral director at a reasonable rate per mile for transporting the remains to and from the cremation facility.



Historical Note: Appendix H was amended by the City Council on October 15, 2019.
 




