
Town of Farmington
Chapter 11- Land Use
Table of Contents
Article 10 - Automobile Graveyard, Automobile Recycling Business,
Junkyard, and Outdoor Storage Yard Ordinance
11 – 10.1 Title 1
11 – 10.2 Authority and Applicability 1
11 – 10.3 Purpose 2
11 – 10.4 Conflict With Other Ordinances 2
11 – 10.5 Effective Date 2
11 – 10.6 Validity and Severability 2
11 – 10.7 Definitions 2
11 – 10.8 Permit Required 4
11 – 10.9 Hearings 5
11 – 10.10 Limitations 5
11 – 10.11 Operations Standards 6
11 – 10.12 Permit Fees 10
11 – 10.13 Provisions Regarding Nuisances Unaffected 10
11 – 10.14 Violation 11
11 – 10.15 Appeals 11
11 – 10.16 Amendments 11
1
Town of Farmington
Automobile Graveyard, Automobile Recycling Business,
and Junkyard Ordinance
Chapter 11
Land Use
11-10.1 Title:
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Town of Farmington Automobile
Graveyard, Automobile Recycling Business, and Junkyard Ordinance” and will be
referred to herein as "this Ordinance”. This Ordinance limits Automobile Graveyards,
Automobile Recycling Businesses, and Junkyards to the zoning district(s) specified
under the Zoning Ordinance Table of Uses; prescribes definitions of Automobile
Graveyards, Automobile Recycling Businesses, and Junkyards; provides for permitting
and regulation of Automobile Graveyards, Automobile Recycling Businesses and
Junkyards; and provides for additional miscellaneous standards for Automobile
Graveyards, Automobile Recycling Businesses, and Junkyards.
11-10.2 Authority and Applicability:
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to 30-A MRSA Sec. 3001 and 30-A MRSA Sec.
3751 et.seq. The provisions of the ordinance shall apply to all Automobile Graveyards,
Automobile Recycling Businesses, and Junkyards as defined in 30-A MRSA Sec. 3752
within the Town of Farmington.
Persons or entities wishing to establish an Automobile Graveyard, Automobile
Recycling Business, or Junkyard within the Town of Farmington shall first obtain a
permit from the Farmington Board of Selectmen (hereinafter “the Municipal Officers”)
and shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
From the time of enactment of this Ordinance, owners of properties that meet the
criteria as defined in this Ordinance as an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling
business or junkyard have one year to come into compliance and be permitted or to
remedy all conditions that would subject them to requirements for being permitted under
this Ordinance. (See also 11-10.10A)
This Ordinance shall not apply to pre-existing “family farm” dumps that may date back
into the 1800’s and which have not had any accretionary activity since 1973, and which
consist primarily of household and farm waste products (including but not limited to
cans, glass bottles, discarded agricultural and household implements) consistent with
daily living activities at the time.
2
11-10.3 Purpose:
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide adequate controls to ensure that
Automobile Graveyards, Automobile Recycling Businesses, and Junkyards within the
Town of Farmington do not have a harmful impact on public health, safety, general
welfare, property values and the natural environment.
11-10.4 Conflict with Other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with other
provisions of this Ordinance, or of any other ordinance, regulation or standard, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
11-10.5 Effective Date:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date this Ordinance is adopted by the
voters at Town Meeting.
11-10.6 Validity and Severability:
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
11-10.7 Definitions:
As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms
have the following meanings:
Aquifer. Aquifer means a geological formation composed of rock, sand, gravel or any
other permeable bedrock or surficial geological formation that stores and transmits
significant quantities of recoverable water.
Aquifer, Generally Known. A generally known aquifer means any aquifer which is
known to exist by local citizens, geologists, hydrologists, and/or soil scientists but which
is not currently mapped as such.
Aquifer, Mapped. “Mapped Aquifer, ” means a geological formation composed of rock,
sand, gravel or any other permeable bedrock or surficial geological formation that stores
and transmits significant quantities of recoverable water according to Hydrogeologic
Data for Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers contained in Map 32 complied and
mapped by the Maine and US Geological Surveys and published by the Department of
Conservation in cooperation with the Maine Department of Environmental Protection,
dated 1982, or any other more recent update.
3
Automobile Graveyard. “Automobile Graveyard” means a yard, field or other area
used to store three (3) or more unserviceable vehicles or discarded, worn-out or junked
motor vehicles or parts of such motor vehicles.
A. “Automobile Graveyard” does not include any area used for temporary storage
by an establishment or place of business that is primarily engaged in doing auto
body repair work or in making repairs to render a motor vehicle serviceable.
B. “Automobile Graveyard” includes an area used for automobile dismantling,
salvage and recycling operations.
Automobile Recycling Business. “Automobile Recycling Business” means the
business premises of a person who purchases or acquires salvage vehicles for the
purpose of reselling the vehicles or component parts of the vehicles or rebuilding or
repairing salvage vehicles for the purpose of resale or for selling the basic materials in
the salvage vehicles, provided that 80% of the business premises specified in the site
plan in Article 10, Section 11 (subsection A. 3) is used for automobile recycling
operations.
Classified Water Body. “Classified Water Body” means freshwater wetlands,
floodplain wetlands, great ponds and rivers, streams or brooks as defined in 38 MRSA
Sec. 480-B.
100-Year Floodplain. “100-Year Floodplain” means those areas depicted as such on
the FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) NFIP (National Flood Insurance
Program) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated July 3, 1995 or more recently
adopted FEMA NFIP/FIRM map.
Highway. “Highway” means any public way, road or right-of-way maintained by the
State, Town, County or other public entity.
Junked. Junked means a state of existence where items are collected or disposed of
within a site where there is no reasonable expectation that those items will be used or
reused within a reasonable period of time; not temporary storage; collected without
demonstrated intent to use or reuse in a timely manner.
Junkyard. “Junkyard” means a yard, field or other outdoor area used to store junked
items including but not limited to the following:
A. Discarded/worn-out plumbing, heating supplies, household appliances, furniture,
machinery, equipment and trailers;
B. Discarded /scrap lumber and building materials;
4
C. Discarded/scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris,
waste and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or nonferrous metallic
material;
D. Garbage and waste dumps;
E. Any discarded/scrap conveyance originally designed to operate on land, water
or air.
All of the materials in A through E found in the locations listed above are hereinafter
referred to as “junk”.
Liquids and Gasses. “Liquids and Gasses” means substances including, but not
limited to, fuels, engine coolants, transmission fluids, hydraulic fluids, differential fluids,
battery acid, refrigerants, engine oils, bearing lubricants, degreasing compounds, and
transformer oils.
Motor Vehicle. “Motor Vehicle” means any self-propelled vehicle not operated
exclusively on tracks.
Primary System. “Primary System” means that portion of the State highway system
which the Maine Department of Transportation has by official designation incorporated
into the Federal-Aid Primary System.
Recycling or Recycling Operations. “Recycling or Recycling Operations” means the
dismantling of motor vehicles for the purpose of reselling the component parts of the
vehicles or rebuilding or repairing salvage vehicles for the purpose of resale or for
selling the basic materials in the salvage vehicles.
Temporary Storage. “Temporary Storage” means a period of time not to exceed ninety
(90) days.
Unserviceable Vehicle. “Unserviceable Vehicle” as used in this Ordinance means any
motor vehicle which is wrecked, dismantled, cannot be operated legally on any public
Highway, or which is not being used for the purpose for which it was manufactured.
11-10.8 Permit Required:
No person may establish, operate or maintain an Automobile Graveyard, Automobile
Recycling Business, or Junkyard without first obtaining a nontransferable permit from
the municipal officers.
Permits issued to an Automobile Graveyard or Junkyard under this section are valid
until the first day of the following year.
5
Permits issued to an Automobile Recycling Business under this section are valid for five
(5) years from the date of issuance and are renewable provided that the permit holder
furnishes a sworn statement, annually, on the anniversary date of the granting of the
permit, that the facility complies with the standards of operation applicable at the time of
issuance of the permit, and is accompanied by a current Town of Farmington Abutting
Property Owner Release Form if applicable. A person operating a business that
involves the recycling of automobiles may operate under a permit for an Automobile
Graveyard or a permit for an Automobile Recycling Business.
11-10.9 Hearings:
The municipal officers shall hold a public hearing before granting a permit to establish,
operate or maintain an Automobile Graveyard, Automobile Recycling Business, or
Junkyard.
They shall post a notice of the hearing at least seven (7) and not more than fourteen
(14) days before the hearing in at least two (2) public places in the municipality and
publish a notice in one (1) newspaper having general circulation in Farmington.
If an application is exempt from Planning Board Site Review, abutting property owners
shall be notified by certified mail by the Town at least fourteen (14) days prior to
consideration by the Municipal Officers. This notice shall indicate the time, date and
place of the public hearing. The cost of notification shall be borne by the applicant.
11-10.10 Limitations on Automobile Graveyard, Automobile Recycling Business,
and Junkyard Permits:
A. Prohibitions. No permit shall be granted for a new Automobile Graveyard,
Automobile Recycling Business or Junkyard if prohibited in a district or zone in
which it is desired unless such Automobile Graveyard, Automobile Recycling
Business, and Junkyard, has been duly licensed by the State and is fully
compliant with the applicable State statutes on the date this Ordinance is
enacted. (See Article 10, Section 11, subsection C).
B. Highways; Interstate and Primary Systems. No permit may be granted for an
Automobile Graveyard, Automobile Recycling Business or Junkyard within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the right-of-way of any highway incorporated in the
primary system or within six hundred (600) feet of the right-of-way of any other
highway, except for:
1. Those Automobile Graveyards, Automobile Recycling Businesses, or
Junkyards that are kept entirely screened from ordinary view from the
highway at all times by natural objects, plantings or fences per the standards
in Article 10, Section 11, subsection F.
6
2. Those Automobile Graveyards, Automobile Recycling Businesses, or
Junkyards located within areas that have been zoned for industrial use and
located more than six hundred (600) feet but less than one thousand (1,000)
feet from the right-of-way of any highway incorporated in the primary system.
No permit may be granted for any automobile graveyard, automobile recycling
business or junkyard established after October 3, 1973, and located within one
hundred (100) feet of any highway.
C. Public facilities. No permit may be granted for an Automobile Graveyard,
Automobile Recycling Business, or Junkyard that is:
1. Located within five hundred (500) feet of any public park, public playground,
public recreational area, school or university, governmental building, church
or cemetery, or;
2. Within ordinary view from any above public facility.
D. Private properties. No permit may be granted for an Automobile Graveyard,
Automobile Recycling Business or Junkyard that is located within three hundred
(300) feet of any abutter’s residence or within ordinary view from any abutting
property. (Note: Exception to this is allowed if and only if a Town of Farmington
Abutting Property Owner Release Form is executed by abutter and recorded in
the Franklin County Registry of Deeds at the time of application and each
renewal.)
E. Public and private water supplies. No permit may be granted for Automobile
Graveyard, Automobile Recycling Business or Junkyard operations within one
hundred (100) feet of a well that serves as a public or private water supply.
11-10.11 Automobile Graveyard, Automobile Recycling Business, and Junkyard
Permits; Operation Standards:
A. Application. An application for an Automobile Graveyard, Automobile
Recycling Business, or Junkyard permit must include the following information:
1. The name and address of the property owner.
2. The name and address of the person or entity who will operate the site.
3. Identification of the site by Town Map and Lot designation.
4. A site plan to scale, including:
a. Property boundary lines, dimensions and acreage;
7
b. Site contours from USGS maps;
c. Soil types as determined from NRCS soil survey maps;
d. The location of any generally known and/or mapped aquifer areas within
one thousand (1,000) feet;
e. The location of any residence, school or other public facility listed in Article
10, Section 10, Subsection C-1, within five hundred (500) feet;
f. The location of any classified water body on the property or within two
hundred (200) feet of the property lines and wells within 100 feet;
g. The boundaries of any 100-Year Floodplain or shoreland zoned areas
located on the property;
h. The location of all roads within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site
including all vehicular entrances and exits serving the site;
i. The location within the property boundary lines where any equipment,
including motor vehicles, old appliances, or machinery are drained,
dismantled or stored; and
j. The location and characteristics of all existing and proposed vegetation
and/or fencing that is to be maintained for required screening.
5. A plan for containment, storage and disposal or recycling of all liquids,
batteries, tires or any hazardous materials which are located at the site in
accordance with the Town of Farmington’s Hazardous Waste & Radioactive
Materials Control Ordinance, Chapter 8, Article 2.
6. A statement as to whether any State agency approvals are required under
State law.
7. If applicable, a Town of Farmington Abutting Property Owner Release Form.
B. Standards for permit. The municipality may issue a permit to an Automobile
Graveyard, Automobile Recycling Business, or Junkyard if the business
demonstrates that it meets all the operation standards set forth below:
1. The site must be enclosed in accordance with Article 10, Section 11-F,
around all sides of the area where vehicles or junk are to be located such that
said areas are entirely screened from ordinary view from all abutting
properties at all times. (Note: Exception to this is allowed if and only if a Town
of Farmington Abutting Property Owner Release Form is executed by abutter
and recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds at the time of
8
application and each renewal. The Abutting Property Owner Release Form
does not apply to any physical screening which may be required pursuant to
the paragraph below).
2. Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely to arise, physical
screening sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises shall
be provided and be maintained in good condition.
3. The site must not be within one hundred (100) feet of any classified water
body.
4. The site must not be within five hundred (500) feet of and must not be within
ordinary view of any public park, public playground, public recreational area,
school or university, municipal building, church or cemetery that existed on
the date the permit was issued.
5. The site must not have any slopes exceeding twenty percent (20%).
6. The site must not have any hydric soils present.
7. The site must not be over a mapped aquifer or a generally known aquifer area
which contributes to or could potentially contribute to a public or private water
supply outside the boundary of the site. In the case where a generally known
aquifer is alleged under the proposed site, it will be incumbent upon the
applicant to prove to the Planning Board that the proposed site is not over a
generally known aquifer which may pollute any water supply outside the
boundary of the site.
8. The site must not be within the 100-Year Floodplain.
9. The site must not be within one hundred (100) feet of a well that serves as a
public or private water supply.
10. The site must not be within fifty (50) feet of any lot line.
11. The site must not be within three hundred (300) feet of any existing abutters’
residence. (Note: Exception to this is allowed if and only if a Town of
Farmington Abutting Property Owner Release Form is executed by abutter
and recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds at the time of
application and each renewal.
12. Dismantling of any equipment, including motor vehicles, old appliances or
machinery must be performed in accordance with the following:
a. All batteries must be removed and disposed of or recycled in accordance
with applicable federal or State laws, rules or regulations.
9
b. All liquids and gasses from any equipment must be recycled or disposed
of in accordance with applicable federal or State laws, rules or regulations.
c. No liquids may be permitted to flow or be discharged into or onto the
ground.
d. All operations must comply with all applicable Town ordinances and
federal or State laws related to hazardous materials.
e. No sound, noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor inconsistent with those
generally experienced in the neighborhood shall be emitted which are
detectable to the normal senses from any abutting property, nor shall any
of these exceed federal or State standards.
C. Nonconforming uses. Any Automobile Graveyard, Automobile Recycling
Business or Junkyard in existence and licensed under State law on the effective
date of this Ordinance may remain in operation in its present location for a
period not to exceed two (2) years pending permit application, approval and
issuance or remedy all conditions that would subject them to requirements for
being permitted under this Ordinance. Thereafter, said Automobile Graveyard,
Automobile Recycling Business or Junkyard shall be required to comply with the
provisions of this ordinance. Any expansion of said Automobile Graveyard,
Automobile Recycling Business, or Junkyard beyond the size which existed on
the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with all provisions of this
Ordinance.
D. Revocation or suspension of permit. For purposes of Article 10, Section 14,
subsection C, each of the standards set forth in this section are conditions of a
permit.
E. Relationship to automobile graveyard permit. A person who recycles
automobiles but does not qualify for, or loses, an Automobile Recycling
Business permit may apply for an Automobile Graveyard permit.
F. Screening Rules. In the interest of uniformity and to establish guidelines in the
matter of adequate screening, the following rules establishing minimum
standards for screening of Automobile Graveyards, Automobile Recycling
Businesses and Junkyards shall apply:
Screening may be accomplished by natural or man-made objects, plantings or
properly constructed fences, any of which must completely screen the site from
ordinary view from any portion of any highway or abutting property within the
prescribed distances throughout the entire calendar year. The minimum height
of any screen is to be six (6) feet, or higher if needed to sufficiently accomplish
the complete screening from ordinary view. Where a potential safety hazard to
10
children would likely arise, screening shall be sufficient to deter small children
from entering the premises. All screens shall be well constructed and maintained
in keeping with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
1. If plantings are used they should be of sufficient height, density, depth or
growth to completely screen the site from ordinary view from the highway or
abutting property within the prescribed distance throughout the entire
calendar year.
2. Fences shall be so located and of sufficient height to completely screen the
site from ordinary view from any highway and abutting property within the
prescribed distances.
3. Fences should not obstruct sight distance for vehicular traffic or create any
other hazard or potential hazard.
11-10.12 Permit Fees:
The municipal officers shall collect all fees, in advance from the applicant for a permit, in
accordance with the following schedule:
A. Automobile Graveyard or Junkyard more than 100 feet from highway. Fifty
dollars ($50.00) for a one (1) year permit for an Automobile Graveyard or
Junkyard located more than one hundred (100) feet from any highway, plus the
cost of posting and publishing the notice under Article 10. Section 8;
B. Automobile Graveyard or Junkyard within 100 feet from highway. Two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for a one (1) year permit for an Automobile Graveyard
or Junkyard located within one hundred (100) feet from any highway, plus the
cost of posting and publishing the notice under section Article 10, Section 8; and
C. Automobile Recycling Business. Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a five
(5) year permit for an Automobile Recycling Business plus the cost of posting
and publishing the notice under section Article 10, Section 8.
11-10-13 Provisions Regarding Nuisances Unaffected:
This Ordinance shall not be construed as in any way repealing, invalidating or
abrogating 30-A MRSA, Sec. 3751 et. seq. or 17 MRSA, Sec. 2802, or limiting the right
of prosecutions under these laws. Violation of this Ordinance in the establishment,
maintenance or operation of any Automobile Graveyard, Automobile Recycling
Business or Junkyard constitutes prima facie evidence that the business is a nuisance
as defined in 17 MRSA, Sec. 2802.
11
11-10.14 Violation:
A. Enforcement. The Municipal Officers or their designees shall enforce this
Ordinance.
B. Penalties. Whoever violates this ordinance is subject to penalty under 30-A
MRSA, Sec. 4452. Each day that the violation continues constitutes a separate
offense with maximum fines of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
per offense. There is a twenty-five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) maximum fine
per offense upon the second conviction within two (2) years for violations under
this Ordinance.
C. Revocation or suspension of permit. Violation of any condition, restriction or
limitation inserted in a permit by the Municipal Officers is cause for revocation or
suspension of the permit.
No permit may be revoked or suspended, or fine imposed without a hearing and
notice to the owner or the operator of the Automobile Graveyard, Automobile
Recycling Business, or Junkyard.
Notice of hearing must be sent to the owner or operator by registered mail at least
seven (7) but not more than fourteen (14) days before the hearing. The notice must
state the time and the place of hearing and contain a statement describing the
alleged violation and the penalties that may be imposed.
11-10.15 Appeals:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Code Enforcement Officer or municipal
officers may appeal to the Board of Appeals by filing a notice of appeal within thirty
(30) days after receipt of the Code Enforcement Officer or municipal officers
notification.
Administrative appeals and variance applications submitted under this Ordinance
shall be subject to the standards and procedures established by the Town of
Farmington Board of Appeals.
11-10.16 Amendments:
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated
by
1. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board of Selectmen has
so voted;
12
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of
votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial elections.
B. Public Hearing: The Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment. Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least seven (7) days
prior to the hearing.
C. Adoption of Amendment: An amendment of this Ordinance shall be adopted
by a majority vote of a Town Meeting.

Town of Farmington
Chapter 3
Table of Contents
Article 3 – Board of Appeals
3-1.1 Authority, Establishment and Title 1
3-1.2 Jurisdiction 1
3-1.3 Effective Date 1
3-1.4 Validity and Severability 1
3-1.5 Appointment, Term and Condition 2
3-1.6 Meetings and Public Hearings 3
3-1.7 Organizational Structure and Voting Procedures 3
3-1.8 Powers and Duties 5
3-1.9 Appellant and Variance Application Requirements 8
3-1.10 Board of Appeals Processing 9
3-1.11 Amendments 11
1
Chapter 3
Article 1. Appeals Board
3-1.1 AUTHORITY, ESTABLISHMENT & TITLE
Pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001, Title 30-A M.R.S.A.
Section 2691 and Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4353, the Town of
Farmington hereby establishes a Board of Appeals by enacting this
Ordinance that shall be titled “Board of Appeals Ordinance”, (hereinafter
referred to as “this Ordinance”) which ordinance shall repeal and
supercede the “Appeals Board, Farmington, Maine” Ordinance adopted on
March 8, 1976 amended March 8, 1982 and the “Hearing Rules, Appeals
Board, Town of Farmington, Maine”.
3-1.2 JURISDICTION
The Board of Appeals shall have jurisdiction to hear and act upon appeals
by any person, body, company, corporation or other legal entity that has
suffered a particularized injury as the result of any decision, order, rule,
action or failure to act by any municipal official, agency, board or other
body where the Board of Appeals is specifically given jurisdiction by
statute or ordinance. Upon finding that an application for appeal is not
within the Board’s jurisdiction, the Appeals Board shall refuse to hear the
appeal. Such refusal shall be in writing, stating the reason or reasons for
refusal, and shall be mailed (certified, return receipt) or hand delivered to
the applicant, the applicant’s representative or agent, the municipal
officers, the municipal official, agency, board, or other body from whose
decision, order, rule, action or failure to act the appeal was attempted, and
to all other parties to the application for appeal within seven (7) days of
such decision.
3-1.3 EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date this Ordinance is
adopted by the voters at Town Meeting.
3-1.4 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court
to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision.
2
3-1.5 APPOINTMENT, TERM AND COMPOSITION
A. There shall be a Board of Appeals consisting of seven (7) regular
members and two (2) alternate members all of whom shall be residents
of the Town. The members of the Board, who shall serve without
compensation, shall be appointed by the municipal officers and be
sworn into office by the Town Clerk, or other person authorized to
administer oaths, before performing any official duties as a Board of
Appeals member.
B. Terms of regular members shall be for three (3) years with staggered
terms, and the members shall serve until their successors are
appointed. The alternate members shall be appointed for a term of one
(1) year and shall act on the Board in place of members who are
unable to act due to a conflict of interest, absence or physical
incapacity. The Chairman shall designate which alternate member
shall serve in the stead of an absent or excused member. Alternate
members shall have no voting rights until such time as they are
designated by the Chairman to fill a vacancy.
C. Terms shall run from July 1st through June 30th.
D. No person who is a municipal officer, municipal official or municipal
employee, general assistance administrator, town manager, code
enforcement officer or who is a father, mother, spouse, sister, brother,
or child of a member serving on the Board of Selectmen, Board of
Appeals or Planning Board may be appointed as a regular or alternate
to the Board of Appeals.
E. A member of the Board of Appeals may be removed for cause after
notice and hearing by the municipal officers before the expiration of his
or her term. The term “for cause” shall include, but shall not be limited
to, failure to attend three (3) consecutive board meetings or hearings
without sufficient justification, or voting when the member has a
“conflict of interest” as determined by a majority of the remaining
members of the Board of Appeals (See 3-1.5 for definition of Conflict of
Interest).
F. When there is a permanent vacancy of either a regular or alternate
member, the Secretary shall immediately notify the Town Clerk who
shall inform the municipal officers. Within sixty (60) days of the
existence of the vacancy, the municipal officers shall appoint a person
to serve for the unexpired term.
3
3-1.6 MEETINGS AND PUBLIC HEARINGS
A. The annual organizational meeting and election of officers shall be in
the month of July. Other meetings shall be held as necessary.
B. All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public,
except executive sessions. No votes may be taken by the Board
except in public meeting. Executive sessions shall be held only to
transact legal consultation, internal disciplinary proceedings and other
business acceptable under the Right to Know laws.
C. Members of the Board shall avoid ex parte communications with any
party-in-interest pertaining to any matter which is under consideration
or may come under consideration before the Board. If a party-ininterest
has such a communication with a Board member outside of a
public meeting, the Board member shall make the communication and
the contents thereof known to the other members of the Board and
public.
D. The Board shall notify the petitioner, the Planning Board, Code
Enforcement Officer and the municipal officers of any meeting or public
hearing. The Code Enforcement Officer, Planning Board and
municipal officers shall be made parties to the action, regardless of
whether they attend or raise any issues at such meetings or public
hearings. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to have their views expressed at any hearing, subject to
the limitations set forth in sections 3-1.6 and 3-1.7.
3-1.7 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND VOTING PROCEDURES
A. The Board of Appeals shall elect annually a Chairman and Secretary
from its membership. An alternate member may serve as Secretary;
however, no alternate member shall be a voting member unless
designated to take the place of an absent member by the Chairman.
B. The Chairman shall call meetings of the Board of Appeals as required.
The Chairman shall also call meetings of the Board when requested to
do so by a majority of the members of the Board of Appeals or by the
Board of Selectmen. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the
Board, and shall be the official speaker for the Board. In the event the
Chairman is indisposed or otherwise absent, the Board shall elect a
temporary presiding officer who shall preside at all meetings of the
Board in the Chairman’s absence.
4
C. The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Board
meetings through transcription or electronic recording and all
correspondence of the Board. The Secretary shall be responsible, with
the assistance of the Town Manager’s Office, for maintaining those
records that are required as part of the various proceedings brought
before the Board. All records prepared or maintained by the Secretary
in reference to any public proceedings are deemed public and shall be
filed in the Town Clerk’s office and may be inspected at reasonable
times. The Secretary shall be responsible for making all notifications
and announcements as are required.
D. Any question of whether a particular issue involves a conflict of interest
sufficient to disqualify a member from voting thereon shall be decided
by a majority vote of the remaining members present and voting
except the member who is being challenged. The term “conflict of
interest” shall include but not be limited to bias, family relationship or
direct or indirect pecuniary interest, which shall include pecuniary
benefit to any member of the person’s immediate family (grandfather,
father, wife, son, grandson, e.g.) or to his or her employer or the
employer of any member of the person’s immediate family.
E. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. All votes shall be by
majority of the Board.
F. A tie vote or favorable vote by a lesser number than the required
majority shall be considered a rejection of the application or appeal
under consideration.
G. The Chairman shall appoint an alternate member, if available, to act
for a regular member who is: disqualified from voting, unable to attend
the hearing, or absent from any portion of the hearing due to late
arrival. The alternate member will act for the regular member until the
case is decided.
H. No regular or alternate member shall vote on the determination of any
matter that was the subject of public hearing unless the member has
attended the public hearing hereon; however, where such a member
has familiarized himself or herself with such matter by reading the
record, reviewing tapes of the hearing and reviewed documents, he or
she shall be qualified to vote upon preparing and submitting to the
Chairman a sworn statement after placing that fact on the record.
I. The Board of Appeals may adopt rules of administration and procedure
for the conduct of its affairs, provided such rules are not contrary to or
inconsistent with this Ordinance.
5
J. The Board of Appeals may prepare and submit to the Town Manager
an annual budget relating to the operation of the Board.
K. The Chairman may waive any rule for good cause upon vote of a
majority of the board members in attendance. The adoption or waiver
of any rule shall be entered in the minutes of the Board.
3-1.8 POWERS AND DUTIES
A. General Responsibilities
It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Appeals to become
familiar with all the duly enacted ordinances of the Town or State law
which it may be expected to act upon as well as with the applicable
State statutes.
B. Except as jurisdiction to hear other matters is otherwise expressly
provided for (or prohibited) by ordinance or statute, the Board of
Appeals shall have only the powers and duties listed in Section C
“Administrative Appeals: and Section D “Variance Applications”. The
Board shall have the power to adjudicate only upon receipt of a written
administrative appeal or variance application by an aggrieved party.
C. Administrative Appeals
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure
to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer, Planning Board, General
Assistance Administrator, Town Manager, or Sewer Commissioners, or
any other municipal official or Administrative Board in the
administration of any ordinance which designates the Board of Appeals
as the appeal authority. The Board of Appeals shall determine from
the record of the proceedings below, whether there has been an error
of law, misinterpretation of the relevant ordinance, or a misapplication
of the law to the facts as found below. If the record of the proceedings
below is not adequate to allow the Board of Appeals’ review, the Board
may remand the matter back to the municipal official or board from
whose decision or failure to act the appeal is taken, for additional fact
finding. If the Board of Appeals determines from the record of the
proceedings below that there has been an error of law, a
misinterpretation of the relevant ordinance, or a misapplication of the
law to the facts as found below, the Board shall remand the matter for
correction and for those further proceedings that are specified by the
Board of Appeals and that are consistent with the Board of Appeals’
decision.
6
The term “below” in the preceding paragraph refers to the proceedings
from which the appeal is being taken.
D. Variance Applications
(1) To hear and decide applications requesting such variance from the
terms of ordinances related to dimensional requirements such as
setbacks, frontage, lot width, structure height, area, and size of
structures, yards, or open spaces where strict application of the
provisions of the pertinent ordinance would result in undue hardship.
A use variance establishing a use prohibited by ordinance may not be
granted, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of
non-conformities in the land use district or uses in adjoining land use
districts.
Establishment or expansion otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed
by variance. A financial hardship shall not constitute grounds for
granting a variance.
A variance may include such conditions and safeguards as are
appropriate under the pertinent ordinance. Any variance granted shall
be the minimum necessary to relieve the hardship. The words “undue
hardship” as used in this Ordinance shall mean:
(a) That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless
a variance is granted;
(b) That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstance(s)
of the property and not to the general conditions in the
neighborhood;
(c) That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character
of the locality; and
(d) That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant
or a prior owner.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall also consider any additional standards
for variances specified by statute or ordinance.
(2) If otherwise permitted by law, the Board may permit a variance from its
setback requirements only when strict application of those
requirements would cause undue hardship. Notwithstanding
subsection D (1) above, for the purpose of reviewing requests for
7
setback variances for single family dwellings, the term “undue
hardship” shall have the following meaning:
(a) The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
(b) The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality;
(c) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner;
(d) The granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or impair
the use of the abutting property; and
(e) That the granting of a variance is based upon demonstrated need,
not convenience, and no other feasible alternative is available.
A variance granted under subsection D (2) shall be limited to
permitting a variance from a setback requirement for a single
family dwelling that is the primary year-round residence of the
petitioner. A variance under this subsection may not exceed 20%
of a setback requirement and may not be granted if the variance
would cause the area of the dwelling to exceed the maximum
permissible lot coverage.
(3) Disability Variance
Notwithstanding subsection D (1) above, the Code Enforcement
Officer may grant a variance to the owner of a dwelling for the purpose
of making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who
resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. Code Enforcement Officer
shall restrict any variance granted under this subsection solely to the
installation of equipment or the construction of structures necessary
for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the
disability. For the purpose of this subsection, a disability has the same
meaning as a physical or mental handicap under M.R.S. 5 § 4553, and
the term “structures necessary for access to or egress from the
dwelling” is defined to include railing, wall or roof systems necessary
for the safety or effectiveness of the structure.
3-1.9 APPELLANT AND VARIANCE APPLICANT REQUIREMENTS
A. Any person aggrieved by a municipal decision that is expressly subject
to review by the Board of Appeals pursuant to ordinance or statute,
shall commence his or her appeal within thirty (30) days after issuance
8
of a written decision from the Code Enforcement Officer, Planning
Board or other municipal official.
B. Variance applications may be submitted at any time.
C. All appeals and variance applications shall be filed in duplicate with the
Town Clerk on forms to be approved by the Board accompanied by
statements and or photographs which shall become part of the record
of such application or appeal.
D. Each variance application shall indicate in writing that it has satisfied
the required approval standards, if applicable, and explain the variance
sought. Each administrative appellant shall indicate in writing the basis
for his or her claim and cite the decision being appealed.
E. It shall be the variance applicant’s burden to present sufficient
admissible evidence to enable the Board to make each and every
affirmative finding necessary under the applicable ordinance to enable
the Board to take the action being sought by the applicant. It shall be
the administrative appellant’s burden to provide the Board with the
complete record of the proceedings below, and to identify any claimed
errors of law, misinterpretations of the ordinance in question, or
misapplication of law to the facts as found below. Each variance
applicant or the appellant shall indicate in writing that he or she
understands that it is his or her burden to prove his or her case to the
Board.
The term “below” in the preceding paragraph refers to the proceedings
from which the appeal is being taken.
F. Each variance application or appeal shall identify the property involved
and list the names and addresses of record, in the most recent tax
listing of the Town, of all property owners within five hundred (500)
feet of the properties in rural areas and two hundred and fifty
(250) feet of properties in urban areas.
G. After the first public notice of hearing, no amendment of any
application or appeal shall be permitted except by order of the Board
on motion of the application for good cause shown. If the Board
approves an amendment, the Board may reschedule the public
hearing, conduct the public hearing as originally scheduled, or conduct
the hearing as originally scheduled and direct or authorize other
appropriate steps to assure that the public’s opportunity to comment on
the application as amended is preserved. The Code Enforcement
Office shall be responsible for placing a public notice in the same
newspaper in which the original public notice appeared identifying the
9
application in the manner first published and describing
the nature of the change.
H. All applications must be accompanied by the appropriate application
fee that shall be set by the Board of Selectmen. All applicable fees
including but not limited to postage reimbursement, advertising fees,
and/or consultant fees will be the responsibility of the applicant.
3-1.10 BOARD OF APPEALS PROCESSING
A. The Town Clerk shall record the date of receipt on the copies of any
such appeal or application and shall forthwith transmit one copy of the
notice of appeal or variance application to the Board of Appeals and
keep the other copy available in the Town Clerk’s office for public
inspection.
B. Before taking action on any appeal or variance application, the Board
may hold a public hearing.
C. The Board of Appeals, within twenty (20) days from receipt of a filing
notice of an appeal or variance application, shall determine a meeting
date, and cause to be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Town a notice of the appeal or variance application identifying
the property involved, the nature of the appeal or variance application,
and the time and place of public meeting on the matter. The public
meeting shall not be held earlier than ten (10) days after the date of
such publication of notice.
D. Within three (3) business days after the date of publication of the public
hearing notice, the Board of Appeals shall mail by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a copy of the notice of appeal or application for
variance, to each of the property owners whose property physically
abuts the property listed in the appeal or application. In addition, the
Board shall mail the same notice, by first class mail, to the other
property owners whose property is located within five-hundred (500)
feet in rural areas (Tax Maps indicated with an “R”) and two-hundred
and fifty (250) feet in urban areas (Tax Map indicated with a “U”) of the
subject property. The owners of property shall be considered to be
those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property
owner to receive a properly mailed notice of public hearing shall not
necessitate another hearing and shall not invalidate any action of the
Board.
E. At any hearing a party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
Hearings shall not be continued to other times except for good cause.
10
F. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designated assistant shall be
notified of and shall attend all hearings and may present to the Board
all plans, photographs, or other material he or she deems appropriate
for an understanding of the appeal or variance application.
G. The appellant’s or applicant’s case shall be heard first. To maintain
orderly procedure, each side shall proceed without interruption.
Questions may be asked through the Chairman. All persons at the
hearing shall abide by the order of the Chairman.
H. An appeal or variance granted by the Board under the provisions of
this Ordinance shall expire if a Building Notification Form or Building
Permit, whichever may apply, is not filed/obtained within six months of
the date on which the appeal or variance is granted. The appeal or
variance so granted shall state this restriction on its face.
I. Title 30-A M.R.S.A. 4353(5) states “If the board grants a variance
under this section, a certificate indicating the name of the current
property owner, identifying the property by reference to the last
recorded deed in its chain of title and indicating the fact that a
variance, including any conditions on the variance, has been granted
and the date of the granting, shall be prepared in a recordable form.
This certificate must be recorded in the local registry of deeds within
ninety (90) days of the date of the final written approval of the variance
or the variance is void. The variance is not valid until recorded as
provided in this subsection. For the purpose of this subsection, the
date of the final written approval shall be the date stated on the written
approval.” The Town shall provide to the applicant a certificate
appropriate for recording within thirty-five (35) days of the date of
approval and it shall be the applicant’s responsibility to record the
document at the Franklin County Registry of Deeds as required by the
statute.
J. The Board shall render a decision on each appeal and variance
application within thirty (30) days following the public hearing on such
appeal or application unless the Board and the applicant mutually
agree to an extension of time, or unless the Board determines that
more time is necessary to make its decision.
K. The Board shall keep a record of each appeal entertained, noting the
date when received from the Town Clerk, the dates of meetings and
hearings, and the person by whom such appeal or variance application
was formally presented. The Board shall record in writing the reasons
for its actions and the final disposition of each and every appeal or
variance application.
11
L. All of the foregoing shall be a matter of public record. Any plan,
drawing or other data on which the Board has based its decision shall
be endorsed thereon by the Board.
M. All testimony in variance applications and argument in administrative
appeals shall be transcribed and/or electronically recorded; and such
transcripts together with all exhibits, documents, requests,
applications, and other records filed in the proceedings shall constitute
the record. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall
include a statement of findings and conclusions, including the basis or
reasons for such findings and conclusions. Findings and conclusions
shall be made on all the material issues of fact, law or discretion
presented, and on all orders, approvals, reliefs or denials made on
such issues.
N. The Board may reconsider any decision within thirty (30) days of its
prior decision. A vote to reconsider and the action taken on that
reconsideration must occur and be completed within thirty (30) days of
the date of the vote on the original decision.
O. Notice of any decision and rights of and procedure for appeal to the
Maine Superior Court shall be mailed (certified, return receipt) or hand
delivered to the applicant, the applicant’s representative or agent, the
Board of Selectmen, and all other parties to the appeal within seven (7)
days of such decision.
P. An appeal may be taken, within forty-five (45) days after the decision is
rendered (the date of the vote on the original decision), by any party to
Superior Court from any order, relief or denial in accordance with
Maine law.
3-1.11 AMENDMENTS
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may
initiated by:
1. The municipal officers, provided a majority of the municipal officers
has so voted;
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the
number of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial
elections.
B. Public Hearing: The municipal officers shall hold a public hearing on
the proposed amendment. Notification of the hearing shall be posted
and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the
12
municipality at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
C. Adoption of Amendment: An amendment to this Ordinance shall be
adopted by a majority vote of a Town Meeting.

1
Town of Farmington
Chapter 11 – Land Use
Article 15 – Fire & Life-Safety Ordinance
11-15.1 Title:
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Town of Farmington "Fire & Life-Safety
Ordinance" and will be referred to herein as “this Ordinance”.
11-15.2 Authority, Purpose, and Administration:
A. This Ordinance is established under the authority of Title 30-A M.R.S. §3001 et seq.
(State “Home-Rule” law) by the Town of Farmington (hereinafter "Town").
B. The purpose of this Ordinance is the local adoption and imposition of the NFPA-1
(Fire) and NFPA-101 (Life-Safety) Codes throughout the Town of Farmington to
promote fire-safety and life-safety for persons and the structures they occupy.
The editions of NFPA-1 and NFPA-101 adopted and currently in-use by the State
Fire Marshal's Office (FMO) at the time of adoption of this Ordinance shall be the
versions initially adopted by the Town. Subsequently, at any time the FMO adopts a
newer edition of the subject Codes, this will trigger automatic adoption and
imposition of same by the Town.
Where applicable, buildings and structures regulated under this Ordinance may also
be subject to the following State laws, which also have provisions for local authority
and enforcement:
10 M.R.S. §9724 "Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code"
25 M.R.S. §2351 et seq. "Municipal Inspection of Buildings”
25 M.R.S. §2371 et seq. "Building Codes & Standards"
32 M.R.S. §3403-B "Plumbing Code"
14 M.R.S. §6021 et seq. “Rental Property”
17 M.R.S. §2851 et seq. “Dangerous Buildings”
30-A M.R.S.§4452 "Enforcement of Land Use Laws & Ordinances"
C. Administration
The Farmington Fire Rescue Department shall have primary responsibility
for administration of this Ordinance, with enforcement assistance provided by the
Town's Code Enforcement Office, both per 30-A M.R.S.§4452(5)A.
Per 30-A M.R.S.§4452(5)A, it shall be the administrative responsibility of the
Farmington Fire Rescue Department to determine and make public the
sections of NFPA-1 and NFPA-101 to be adopted locally at the time of initial
enactment of this Ordinance and at the time of any subsequent adoption of newer
editions of these Codes by the FMO.
2
11-15.3 Applicability:
This Ordinance shall apply to all structures within the Town of Farmington, including:
multi-unit residential, commercial, and industrial; new and existing construction;
expansions, additions, relocations, and conversions; and manufactured housing
installations. Exempted from this Ordinance are owner-occupied single-family and
duplex residential structures.
11-15.4 Validity and Severability:
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
11-15.5 Conflicts with other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this Ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation, or statute, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
11-15.6 Effective Date:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date this Ordinance is adopted by the
voters at the Annual Town Meeting.
11-15.7 Inspection Required; Entry Allowed:
Before any construction, addition, alteration, demolition, relocation, or foundation work
is commenced on any property and/or structure for which the owner, or an authorized
agent for the owner, has filed a Project Registration Form with the Code Enforcement
Office and/or a Building Notification Form with the Assessing Office, the owner, or an
authorized agent for the owner, shall contact the Farmington Fire Rescue Department
so they can determine if the subject property must be inspected per 25 M.R.S. §2353-A
and §2354 by personnel from same under the editions and sections of NFPA-1 and
NFPA-101 currently in effect in the Town, if these codes are applicable to the subject
project. The Code Enforcement Office and the Assessing Office will forward all Project
Registration Forms and Building Notification Forms to the Fire Rescue Department to
notify them of the need for determining whether said inspections must be done.
Per 25 M.R.S. §2351-A, whenever NFPA-1 and/or NFPA-101 are applicable to a
structure, designated personnel from the Fire Rescue Department and/or Code
Enforcement Office shall have the right to enter any premises to inspect under the
editions and sections of NFPA-1 and NFPA-101 currently in effect in the Town, on the
basis of a request to do same: by the owner, by an authorized agent for the owner; by
the Code Enforcement Office and/or the Assessing Office; by a tenant; or in response
to an emergency call to Fire Rescue.
11-15.8 Amendments:
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be
initiated by:
3
1. The Municipal Officers, provided a majority of the Municipal
Officers has so voted; or
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the
number of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial
election.
B. Public Hearing: The Municipal Officers shall hold a public hearing on
the proposed amendment in accordance with 30-A M.R.S. §4352(9).
Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised twice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The date of the first
publication must be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice
of the hearing must be posted in the municipal office at least thirteen (13)
days before the hearing.
C. Adoption of the Amendment: An amendment to this Ordinance shall
be adopted by majority vote of the Town Meeting.
11- 15.9 Enforcement:
Any property owner that has received a Citation of Violation(s) and/or Statement of
Deficiencies from either the Fire Rescue Department and/or the Code Enforcement
Office is required to return a Plan of Correction within 10 days of receipt, stating how
and when the violations and/or deficiencies will be corrected. Failure by the property
owner to furnish a Plan of Correction within ten (10) days, stating how and when the
violations and/or deficiencies will be corrected, shall be a civil violation per 30-A M.R.S.
§4452.
Any building project commenced without Fire Rescue Department inspection, when
applicable under 11-15.7, as of the enactment date of this Ordinance, shall be
considered a violation. The Fire Rescue Department and/or Code Enforcement Office
shall order the property owner to obtain the required inspection within ten (10) days.
Failure by the property owner to obtain an inspection within ten (10) days of said order
shall be a civil violation per 30-A M.R.S. §4452. The Fire Rescue Department and
Code Enforcement Office are authorized to commence an action seeking penalties,
injunctive relief, and attorney’s fees to correct the violation(s) per 30-A M.R.S. §4452.
Any violation of this Ordinance, including failure to comply with any condition, shall be
deemed to be a violation of 30-A M.R.S. §4452. Every day a violation exists constitutes
a separate offense.
11 - 15.10 Appeals:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Fire Rescue Department and/or Code
Enforcement Office may appeal to the Board of Appeals by filing a notice of appeal
within thirty (30) days after receipt of the Fire Rescue Department's and/or Code
Enforcement Office's notification. Administrative appeals submitted under this
Ordinance shall be subject to the standards and procedures established by the Town of
Farmington Board of Appeals Ordinance.

2
PREFACE - STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT
Certain areas of the Town of Farmington, Maine are subject to periodic flooding,
causing serious damages to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the
form of federally subsidized flood insurance as authorized by the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Farmington, Maine has chosen to become a participating
community in the National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended)
as delineated in the attached Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Farmington, Maine to require the recognition and
evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain
areas having special flood hazards.
This body has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce
future flood losses pursuant to MRSA Title 30A, Sections 3001-3007, 4352 4401-4407,
and Title 38 M.R.S.A., Section 440.
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
PREFACE - STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT 2
11-2.1 ESTABLISHMENT 4
11-2.2 PERMIT REQUIRED 4
11-2.3 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 4
11-2.4 APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE 6
11-2.5 REVIEW OF STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS 6
11-2.6 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 7
11-2.7 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE 12
11-2.8 REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT
PROPOSALS 13
11-2.9 APPEALS AND VARIANCES 13
11-2.10 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 16
11-2.11 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY 17
11-2.12 CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES 17
11-2.13 DEFINITIONS 17
11-2.14 ABROGATION 23
60.3 (c & d) Rev. 2/95
4
Town of Farmington
Chapter 11 – Land Use
Article 2 – Floodplain Management Ordinance
11-2.1 ESTABLISHMENT
The Town of Farmington, Maine elects to comply with the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended). The National Flood
Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town
having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood
hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system
and review procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard areas of
the Town of Farmington, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, A1-3O, AE, AO, and AH, identified by
FEMA in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Town of Farmington, Maine,
Franklin County," dated July 3, 1995 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map"
dated July 3, 1995 is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
Ordinance.
11-2.2 PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIII), including the
placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard
established in Article I, a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the
Planning Board. This permit shall be in addition to any other building permits which
may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town of Farmington,
Maine.
11-2.3 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the
Planning Board and shall include:
A. The name and address of the applicant;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed structures, sewage
disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot
dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure;
5
E. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
F. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure;
G. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or to a
locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved
structures, which is determined:
a. in Zones A1-30, AE, AO, and AH from data contained in the "Flood
Insurance Study - Town of Farmington, Maine," as described in
Article I; or,
b. in Zone A, to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of
the floodplain boundary and a line perpendicular to the shoreline
which passes along the ground through the site of the proposed
building;
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed
building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures
contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure
will be floodproofed;
H. A description of a base flood elevation reference point established on the site of
developments for which elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
I. A written certification by a professional land surveyor, registered professional
engineer, or architect, that the base flood elevations and grade elevations shown
on the application are accurate;
J. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that floodproofing
methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of
Articles III.G.4; VI.G; and other applicable standards in Article VI.
K. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated
as a result of the proposed development; and,
L. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable
development standard in Article VI will be met.
6
11-2.4 APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee of $ 50.00 for all minor development and for all new
construction or substantial improvements shall be paid to the Town and a copy of a
receipt for the same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Planning Board and/or Board of Appeals needs
the assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be
paid in full by the applicant within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant.
Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the
issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the
expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing
or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is
dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the
Board of Appeals.
11-2.5 REVIEW OF STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
The Planning Board shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that
proposed building sites are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that
all pertinent requirements of Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or
will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, the
base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Farmington, Maine," as described in Article I. In special flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation and floodway data are not provided, the Planning
Board shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data from federal, state, or other sources, including information
obtained pursuant to Article III.G.1.b.; Article VI.I; and Article VIII.D, in order to
administer Article VI of this Ordinance;
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas
shown on the maps described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that
all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, and local
government agencies from which prior approval is required by federal or state
law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
7
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and
the Maine Office of Community Development prior to any alteration or relocation
of a water course;
F. Issue a two-part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part
I shall authorize the applicant to build a structure to and including the first
horizontal floor only above the base flood level. At that time the applicant shall
provide the Code Enforcement Officer with an application for Part II of the Flood
Hazard Development Permit and shall include an Elevation Certificate completed
by a registered Maine surveyor for compliance with the elevation requirements of
Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, and K. Following review of the application, which
review shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit.
Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; and,
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development
Permits issued and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of
Appeals on variances granted under the provisions of Article IX of this
Ordinance, and copies of Elevation Certificates and Certificates of Compliance
required under the provisions of Article VII of this Ordinance.
11-2.6 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable
standards:
A. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage;
and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during flooding conditions.
B. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
8
C. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and
located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharges from the system into flood waters.
D. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. All development shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no
reduction occurs in the flood carrying capacity of any watercourse.
F. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located
within:
1. Zones A1-30, AE, and AH shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
2. Zones AO and AH shall have adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above
the highest adjacent grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified.
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained
pursuant to Article III.G.1.b.; Article V.B; or Article VIII.D.
G. New construction or substantial improvement of any non - residential structure
located within:
1. Zones A1-30, AE, and AH shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood level so
that below that elevation the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to passage of water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and,
9
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this
section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for
a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.J
and shall include a record of the elevation above mean sea level of
the lowest floor including basement.
2. Zones AO and AH shall have adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes, to guide floodwater away from them.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above
the highest adjacent grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; or,
c. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be floodproofed
to meet the elevation requirements of this section and floodproofing
standards of Article VI, paragraph G.1.
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained
pursuant to Article III.G.1.b.; Article V.B; or Article VIII.D.
H. New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zones A1-30, AE, or AH shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor is at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and,
b. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods
of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners
of the manufactured home, plus two additional ties per side
at intermediate points (homes less than 50 feet long require
one additional tie per side); or by,
10
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional
ties along each side at intermediate points (homes less than
50 feet long require four additional ties per side).
(3) All components of the anchoring system described in Article
VI.H.1 shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
2. Zones AO and AH shall have adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes, to guide floodwater away from them.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above
the highest adjacent grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; and,
c. meet the requirements of Article VI.H.1.(a)(b).
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained
pursuant to Article III.G.1.b.; Article V.B; or Article VIII.D.
I. Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zones A1-A30, AH, and AE shall either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. Meet the permit requirements of elevation and anchoring
requirements for "manufactured home" in Article VI. H. a & b.
J. Floodways
1. In Zones A1-30 and AE encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted in
riverine areas, for which a regulatory floodway is designated on the
community's "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map," unless a technical
evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided
11
demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
2. In Zones A1-30 and AE riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway is
designated, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing development and
anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community; and,
3. In Zone A riverine areas, in which the regulatory floodway is determined to
be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured
from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement,
and other development shall not be permitted unless a technical
evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided
meeting the requirements of Article VI, paragraph J.2.
K. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure in Zones A1-30,
AE, AO, AH, and A that meets the development standards of Article VI, including
the elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on
posts, columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or crawlspaces less than three feet in height
may be enclosed below the elevation requirements provided all the following
criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Walls, with the exception of crawlspaces less than three feet in height,
shall not be part of the structural support of the building; and,
2. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIII; and,
3. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either:
a. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of the
enclosed area;
12
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other non-automatic
mechanical means; and,
4. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
5. The enclosed area may be used for building maintenance, access,
parking vehicles, or storing of articles and equipment used for
maintenance of the building.
11-2.7 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure,
which is constructed or substantially improved, shall be occupied until a Certificate of
Compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer subject to the following
provisions:
A. The applicant shall submit an Elevation Certificate completed by:
1. a registered Maine surveyor for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F,
G, H, or K; and,
2. a registered professional engineer or architect, in the case of floodproofed
non-residential structures, for compliance with Article VI.G; and,
B. The application for a Certificate of Compliance shall be submitted by the
applicant in writing along with a completed Elevation Certificate to the Code
Enforcement Officer.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the application within 10 working
days of receipt of the application and shall issue a Certificate of Compliance,
provided the building conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance
13
11-2.8 REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed
developments that require review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances
or regulations and all projects on 5 or more disturbed acres, or in the case of
manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevation, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine
floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering
practices recognized by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval
requiring that structures on any lot in the development having any portion of its
land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are to be constructed in accordance
with Article VI of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included in any deed,
lease, or document transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in
real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The
condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of
the construction requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or
any other document previously described. The construction requirement shall
also be stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed by the Planning Board or
local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
11-2.9 APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Farmington, Maine, may, upon written application
of an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error
in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the
Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the administration or enforcement of
the provisions of this Ordinance. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the
requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
14
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur,
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, public expense, or create nuisances,
cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the existence of the variance will not conflict with other
state, federal or local laws or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue
hardship," which in this sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of
the property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character
or the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or
a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board
of Appeals may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article IX and Article VI-J are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to
public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory
of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in Article IX,
paragraphs A through D.
15
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A through E shall
be notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman
of the Board of Appeals that:
1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the
risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks
and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality against any claims
filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use land
located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the
municipality from any claims the applicant may have against the
municipality that are related to the use of land located in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of
Appeals by an aggrieved party within thirty days after receipt of a written
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all
of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within
twenty days of its receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty days after the
close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Planning Board a report of all
variance actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and
an authorization for the Planning Board to issue a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, which includes any conditions to be attached to said
permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings
before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in
16
accordance with State laws within forty-five days from the date of any
decision of the Board of Appeals.
11-2.10 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance pursuant to 30A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in 30A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this
Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon
determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the
Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a denial of
flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the
property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a
cited State or local law, or ordinance;
3. a statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to
do so and a citation to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation
and the prospective denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
17
11-2.11 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
11-2.12 CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with
any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law.
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or
structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
11-2.13 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have
the same meaning as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most
reasonable application. Words used in the present tense include the future, the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The
word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Accessory Structure – means a small detached structure that is incidental and
subordinate to the principal structure.
Area of a Shallow Flooding - means a designated AO and AH zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent
or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood
Insurance Study cited in Article I of this Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall - means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building
and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral
18
loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer
stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer - A person certified under Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section
4451 (including exceptions in Section 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a
municipality to enforce all applicable comprehensive planning and land use laws and
ordinances.
Development - means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building:
(a) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, or AH, to have
the top of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts;" and
(b) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building
during a flood of up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, or AH, Elevated Building also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls less than three feet
in height with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters,
as required in Article VI.K.
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 01/03, as amended) that:
(a) is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program; and,
(b) is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
(a) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
19
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
(b) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain Ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non- structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on
federal, state, and local floodplain maps.
20
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many
unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed, that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes
only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained
by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior a contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered
historic district;
(c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation
established for a specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced.
This elevation is generally not referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) or any other established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level
data is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
21
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
described in Article VI .K. of this Ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management
purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate map are referenced.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) – means the national vertical datum,
whose standard was established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also
has been called “1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)”.
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
(a) built on a single chassis;
(b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not
including slideouts;
(c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle ; and;
(d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
22
Regulatory Floodway -
(a) means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, and
(b) in riverine areas is considered to be the channel of a river or other water course
and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain,
as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the
floodplain.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries),
stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement,
substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building.
A gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed
50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This
23
term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified
by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(b) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a
community's floodplain management regulations.
11-2.14 ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to
comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended)
60.3 (c & d).
TOWN OF FARMINGTON
Right to Farm Ordinance
ENACTED: March 12, 2007
CERTIFIED BY: Daryl T. Schram
Name
Deputy Town Clerk
Title
Chapter 11 – Land Use
Table of Contents
Article 14 – Right to Farm
11-14.1 Title 1
11-14.2 Authority & Administration 1
11-14.3 Purposes 1
11-14.4 Applicability 1
11-14.5 Validity 2
11-14.6 Conflicts with other Ordinances 2
11-14.7 Effective Date 2
11-14.8 Definitions 2
11-14.9 Best Management Practices 3
11-14.10 Change in Land Use 3
11-14.11 Complaint Resolution 3
11-14.12 Disclosure 5
11-14.13 Amendments 5
1
Chapter 11 – Land Use
Article 14 - Right to Farm Ordinance
11-14.1 Title:
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Town of Farmington Right to
Farm Ordinance and will be referred to herein as “this Ordinance”.
11-14.2 Authority and Administration:
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA §3001 and the Maine
Nuisance Law and provisions of Title 17 MRSA §2805.
11-14-3 Purpose:
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist in the Town of Farmington and is
hereby declared as an allowed use in the zoning districts as determined in the
Table of Uses in the Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance.
The Town of Farmington finds that it is in the public interest to enhance and
encourage farms, farm operations and locally grown farm products within the
town. The Town also finds that residential and commercial development
adjacent to farms and farm operations can lead to compatibility issues for nearby
farm operations and cause diminished economic viability of the farming industry.
This Ordinance is intended to promote public health, safety, and welfare, and to
support and encourage continued farming and farm operations in the town. This
Ordinance is not intended to modify or abridge State nuisance law, but is to be
used as an interpretation and enforcement tool.
The main purpose of this Ordinance is to state that farms and farm operations
are not nuisances as long as Best Management Practices are used.
An additional purpose of this Ordinance is to require notification of applicants for,
and subsequent buyers of lots within developments requiring approval by the
Town through its Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer for uses on lands
adjacent (abutting and across-street/right-of-way) to existing farms and farm
operations, of the existence of these farms and farm operations and that the
proposed development may be subject to inconveniences or compatibility issues
from normal farm operations.
11-14.4 Applicability:
This section does not affect the application of State and federal laws. The Town
of Farmington must provide the Commissioner of Agriculture, Food, and Rural
Resources (hereinafter “Commissioner”) with a copy of this and any other
proposed Town ordinance that impacts farm operations. The Town Clerk or a
2
municipal official designated by the Clerk shall submit a copy of this and any
other proposed ordinance to the Commissioner at least ninety (90) days prior to
the meeting of the legislative body or public hearing at which adoption of the
ordinance will be considered. The Commissioner shall review the proposed
ordinance and advise the Town if the proposed ordinance would restrict or
prohibit the use of Best Management Practices.
11-14.5 Validity:
If any part of this Ordinance is found to be invalid, the remainder of this
Ordinance shall remain in effect.
11-14.6 Conflicts with Other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with
another provision of this Ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation, or statute,
the more restrictive provision shall apply.
11-14.7 Effective Date:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date this Ordinance is adopted
by the voters at Town Meeting.
11-14.8 Definitions:
A. Farm. Farm shall mean the land, buildings, and machinery used in the
commercial production of farm products.
B. Farm Operation. Farm operations shall mean a condition or activity that
occurs on a farm in connection with the commercial production of farm
products and includes, but is not limited to, operations giving rise to noise,
odors, dust, insects, fumes, operation of machinery and irrigation pumps,
ground and aerial seeding, ground spraying, composting of material
produced by the farm or imported for use on the farm, to be used at least
in part on the farm, disposal of manure, the application of chemical
fertilizers, soil amendments, conditioners and pesticides, and the
employment and use of labor.
C. Farm Product. Farm product shall mean those plants and animals useful
to humans and includes, but is not limited to, forages and sod crops,
grains and food crops, dairy products, poultry and poultry products, bees,
livestock and livestock products, and fruits, berries, vegetables, flowers,
seeds, grasses and other similar products.
3
11-14.9 Best Management Practices:
A. If a farm or farm operation is alleged to be a nuisance, it may not be
legally determined to be such if it meets one of the following conditions:
1. The farm or farm operation conforms to the Best Management
Practices, as determined by the Commissioner in accordance with
the Maine Administrative Procedure Act, Title 5 MRSA, Chapter
375; or
2. For complaints regarding the storage or use of farm nutrients as
defined in Title 7 MRSA §4201, Subsection 4, the farm or farm
operation has implemented a Nutrient Management Plan
developed in accordance with Title 7 MRSA, §4204 and operation
of the farm is consistent with the Nutrient Management Plan; or
3. The farm or farm operation existed before a change in the land use
or occupancy of land within one mile of the boundaries of the farm,
and the farm or farm operation would not have been considered a
nuisance before the change in land use or occupancy.
a. The above paragraph does not apply to a farm or farm
operation that materially changes the nature of the farm
operation after a change in the land use or occupancy
of the land within one mile of the boundaries of the farm.
b. Nothing in 11-14.9.A.3 above affects the applicability of any of
the other provisions in this Subsection.
4. There shall be a one hundred foot (100’) minimum setback from the
property line adjacent to a farm field of any well that supplies
drinking water to a household.
11-14.10 Change in Land Use:
A. Violation of municipal ordinances: A method of operation used by a farm
or farm operation located in an area where agricultural activities are
allowed may not be considered a violation of a municipal ordinance if
the method of operation constitutes a Best Management Practices as
determined by the Maine Department of Agriculture, Food, and Rural
Resources.
11-14.11 Complaint Resolution:
A. Pursuant to 17 M.R.S.A. § 2805 all complaints shall be submitted to the
4
Department of Agriculture in writing and shall be signed by the
complainant.
B. The Commissioner shall investigate all complaints involving a farm or farm
operation, including, but not limited to, complaints involving the use of
waste products, ground and surface water pollution and insect
infestations. In cases of insect infestations not arising from agricultural
activities, from agricultural activities, when the State Entomologist believes
that the infestation is a public nuisance and is able to identify the source
or sources of the infestation, the Commissioner shall refer the matter to
the Department of the Attorney General. If the Commissioner finds upon
investigation that the person responsible for the farm or farm operation is
using Best Management Practices, the Commissioner shall notify that
person and the complainant of this finding in writing. Notwithstanding
Subsection 11-14.9A.3., if the Commissioner identifies the source or
sources of the problem and finds that the problem is caused by the use of
other than Best Management Practices, the Commissioner shall:
1. Determine the changes needed in the farm or farm operation to comply
with Best Management Practices and prescribe site specific Best
Management Practices for that farm operation;
2. Advise the person responsible for the farm or farm operation of the
changes, as determined in paragraph A, that are necessary to conform
with Best Management Practices and determine subsequently if those
changes are implemented; and
3. Give the findings of the initial investigation and subsequent
investigations and any determination of compliance to the complainant
and person responsible.
C. Good faith. The Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 11, applies in any
private action filed against the owner or operator of a farm or farm
operation in which it is alleged that the farm or farm operation constitutes
a nuisance if it is determined that the action was not brought in good faith
and was frivolous or intended for harassment only.
D. Failure to adopt Best Management Practices. If the person responsible
for the farm or farm operation does not apply Best Management
Practices as required by the Commissioner, the Town shall send a
written report to the Commissioner, and the Commissioner shall send a
written report to an appropriate agency if a federal or State law has been
violated and to the Attorney General.
The Attorney General may institute an action to abate a nuisance or to
enforce the provisions of this section or any other applicable State law,
5
and the court may order the abatement with costs as provided under
Section 2720, such injunctive relief as provided in this section or by other
other applicable law, or that a civil violation has been committed. Failure
to apply Best Management Practices in accordance with this Section
constitutes a separate civil violation for which a fine up to $1,000,
together with an additional fine of up to $250 per day for every day that
the violation continues, may be adjudged.
11-14.12 Disclosure
A. Applicants for developments requiring approval by the Town through its
Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, including but not limited to
subdivision and site review projects, for uses on lands adjacent (abutting
and across-street/right-of-way) to existing farms and farm operations,
must be notified by the Code Enforcement Office, upon receipt of such
applications, of the existence of these farms and farm operations and that
the development may be subject to inconveniences or compatibility
issues from normal farm operations. (Effective upon the date of
Ordinance adoption).
Subsequent buyers of lots within developments approved by the Town
through its Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, including but not
limited to subdivision and site review projects, for uses on lands adjacent
(abutting and across-street/right-of-way) to existing farms and farm
operations, must be notified by the property owner of the existence of
these farms and farm operations and that the property may be subject to
inconveniences or discomfort from such operations. (Effective upon date
of Ordinance adoption).
The above notifications shall contain the following statement: “Such
discomfort and inconveniences may include, but are not limited to: noise,
odor, fumes, dust, smoke, machinery operation at any time and
throughout any 24 hour period, manure storage and disposal, application
(spraying or otherwise) of chemical fertilizers, soil amendments,
herbicides, and pesticides. If you choose to work or live near a farm or
farm operation, you should be prepared to accept such inconveniences or
discomfort as a normal and necessary aspect of living in a town with a
strong rural character and an active farming community.”
11-14.13 Amendments
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be
initiated by:
1. The Municipal Officers, provided a majority of the Municipal
Officers has so voted; and
6
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the
number of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial
election.
B. Public Hearing: The Municipal Officers shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment in accordance with 30A MRSA §4352(9).
Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised twice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The date of the first
publication must be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice
of the hearing must be posted in the municipal office at least thirteen (13)
days before the hearing.
C. Adoption of the Amendment: An amendment to this Ordinance shall be
adopted by majority vote of the Town Meeting.
TOWN OF FARMINGTON
Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance
ENACTED: September 30, 1999
CERTIFIED BY: Leanne E. Pinkham
Town Clerk Affix Seal
Title
Town of Farmington
Chapter 11 – Land Use
Table of Contents
Article 12 – Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance
11-12.1 Title 1
11-12.2 Authority & Administration 1
11-12.3 Purposes 2
11-12.4 Conflicts with other Ordinances 5
11-12.5 Effective Date 6
11-12.6 Validity and Severability 6
11-12.7 Definitions 6
11-12.8 Classifications 11
11-12.9 Permit/License Required 11
11-12.10 Application Procedure 11
11-12.11 Standards for Permit 15
11-12.12 Issuance of Permit/License 21
11-12.13 Fees 23
11-12.14 Inspection 23
11-12.15 Expiration of Permit 23
11-12.16 Suspension 24
11-12.17 Revocation 24
11-12.18 Transfer of License 25
11-12.19 Violation (Enforcement & Penalties) 25
11-12.20 Appeals 25
11-12.21 Amendments 26
1
Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance
Chapter 11
Land Use
11 - 12.1 Title:
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Town of Farmington Sexually Oriented
Business Ordinance” and will be referred to herein as “this Ordinance”. This Ordinance
limits Sexually Oriented Businesses to the zoning district(s) specified under the Zoning
Ordinance Table of Uses; prescribes definitions of Sexually Oriented Businesses;
provides for permitting/licensing and regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses and
employees; and provides for additional miscellaneous standards for Sexually Oriented
Businesses.
11 – 12. 2 Authority and Applicability:
WHEREAS, sexually oriented businesses require special supervision from the public
safety agencies of the Town in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, and
welfare of the patrons of such businesses as well as the citizens of the Town; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Selectmen finds that sexually oriented businesses are
frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual liaisons
of a casual nature; and
WHEREAS, the concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health
concern of the Town which demands reasonable regulation of sexually oriented
businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of the citizens; and
WHEREAS, permitting is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to
ensure that operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable
regulations and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to
be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation; and
WHEREAS, there is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented
businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing
businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them,
causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values; and
WHEREAS, it is recognized that sexually oriented businesses, due to their nature,
have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when they are
located in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to urban blight and
downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Selectmen desires to minimize and control these adverse
effects and thereby protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry; protect the
2
citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values
and character of surrounding neighborhoods and deter the spread of urban blight; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Selectmen has determined that locational criteria alone do
not adequately protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of this
Town; and
WHEREAS, it is not the intent of this Ordinance to suppress any speech activities
protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content neutral ordinance which
addresses the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses; and
WHEREAS, it is not the intent of the Board of Selectmen to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene material, and the Board recognizes that State and federal
law prohibits the distribution of obscene materials and expects and encourages State
law enforcement officials to enforce State obscenity statutes against any such illegal
activities in the Town.
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article VIII, Part 2,
Section 1 of the Maine Constitution; the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule
Authority (30A MRSA 3001 et seq) and the provisions of the Planning and Land Use
Regulation Act, Title 30-A MRSA Section 4312 et seq.
Persons or entities wishing to establish a Sexually Oriented Business or obtain
employment with a sexually oriented business within the Town of Farmington shall first
obtain a permit/license from the Farmington Board of Selectmen (hereinafter “the
Municipal Officers”) and shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
11 - 12.3 Purpose:
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the Town, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the
Town. The provisions of this Ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
Ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it
the intent nor effect of this Ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
B. Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult
uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the
Municipal Officers, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426
3
U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on
studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona;
Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas;
Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin,
Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and
Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's
Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989,
State of Minnesota), the Municipal Officers find:
1. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy
activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments.
Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these
establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
2. Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this Ordinance as
adult theatres and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit
sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
3. Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually
oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private
booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
4. Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates
unhealthy conditions.
5. Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually
oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of
such sexually oriented businesses.
6. At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in
sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea,
human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B,
Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. The
number of estimated new annual cases of sexually transmitted diseases in Maine
is 58,300.
7. Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number
of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in
the United States -- 600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and
253,448 through December 31, 1992. Since 1992 new cases have leveled at
40,000 per year about half of which (20,000) are acquired through sexual
contact. Currently there are about 500,000 cases of AIDS that have resulted
from sexual contact.
4
8. Through December 1998, there have been 836 reported cases of AIDS in the
State of Maine with 462 deaths. Thirty-three newly identified cases, including 26
men and 7 women, were reported from January through December in 1998.
9. Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an increasing cumulative
number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test in the State of Maine.
10. The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States
reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200
through November of 1990. In 1998, in the State of Maine, 1 case of early
syphilis was reported.
11. The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually
remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990.
In 1998, in the State of Maine, 67 cases of gonorrhea were reported.
12. The number of case of chlamydia in the United States reported annually also
remains at a high level. In 1998, in the State of Maine, there were 1,073 cases
reported. Estimated new annual cases of sexually transmitted diseases in
Maine is 58,300 at a cost of $32,000,000.
13. The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22,
1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn.
14. According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as
syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
15. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part,
because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of
the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the
operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those
facilities.
16. Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the
areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films.
17. The findings noted in paragraphs 1 through 16 raise substantial governmental
concerns.
18. Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be
reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental
concerns.
19. A reasonable permitting procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the
5
burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the
sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a permitting procedure will place a
heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually
oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and
welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the Town. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the permittee is the actual
operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
20. Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises
with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the
illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theatres.
21. Requiring permittees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information
regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the
incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of
potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such
establishments.
22. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible
for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented
business, where such information is substantially related to the significant
governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the
spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
23. It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to
obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may
engage in the conduct which this ordinance is designed to prevent or who are
likely to be witnesses to such activity.
24. The fact that an applicant for an adult use permit has been convicted of a
sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may
engage in that conduct in contravention of this Ordinance.
25. The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period
of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the
transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
26. The general welfare, health, and safety of the citizens of the Town will be
promoted by the enactment of this Ordinance.
11 - 12.4 Conflict with Other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with other
provisions of this Ordinance, or of any other ordinance, regulation or standard, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
6
11 - 12.5 Effective Date:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date this Ordinance is adopted by the
voters at Town Meeting.
11 - 12.6 Validity and Severability:
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
11 - 12.7 Definitions:
As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms
have the following meanings:
Adult Arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coinoperated,
slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically,
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser
disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult Video Store means a commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any
form of consideration any one or more of the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
B. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities."
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be
categorized as ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT
VIDEO STORE. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE,
ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as one of its
principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the
specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
7
Adult Cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment
which regularly features:
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or
B. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
C. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
Adult Motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
A. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides
patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by
the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
B. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10)
hours; or
C. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude,
or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities."
Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person
is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether
or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said
business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair
or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of
goods to the premises.
8
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion,
guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or
to privately perform a striptease for another person.
Escort Agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a
fee, tip, or other consideration.
Establishment means and includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented
business, to any sexually oriented business;
C. The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually
oriented business; or
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Licensee means a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing
employment in a sexually oriented business.
Nude Model Studio means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a
state of nudity, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" and is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude Model Studio shall
not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Maine or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or
university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or in a structure:
A. That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for
viewing; and
B. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class; and
C. Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
Nudity or a State of Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering,
9
the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of
the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
Permittee means a person in whose name a permit to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the
application for a permit.
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association,
or other legal entity.
Regularly means a recurring and/or substantial course of conduct.
Semi-Nude or in a Semi-Nude Condition means the showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing
of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of
the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
Sexual Encounter Center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
A. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the
opposite sex; or
B. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex
when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Sexually Oriented Business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
Specified Anatomical Areas means:
A. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered; or
B. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
Specified Criminal Activity means any of the following offenses:
A. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale,
distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a
child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness;
10
indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal
activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a
controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under
the criminal or penal code of the State of Maine, other states or countries;
B. For which:
(1) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(2) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(3) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any
24-month period.
C. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
Specified Sexual Activities means any of the following:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
C. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in A through B above.
Substantial Enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in
floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent (25%), as the
floor areas exist on the date this Ordinance takes effect.
Transfer Of Ownership Or Control of a sexually oriented business means and
includes any of the following:
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
B. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
11
C. The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers
the ownership or control of the business.
11 - 12.8 Classification:
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
1. adult arcades;
2. adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
3. adult cabarets;
4. adult motels;
5. adult motion picture theaters;
6. adult theaters;
7. escort agencies;
8. nude model studios; and
9. sexual encounter centers.
11 - 12.9 Permit/License Required:
No person may establish, operate or maintain a Sexually Oriented Business without first
obtaining a nontransferable permit from the Municipal Officers. No person may obtain
employment with a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a nontransferable
license from the Municipal Officers.
It is a violation of this Ordinance for any person:
A. To operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented
business license issued by the Town pursuant to this Ordinance.
B. Who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for
the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented
business employee by the Town pursuant to this Ordinance.
C. To obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having
secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this
Ordinance.
11 - 12.10 Application Procedure:
A. An application for a permit/license must be made on a form provided by the Town.
B. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this Ordinance. The
application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including
fingerprints) as to enable the Town to determine whether the applicant meets the
qualifications established in this Ordinance.
12
C. Application to establish a Sexually Oriented Business
1. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the
business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. Each applicant
must be qualified under the following Section and each applicant shall be
considered a permittee if a permit is granted.
2. The completed application for a sexually oriented business permit shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
a. If the applicant is:
(1) an individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is 18 years of age;
(2) a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any;
(3) a corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the
names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal
stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent
and the address of the registered office for service of process.
b. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state:
(1) the sexually oriented business' fictitious name; and
(2) submit the required registration documents.
c. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this
Ordinance, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the
date, place, and jurisdiction of each.
d. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
had a previous permit under this Ordinance or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinances from another town, city or county
13
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of
the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension
or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
principal stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under this
Ordinance whose permit has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented
business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as
well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
e. Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other permits under this Ordinance or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance from another town, city or county and, if
so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses.
f. The single classification of permit for which the applicant is filing.
g. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any.
h. The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
i. A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
j. The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number,
and/or his/her State or federally issued tax identification number.
k. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six (6) inches.
l. A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty
(30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually oriented businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be
certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area
within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this
Section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in
existence at the time an application is submitted.
14
m. If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other
than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a
viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square
feet of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions,
or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the
application requirements set forth in Article 12.9.
D. Application for a sexually oriented business employee license.
1. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee
license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the Town the
following information:
a. The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or
aliases used by the individual;
b. Age, date, and place of birth;
c. Height, weight, hair and eye color;
d. Present residence address and telephone number;
e. Present business address and telephone number;
f. Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other
identification card information;
g. Social Security number; and
h. Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee
license as provided above, shall be the following:
a. A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face,
and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police
department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid
by the applicant.
b. A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five (5)
years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to
operate, in this or any other county, town, city, state, or country has ever
had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or
suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit
15
denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or
denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial,
revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or
suspension shall be attached to the application.
c. A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity as defined in this Ordinance and, if so, the specified
criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
11 - 12.11 Standards for Permit:
A. General
1. Sexually oriented businesses may be operated only in the district(s) or
zone(s) defined and described in the Zoning Ordinance Table of Uses.
2. Sexually oriented businesses may not be operated within 1,000 feet of:
a. A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;
b. A public or private educational facility including but not limited to
child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior
high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools,
junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds,
but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and
only incidentally as a school;
c. A boundary of a residential district as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance Table of Uses;
d. A public park or recreational area which has been designated for
park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness
areas, or other similar public land within the town which is under the
control, operation, or management of the town park and recreation
authorities or management of any non-profit conservation trust;
e. The property line of any lot devoted to a residential use existing in any
zone at the time of application;
f. An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards
16
children or family entertainment, including but not limited to bowling
alleys, roller or ice skating rinks, video stores, miniature golf and
movie theaters; or
g. A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage
control regulations of the State.
3. A sexually oriented business may not be operated within 1,000 feet of
another sexually oriented business.
4. More than one sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same
building, structure, or portion thereof.
5. For the purpose of subsection A.2 of this Section, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection A.2. Presence of a
town, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for
purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this
Section.
6. For purposes of subsection A.3 of this Section, the distance between any two
sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from
the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
7. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this
Ordinance, that is in violation of subsection A (1 through 6 ) of this Section
shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30)
days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged,
extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming
use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one
another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented
business which was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are
nonconforming.
8. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not
rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in
subsection A.2 of this Section within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and
does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license
17
has expired or been revoked.
B. Additional Standards For Adult Motels
1. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial
establishments has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period
of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that
the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this Ordinance.
2. A person commits a violation if, as the person in control of a sleeping room
in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a
sexually oriented permit, he rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person
and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents
the same sleeping room again.
3. For purposes of subsection B (1 & 2) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent"
mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.
C. Standards Pertaining To Exhibition or Sexually Explicit Films, Videos or
Live Entertainment in Viewing Rooms.
1. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in
a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor
space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment, or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Upon application for a sexually oriented permit, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a
plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's
stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and
designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not
be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate
the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however,
each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated
scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to
an accuracy of plus or minus six (6") inches. The Town may
waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
18
certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
b. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
c. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the Town.
d. It is the duty of the permittee of the premises to ensure that at
least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside
the premises.
e. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's
station of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then
the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises
to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at
least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this
subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
f. It shall be the duty of the permittee to ensure that the view area
specified herein remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or ther materials and, at
all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated in the application as an area
in which patrons will not be permitted.
g. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at
any time.
h. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0)
foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
i. It shall be the duty of the permittee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any
patron is present in the premises.
19
j. No permittee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
k. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any
kind between viewing booths or rooms.
l. The permittee shall, during each business day, regularly
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if
any openings or holes exist.
m. The permittee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths
to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or
carpeting.
n. The permittee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces
in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered
by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within
forty-eight (48") inches of the floor.
D. A person having a duty under subsection C.1 (a. through n.) above commits a
violation if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
E. Additional Standards For Escort Agencies.
1. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
2. A person commits a violation if the person acts as an escort or agrees to
to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
F. Additional Standards For Nude Model Studios.
1. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
2. A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation if the person appears
semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model
studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person less
than 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any
other person.
3. A person commits a violation if the person appears in a state of nudity, or
knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude
model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
4. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any
20
room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room
open to the public.
G. Additional Regulations Concerning Public Nudity.
1. It shall be a violation for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a
sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified
sexual activities.
2. It shall be a violation for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually
oriented business appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an
employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten (10) feet from any
patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor.
3. It shall be a violation for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually
oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer
or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee,
while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
4. It shall be a violation for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a customer
or the clothing of a customer.
H. Prohibition Against Children In A Sexually Oriented Business.
A person commits a violation if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of
18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
I. Hours of Operation.
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on
weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and noon (12:00) P.M. on
Sundays.
J. Exemptions.
1. It is a defense to prosecution under subdivision F of this Article that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
a. by a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Maine; a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
b. by a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
21
c. in a structure:
1. which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing; and
2. where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
3. where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
11 - 12.12 Issuance of Permit/License:
A. Sexually Oriented Business Permit
1. Within 30 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business
application, the Municipal Officers shall approve or deny the issuance of a
permit to an applicant. The Municipal Officers shall approve the issuance of
a permit to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
a. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
b. An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in
payment to the Town of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed
against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any business.
c. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form.
d. An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been
denied a permit by the Town to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding twelve (12) months or whose permit to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding
twelve (12) months.
e. An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this Ordinance.
f. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not
been approved by the health department, fire department, and the
code enforcement officer as being in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances.
g. The permit fee required by this Ordinance has not been paid.
22
h. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not
in compliance with any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually oriented business and the classification for which the permit is
issued pursuant to Article 12.8. All permits shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they
may be easily read at any time.
3. The health department, fire department, and the code enforcement officer
shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the Town.
4. A sexually oriented business permit shall be issued for only one
classification as found in Article 12.8.
B. Sexually Oriented Business Employee License.
1. Upon the filing of said application for a sexually oriented business employee
license, the Town shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The
application shall then be referred to the appropriate departments for an
investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the
application. The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) days
from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the
Municipal Officers shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is
true:
a. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonable necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
b. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
c. The applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal activity” as
defined in this Ordinance;
d. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or State law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this
Ordinance; or
e. The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked by the Town within two (2) years of the date of the current
23
application. If the sexually oriented business employee license is
denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately
deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license
issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set
forth in Article 12.20.
2. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal
upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the Town that the
applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in
this Ordinance or committed any act during the existence of the previous
license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The
renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in
Article 12.13.
11 - 12.13 Fees:
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business permit (whether for a new permit
or for renewal of an existing permit) shall be accompanied by a $50.00 nonrefundable
application and investigation fee.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually
oriented business that is granted a permit (new or renewal) shall pay to the Town an
annual non-refundable permit fee of $50.00 prior to issuance or renewal.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a
new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an
annual $25.00 non-refundable application, investigation, and license fee.
D. All permit/license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Town Clerk.
11 - 12.14 Inspection:
A. An applicant or permittee shall allow representatives of the Police Department,
Health Department, Fire Department, Code Enforcement, or other Town or State
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for
the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee
commits a violation if he refuses to allow such lawful inspection of the premises at
any time it is open for business.
11 - 12.15 Expiration of Permit:
A. Each Permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed
only by making application as provided in Article 12.10. Application for renewal
24
shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made
less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will
not be affected.
B. When the Town denies renewal of a permit, the applicant shall not be issued a
permit for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Town finds
that the basis for denial of the renewal permit has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since
the date denial became final.
11 - 12.16 Suspension:
The Town shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a permittee has:
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this Ordinance;
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as
authorized by this chapter.
There shall be immediate cessation of business activities upon suspension of permit
until the issues are appropriately adjudicated.
11 - 12.17 Revocation:
A. The Town shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension in Article 12.16 occurs and
the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. There
shall be immediate cessation of business activities upon revocation of the permit
until the issues are appropriately adjudicated.
B. The Town shall revoke a permit if it determines that:
1. A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted
during the application process;
2. A permittee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
3. A permittee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
A permittee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a
period of time when the permittee's license was suspended;
4. Except in the case of an adult motel, a permittee has knowingly allowed any
act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other
sex act to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
25
5. A permittee is delinquent in payment to the Town, County, or State for any
taxes or fees past due.
C. When the Town revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year,
and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one (1)
year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation,
the Town finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.
D. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of any permit, the applicant or permittee may file an
appeal. (See Appeals subsection 12.20)
11 – 12.18 Transfer of License:
A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another, nor shall a permittee operate a
sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the
address designated in the application.
11 - 12.19 Violation:
A. Enforcement. The Municipal Officers or their designees shall enforce this
Ordinance.
B. Penalties. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid permit or is in violation of Article 12.9 of this Ordinance is
subject to penalty under 30-A MRSA, Sec. 4452. Each day that the violation
continues constitutes a separate offense with maximum fines of two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per offense. There is a twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) maximum fine per offense upon the second conviction within two (2)
years for violations under this Ordinance.
11 – 12. 20 Appeals:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the municipal officers or their designees may
appeal to the Board of Appeals by filing a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the municipal officers or designee’s notification. All activities of the Sexually
Oriented Business must cease during any appeal period.
Administrative appeals and variance applications submitted under this Ordinance shall
be subject to the standards and procedures established by the Town of Farmington
Board of Appeals Ordinance.
26
11 - 12.21 Amendments:
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated
by:
1. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board of Selectmen has so
voted:
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of
votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial elections.
B. Public Hearing: The Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment. Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised in
a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least 7 days prior to
the hearing.
C. Adoption of Amendment: An amendment of this Ordinance shall be adopted
by a majority vote of a Town Meeting.
TOWN OF FARMINGTON
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
ENACTED: June 4, 1975
AMENDED: March 14, 1977
May 6, 1991
March 14, 2005
March 12, 2007
March 20, 2010
January 1, 2013
March 28, 2016
CERTIFIED BY: ______________
Leanne E. Dickey
Town Clerk Affix Seal
Title
Chapter 11
Town of Farmington Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
Table of Contents
Article 11
11-1.1 Purposes 1
11-1.2 Authority 1
11-1.3 Applicability 1
11-1.4 Effective Date Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments 2
11-1.5 Availability 2
11-1.6 Severability 2
11-1.7 Conflicts with Other Ordinances 2
11-1.8 Amendments 2
11-1.9 Districts and Zoning Map 3
11-1.10 Interpretation of District Boundaries 3
11-1.11 Land Use Requirements 3
11-1.12 Non-conformance 4
11-1.13 Establishment of Districts 10
11-1.14 Table of Land Uses 12
11-1.15 Land Use Standards 15
11-1.16 Administration 46
11-1.17 Definitions 56
11-1.18 Fees 67
Shoreland Zoning Map Attachment A
1
CHAPTER 11 – LAND USE
Article 1. Shoreland Zoning
11-1.1 Purposes:
The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful
conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds,
aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and
accelerated erosion; to protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect
freshwater wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to
conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters; to
conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of
development in shoreland areas.
11-1.2 Authority:
This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of 38 M.R.S. §
435-449.
11-1.3 Applicability:
This Ordinance applies to:
A. All land areas within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of any great pond or river, including but not limited to the Sandy River,
Wilson Stream, Temple Stream, and Clearwater Lake (within Farmington jurisdiction).
B. All land areas within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland
edge of certain freshwater wetlands, excluding forested wetlands, including but not
limited to the wetlands ten (10) acres or larger as numbered by MGS and published in
1989 by DEP, and those which are rated as "moderate" or "high value" waterfowl and
wading bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas by the Maine Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic
Information System (GIS) data layer maintained by MDIF&W as of December 31,
2008.
C. All land areas within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of certain streams, including but not limited to portions of Barker Brook,
Beaver Brook, Cascade Brook, Beales Brook, Hardy Brook, McLain Brook, and
several unnamed brooks.
The above rivers, streams, wetlands, and great ponds are depicted on the Town of
Farmington Shoreland Zoning Map which is part of and incorporated into this Ordinance.
Specific applicability of this ordinance and its provisions is dependent on said map. In all
instances, the Shoreland Zone begins at the normal high waterline or upland edge of a
wetland and extends inland the specified distance.
2
This Ordinance also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, or other
structure extending or located below the normal high-water line of a water body or
within a wetland.
11-1.4 Effective Date Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments:
This Ordinance, which was amended by the municipal legislative body on March 28,
2016, shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection. A certified copy of the Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment,
attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of for
approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment,
within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, it
shall be automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day
period shall be governed by the terms of this Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, if the
Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, is approved by the Commissioner.
11-1.5 Availability:
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be
accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at
reasonable cost at the expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of
this Ordinance shall be posted.
11-1.6 Severability:
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
11-1.7 Conflicts with Other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered
by the municipality, the more restrictive provision shall control.
11-1.8 Amendments:
This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the legislative body. Copies of
amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the
municipal legislative body and shall not be effective unless approved by the
Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on any amendment within forty-five (45)
days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day
period shall be governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved
by the Commissioner.
3
11-1.9 Districts and Zoning Map:
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map:
The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby divided into the following
districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, which is made a part of this
Ordinance:
1. Resource Protection
2. Limited Residential
3. Agriculture/Forest
4. General Development
5. Stream Protection
B. Scale of Map:
The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of not less than: 1 inch =
2,000 feet. District boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the
symbols for each district placed on the map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map:
The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be certified by the attested signature of the
Municipal Clerk and shall be located in the municipal office.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map:
If amendments, in accordance with Section 8, are made in the district boundaries or
other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, such changes shall be
made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within thirty (30) days after the
amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
11-1.10 Interpretation of District Boundaries:
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, district boundary lines
are property lines, the centerlines of streets, roads and rights of way, and the boundaries
of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location
of district boundary lines, the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
11-1.11 Land Use Requirements:
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located,
unless a variance is granted.
4
11-1.12 Non-conformance:
A. Purpose:
It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
non-conforming conditions that existed before the effective date of this Ordinance or
amendments thereto shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set
forth in this Section 12. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a nonconforming
condition shall not be permitted to become more non-conforming.
B. General:
1. Transfer of Ownership: Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be
transferred, and the new owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue
to use the non-conforming structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance.
2. Repair and Maintenance: This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal
upkeep and maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures including repairs
or renovations that do not involve expansion of the non-conforming use or
structure, and such other changes in a non-conforming use or structure as federal,
State, or local building and safety codes may require.
C. Non-conforming Structures:
1. Expansions: All new principal and accessory structures, excluding functionally waterdependent
uses, must meet the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback
requirements contained in Section 15.B.1. A non-conforming structure may be
added to or expanded after obtaining a permit from the same permitting authority
as that for a new structure, if such addition or expansion does not increase the
non-conformity of the structure and is in accordance with the subparagraphs below
(a) and (b) below.
Further Limitations:
a. Expansion of any portion of a structure within twenty-five (25) feet of the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland is prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase nonconformity
with the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement.
Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer to the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland than
the principal structure is prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase
nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback
requirement.
5
b. Notwithstanding paragraph (a), above, if a legally existing nonconforming
principal structure is entirely located less than twenty-five (25) feet from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland, that structure may be expanded as follows, as long as all other
applicable municipal land use standards are met and the expansion is not
prohibited by Section 12.C.1.
1) The maximum total footprint for the principal structure may not be
expanded to a size greater than eight hundred (800) square feet or thirty
percent (30%) larger than the footprint that existed on January 1, 1989,
whichever is greater. The maximum height of the principal structure may
not be made greater than fifteen (15) feet or the height of the existing
structure, whichever is greater.
c. All other legally existing nonconforming principal and accessory structures
that do not meet the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback
requirements may be expanded or altered as follows, as long as other
applicable municipal land use standards are met and the expansion is not
prohibited by Section 12.C.1., or Section 12.C.1.a., above.
1) For structures located less than seventy-five (75) feet from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland, the maximum combined total footprint for all structures may not
be expanded to a size greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet or
thirty percent (30%) larger than the footprint that existed on January 1,
1989, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not
be made greater than twenty (20) feet or the height of the existing
structure, whichever is greater.
2) For structures located less than one hundred (100) feet from the normal
high-water line of a great pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a
great pond classified as GPA, the maximum combined total footprint for
all structures may not be expanded to a size greater than fifteen hundred
(1,500) square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on
January 1, 1989, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any
structure may not be made greater than twenty-five (25) feet or the height
of the existing structure, whichever is greater. Any portion of those
structures located less than seventy-five (75) feet from the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland
must meet the footprint and height limits in Section 12.C.1.b.1), and
Section 12.C.1.c.1), above.
3) In addition to the limitations in subparagraphs 1), and 2), above, for
structures that are legally nonconforming due to their location within the
Resource Protection District when located at less than two hundred fifty
(250) feet from the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland
6
edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total footprint for all structures
may not be expanded to a size greater than fifteen hundred (1,500)
square feet or thirty percent (30%) larger than the footprint that existed at
the time the Resource Protection District was established on the lot,
whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be
made greater than twenty-five (25) feet or the height of the existing
structure, whichever is greater, except that any portion of those structures
located less than seventy-five (75) feet from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must meet the
footprint and height limits in Section 12.C.1.b.1), and Section 12.C.1.c.1),
above.
d. An approved plan for expansion of a nonconforming structure must be
recorded by the applicant with the registry of deeds, within ninety (90) days of
approval. The recorded plan must show the existing and proposed footprint
of the non-conforming structure, the existing and proposed structure height,
the footprint of any other structures on the parcel, the shoreland zone
boundary and evidence of approval by the municipal review authority.
2. Foundations: Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is
constructed under a non-conforming structure, the structure and new foundation
must be placed such that the setback requirement is met to the greatest practical
extent as determined by the Planning Board, or its designee, basing its decision on
the criteria specified in Section 12.C.3. Relocation, below. No structure, which is
less than the required setback from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland shall be expanded toward the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland.
3. Relocation: A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of
the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation
conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined
by the Planning Board, or its designee, and provided that the applicant
demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the
requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with
the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that
causes the structure to be more non-conforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board or its designee, shall consider the size of the
lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other
structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic
system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and
amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
7
When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback
area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board shall require replanting of
native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation in accordance with
Section 15.S. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure was
removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as
follows:
a. Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least
one (1) native tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than
five (5) trees are planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than fifty
percent (50%) of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted
no further from the water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed
or destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at
least the same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was
disturbed, damaged, or removed must be re-established within the setback
area. The vegetation and/or ground cover replanted must consist of similar
vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
b. Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location
of the structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of
grasses, trees, or a combination thereof.
4. Reconstruction or Replacement: Any non-conforming structure, which is located
less than the required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and
which is removed, or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more
than fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before such damage,
destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced provided that a permit is
obtained within eighteen (18) months of the date of said damage, destruction, or
removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance
with the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback requirement to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its designee in
accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case shall a structure be
reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its non-conformity. If the
reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback it shall not
be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Section
12.C.1., above, as determined by the non-conforming footprint of the reconstructed
or replaced structure at its new location. If the total footprint of the original
structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no
portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed
at less than the setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to
remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall
be replanted in accordance with Section 12.C.2. above.
8
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required setback from
a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by fifty percent
(50%) or less of the market value or damaged by fifty percent (50%) or less of the
market value of the structure excluding normal maintenance and repair, may be
reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer
(CEO) within one (1) year of such damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the
setback to the greatest practical extent the Planning Board or its designee shall
consider in addition to the criteria in Section 12.C.3., above, the physical condition
and type of foundation present, if any.
5. Change of Use of a Non-conforming Structure: The use of a non-conforming
structure may not be changed to another use, unless the Planning Board, after
receiving a written application, determines that the new use will have no greater
adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream, or wetland, or on the subject
or adjacent properties and resources than the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall
require written documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on
public health and safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife
habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access to waters,
natural beauty, flood plain management, archaeological and historic resources,
and functionally water-dependent uses.
6. Expiration and Extension of Permits and Completion Dates: Refer to Section
16.F.
D. Non-conforming Uses:
1. Expansions: Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that
non-conforming residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Planning
Board, be expanded within existing residential structures or within expansions of
such structures as allowed in Section 12.C.1., above.
2. Resumption Prohibited: A lot, building or structure in or on which a
non-conforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one (1) year, or which
is superceded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a
non-conforming use except that the Planning Board may, for good cause shown by
the applicant, grant up to a one (1) year extension to that time period. This
provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a residential structure
provided that the structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes
during the preceding five (5) year period.
3. Change of Use: An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another
non-conforming use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse
9
impact on the subject and adjacent properties and resources, than the former use,
as determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no greater adverse
impact shall be made according to criteria listed in Section 12.C.5. above.
E. Non-conforming Lots:
1. Non-conforming Lots: A non-conforming lot of record as of the effective date of
this Ordinance or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a
variance, provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with
any other lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance
except lot area, lot width, and shore frontage, can be met. Variances relating to
setback or other requirements not involving lot area, lot width, or shore frontage
shall be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
2. Contiguous Built Lots: If two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single
or joint ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of
the lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a
principal use or structure exists on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be
conveyed separately or together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law
(12 M.R.S. § 4807-A through 4807-D) and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two (2) or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on
the effective date of this Ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot provided
that the above referenced law and rules are complied with. When such lots are
divided each lot thus created must be as conforming as possible to the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
3. Contiguous Lots – Vacant or Partially Built: If two (2) or more contiguous lots or
parcels are in single or joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, if any of these lots do not individually meet the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if
one (1) or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal structure the lots shall
be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
This provision shall not apply to two (2) or more contiguous lots, at least one (1) of
which is non-conforming, owned by the same person or persons on the effective
date of this Ordinance and recorded in the Registry of Deeds if the lot is served by
a public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface sewage disposal system in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and:
a. Each lot contains at least one hundred (100) feet of shore frontage and at
least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area; or
b. Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size requirements of Section
12.E.3.a., are reconfigured or combined so that each new lot contains at least
10
one hundred (100) feet of shore frontage and twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet of lot area.
11-1.13 Establishment of Districts:
A. Resource Protection District:
The Resource Protection District includes areas in which development would
adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, or biological ecosystems. This
district shall include the following areas when they occur within the limits of the
shoreland zone, exclusive of the Stream Protection District, except areas which are
currently developed, and areas which meet the criteria for the Limited Residential,
Agriculture/Forest, or General Development.
1. Areas within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
freshwater wetlands, and wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers, which
are rated “moderate” or “high” value waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including
nesting and feeding areas by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife (MDIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS)
data layer maintained by MDIF&W as of December 31, 2008. For the purposes of
this paragraph “wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers” shall mean areas
characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils that are
contiguous with a great pond or river, and have a surface elevation at or below the
water level of the great pond or river during the period of normal high water.
“Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers” are considered to be part of that
great pond or river.
2. Floodplains along rivers and flood plains along artificially formed great ponds along
rivers, defined by the 100-year floodplain as designated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood
Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these, by soil
types identified as recent flood plain soils.
3. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of twenty
percent (20%) or greater.
4. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and
hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater wetland, and which are not
surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal high water.
5. Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or river
bed movement, and lands adjacent to waters, which are subject to severe
erosion or mass movement.
B. Limited Residential District:
11
The Limited Residential District includes those areas suitable for residential and
recreational development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource
Protection District, or Stream Protection District, and areas, which are used less
intensively than those in the General Development District.
C. Agriculture/Forest District:
The Agriculture/Forest District includes areas suited to agriculture purposes and
timber harvesting operations consistent with maintaining water quality, and wildlife
habitat. Such districts also include areas primarily devoted to agriculture and forestry
operations as of the effective date of this ordinance, unless otherwise restricted.
Passive recreation activities will also be allowed.
D. General Development District:
The General Development District includes areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres
devoted to commercial, industrial or recreational activities or a mix of such activities:
manufacturing, fabricating, wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade, service activities,
intensive recreational development such as amusement parks, race tracks and
fairgrounds.
Portions of the General Development District may also include residential
development. However, no area shall be designated as a General Development
District based solely on residential use.
E. Stream Protection District:
The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those areas
within two-hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
a great pond, or river, or within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the
upland edge of a freshwater wetland. Where a stream and its associated shoreland
area are located within two-hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the above
water bodies or wetlands, that land area shall be regulated under the terms of the
shoreland district associated with that water body or wetland. These include but are
not limited to portions of Barker Brook, Beaver Brook, Cascade Brook, Beals Brook,
Hardy Brook, McLain Brook, and several unnamed brooks.
11-1.14 Table of Land Uses:
All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, “Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone”, shall
conform with all of the applicable land use standards in Section 15. The district
designation for a particular site shall be determined from the Shoreland Zoning Map.
12
Key to Table 1:
Yes - Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all applicable land
use standards.)
No - Prohibited
PB - Allowed with permit issued by the Planning Board
CEO - Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI - Allowed with permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
Abbreviations:
SP - Stream Protection
RP - Resource Protection
LR - Limited Residential
GD - General Development
AF - Agriculture Forest
TABLE 1 – Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone
Land Use Districts
SP RP LR GD AF
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring
structures such as hunting, fishing and hiking Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and
trails Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
3. Forest management activities except for timber
harvesting and land management roads Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
4. Timber harvesting Yes CEO Yes Yes CEO
5. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities
other than timber harvesting CEO CEO-1 Yes Yes Yes
6. Fire prevention activities Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
7. Wildlife management practices Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
8. Soil and water conservation practices Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
9. Mineral exploration No Yes-2 Yes-2 Yes-2 Yes-2
10. Mineral extraction including sand & gravel No PB-3 PB PB PB
11. Surveying and resource analysis Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
12. Emergency operations Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
13. Agriculture Yes PB Yes Yes Yes
13
Land Use Districts
SP RP LR GD AF
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB Yes Yes
15. Principal structures and uses:
A. One and two family residential, including
driveways PB – 4 PB – 9 CEO CEO PB – 9
B. Multi-unit residential No No PB PB No
C. Commercial No No No PB No
D. Industrial No No No PB No
E. Governmental and institutional No No PB PB No
F. Small non-residential facilities for
educational, Scientific, or nature
interpretation purposes PB – 4 PB CEO CEO CEO
16. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB – 4 PB CEO Yes PB
17. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other
structures and uses extending over or below the
normal high-water line or within a wetland:
A. Temporary CEO-11 CEO-11 CEO-11 CEO-11 CEO-11
B. Permanent PB PB PB PB PB
18. Conversions of seasonal residences to yearround
residences LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
19. Home Occupations PB PB PB Yes PB
20. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed
uses LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
21. Essential services:
A. Roadside distribution lines (34.5kV and
lower CEO – 6 CEO - 6 Yes - 12 Yes - 12 Yes - 12
B. Non-roadside or cross-country
distribution lines involving ten poles or
less in the Shoreland Zone PB - 6 PB - 6 CEO CEO
CEO
C. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution
lines eleven or more poles in the Shoreland
Zone
D. Other essential services PB - 6 PB - 6 PB PB PB
22. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
23. Public and private recreation areas involving
minimal structural development PB PB PB CEO PB
24. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. Campgrounds No No - 7 PB PB PB
14
Land Use Districts
SP RP LR GD AF
26. Road construction PB No - 8 PB PB PB
27. Land management roads Yes PB Yes Yes Yes
28. Parking facilities No No - 7 PB PB PB
29. Filling and earthmoving of < 10 cubic yards CEO CEO Yes Yes CEO
30. Filling and earthmoving of > 10 cubic yards PB PB CEO
CEO PB
31. Signs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
32. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
33. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
34. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB PB
Key:
1. In RP not allowed within seventy-five (75) feet horizontal distance of the normal
high-water line of a great pond, except to remove safety hazards.
2. Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than one hundred
(100) square feet of surface area, in total, is disturbed.
3. In RP not allowed in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
4. Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the Board
of Appeals.
5. Functionally water-dependent uses and uses accessory to such water dependent
uses only.
6. See further restrictions in Section 15.L.2.
7. Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to floodplain criteria, in
which case a permit is required from the Planning Board.
8. Except as provided in Section 15.H.3.
9. Single-family residential structures may be allowed by special exception only
according to the provisions of Section 16.E. Special Exceptions. Two-family
residential structures are prohibited.
15
10. Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table such as campgrounds
that are allowed in the respective district.
11. Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no
permit is required.
12. Permit not required but must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with the
Code Enforcement Officer.
11-1.15 Land Use Standards:
All land use activities within the Shoreland Zone shall conform with the following
provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum Lot Standards:
1. Lot Sizes and Frontages:
a. Residential per dwelling unit within the Shoreland Zone:
Lots created after effective date of ordinance:
Minimum Lot Area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
Minimum Shore Frontage: Two hundred (200) feet.
Lots of record existing at effective date of ordinance:
Minimum Lot Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
Minimum Shore Frontage: One hundred (100) feet.
b. Governmental, Institutional, Commercial, or Industrial per principal structure
within the Shoreland Zone:
Minimum Lot Area: Sixty thousand (60,000) square feet.
Minimum Shore Frontage: Three hundred (300) feet.
c. Public and Private Recreational Facilities within the shoreland zone:
Minimum Lot Area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
Minimum Shore Frontage: Two hundred (200) feet.
2. Land below the normal high-waterline of a water body or upland edge of a wetland
and land beneath roads serving more than two (2) lots shall not be included toward
calculating minimum lot area.
3. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each
a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner
of land on both sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
16
4. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of
a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot
with the proposed use.
5. If more than one (1) residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional,
commercial, or industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or
established on a single parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each
additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures:
1. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one hundred
(100) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of great ponds
classified GPA and rivers that flow to great ponds classified GPA, and seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, except that in the
General Development District the setback from the normal high-water line shall be
at least twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance. In the Resource Protection
District the setback requirement shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal
distance, except for structures, roads, parking spaces, or other regulated objects
specifically allowed in that district in which case the setback requirements specified
above shall apply.
In addition:
a. The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback provision shall neither
apply to structures which require direct access to the water body, or wetland
as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks, and retaining walls, nor to
other functionally water-dependent uses.
b. On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists,
and it is not possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required
water body, tributary stream or wetland setbacks, the Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a permit to place a single accessory structure, with no
utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such accessory
structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor eight (8) feet in
height, and shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream as
practical and shall meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage
and vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the structure be located
closer to the shoreline or tributary stream than the principal structure.
2. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are
permitted in the Resource Protection, Limited Residential, Stream Protection, and
Agricultural and Forest Districts, shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. This
provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission towers, windmills,
antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
17
3. The lowest floor elevation or openings of all new buildings and structures, including
basements, shall be elevated at least one (1) foot above the elevation of the 100-
year flood of record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types
identified as recent floodplain soils. In those municipalities that participate in the
National Flood Insurance Program and have adopted the April 2005 version, or
later version, of the Floodplain Management Ordinance, accessory structures may
be placed in accordance with the standards of that Ordinance and need not meet
the elevation requirements of this paragraph.
4. With the exception of General Development Districts located adjacent to rivers
that do not flow to great ponds, non-vegetated surfaces shall not exceed a total
of twenty (20) percent of the portion of the lot located within the shoreland zone.
This limitation does not apply to public boat launching facilities regardless of the
district in which the facility is located.
In a General Development District located adjacent to rivers that do not flow to
great ponds, non-vegetated surfaces shall not exceed a total of seventy (70)
percent of the portion of the lot located within the shoreland zone.
For the purposes of calculating lot coverage, non-vegetated surfaces include, but
are not limited to the following: structures, driveways, parking areas, and other
areas from which vegetation has been removed. Naturally occurring ledge and
rock outcroppings are not counted as nonvegetated surfaces when calculating lot
coverage for lots of record on March 24, 1990 and in continuous existence since
that date.
5. Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure
setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all
of the following conditions are met:
a. The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not
exist;
b. The wall(s) is(are) at least twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of
wetland;
c. The site where the retaining wall(s) will be constructed is legally existing lawn or
is a site eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot
be stabilized with vegetation alone;
d. The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, is(are) no more than twentyfour
(24) inches;
e. Retaining wall(s) is(are) located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers,
streams, wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or
18
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in absence of these, by
soil types identified as recent flood plain soils;
f. The area behind the wall is re-vegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a
combination thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the
setback area, including patios and decks; and
g. A vegetated buffer area is established within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland when a natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer
area must meet the following characteristics:
1) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous
vegetation. Where natural ground cover is lacking, the area must be
supplemented with leaf or bark mulch;
2) Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and
provide for effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
3) Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
4) A minimum buffer width of fifteen (15) feet, horizontal distance, is required,
measured perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a
wetland; and
5) A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 15.P.2.a, may traverse
the buffer.
6. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways, or similar structures
may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide
shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided; that the
structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width; that the structure does
not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the DEP pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S. § 480-C); and that the applicant
demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
7. Expiration and Extension of Permits and Completion Dates:
Refer to Section 16.F.
C. Piers, Docks, Wharfs, Bridges, and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Beyond the Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a Wetland, and
Shoreline Stabilization.
19
1. No more than one pier, dock, wharf or similar structure extending or located below
the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland is allowed on a
single lot; except that when a single lot contains at least twice the minimum shore
frontage as specified in Section 15.A, a second structure may be allowed and may
remain as long as the lot is not further divided.
2. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and
constructed so as to control erosion.
3. The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
4. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
5. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity
and be consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the area. A
temporary pier, or dock, shall not be wider than six (6) feet for non-commercial
uses.
6. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock, or other
structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the water as an
operational necessity.
7. New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is clearly
demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible,
and a permit has been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection,
pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act.
8. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf, or other
structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
9. Except in the General Development District, structures built on, over, or abutting
a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water
line of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in
height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure.
10. Vegetation may be removed in excess of the standards in Section 15.P. of this
Ordinance in order to conduct shoreline stabilization of an eroding shoreline,
provided that a permit is obtained from the Planning Board. Construction
equipment must access the shoreline by barge when feasible as determined by
the Planning Board.
a. When necessary, the removal of trees and other vegetation to allow for
construction equipment access to the stabilization site via land must be
20
limited to no more than twelve (12) feet in width. When the stabilization
project is complete the construction equipment accessway must be restored.
b. Revegetation must occur in accordance with Section 15.S.
11. A deck over a river may be exempted from the shoreland setback requirements if
it is part of a downtown revitalization project that is defined in a project plan
approved by the legislative body of the municipality, and may include the
revitalization of structures formerly used as mills that do not meet the structure
setback requirements, if the deck meets the following requirements:
a. The total deck area attached to the structure does not exceed seven hundred
(700) square feet;
b. The deck is cantilevered over a segment of a river that is located within the
boundaries of the downtown revitalization project;
c. The deck is attached to or accessory to an allowed commercial use in a structure
that was constructed prior to 1971 and is located within the downtown revitalization
project;
d. The construction of the deck complies with all other applicable standards, except the
shoreline setback requirements in section 15.B.; and
e. The construction of the deck complies with all other state and federal laws.
D. Campgrounds:
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures and the following:
1. Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of
land, not including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland
vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line of a water body shall not be
included in calculating land area per site.
2. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and
utility and service buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100)
feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond
classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
E. Individual Private Campsites:
Individual - private campsites not associated with campgrounds are allowed
provided the following conditions are met:
21
1. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is
less, may be allowed.
2. When an individual private campsite is proposed on a lot that contains another
principal use and/or structure, the lot must contain the minimum lot dimensional
requirements for the principal structure and/or use, and the individual private
campsite separately.
3. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational
vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or river
flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary
streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
4. No more than five (5) recreational vehicles shall be allowed on a campsite. The
recreational vehicles shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation
except for a gravel pad, and no structure except a canopy shall be attached to the
recreational vehicle.
(See also 11-1.17 “Individual Private Campsites”).
5. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar
shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
6. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of
sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the
Local Plumbing Inspector (LPI). Where disposal is off-site, written authorization
from the receiving facility or landowner is required.
7. When a recreational vehicle, tent, or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than
one hundred twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures
shall be met, including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in
compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless
served by public sewage facilities.
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses:
The following new commercial and industrial uses are prohibited within the
shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and rivers and streams,
which flow to great ponds classified GPA:
1. Auto washing facilities
2. Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
22
3. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
4. Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers other than
amounts normally associated with individual households or farms
5. Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
6. Dry cleaning establishments
7. Electronic circuit assembly
8. Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
9. Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
10. Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same
property as use occurs
11. Photographic processing
12. Printing
G. Parking Areas:
1. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary streams setback requirements
for structures for the district in which such areas are located, except that the
setback requirement for parking areas serving public boat launching facilities, in
districts other than the General Development shall be no less than fifty (50) feet,
horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if the Planning Board
finds that no other reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline or
tributary stream.
2. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be
designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body,
tributary stream or wetland and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
3. In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following
shall apply:
a. Typical parking space: Approximately ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet
long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be forty
(40) feet long.
b. Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty (20) feet wide.
H. Roads and Driveways
The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways
and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
1. Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river
that flows to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary steams,
or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as
23
determined by the Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the
road and/or driveway setback requirement shall be no less than fifty (50) feet,
horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that appropriate
techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the
installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief
culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty percent (20%), the road and/or driveway setback
shall be increased by ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five percent (5%)
increase in slope above twenty (20%) percent.
Section 15.H.1. does not apply to approaches to water crossings nor to roads or
driveways that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities located nearer
to the shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding
temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and driveways providing access to
permitted structures within the setback area shall comply fully with the
requirements of Section 15.H.1., except for that portion of the road or driveway
necessary for direct access to the structure.
2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way
regardless of their setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except
that the Planning Board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to
provide access to permitted uses within the district. A road or a driveway may also
be approved by the Planning Board in a Resource Protection District, upon a
finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the
district. When a road or a driveway is permitted in a Resource Protection District
the road and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
4. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to
one (1) vertical (2:1), and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the
provisions for erosion and sedimentation control contained in Section 15.Q.
5. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal
to one (1) vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the
provisions for erosion and sedimentation control contained in Section 15.T.
6. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water
bodies, tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least fifty
(50) feet plus two (2) times the average slope in width, between the outflow point
of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed to an
24
unscarified buffer strip, shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the
runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be
installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips
before the flow gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or
ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be
spaced along the road, or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the
following table:
b. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the
grade is ten percent (10%) or less.
c. On road sections having slopes greater than ten percent (10%), ditch relief
culverts shall be placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle down
slope from a line perpendicular to the centerline of the road or driveway.
d. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order
to allow for effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be
stabilized with appropriate materials.
8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts, and other storm water runoff
control installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on
a regular basis to assure effective functioning.
I. Signs:
The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection,
Stream Protection, Limited Residential and Agricultural/Forest Districts:
1. Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be allowed,
provided that such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not
exceed two (2) signs per premises. Signs relating to goods or services not sold or
rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21+ 40
25
2. Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed two (2) signs per
premises, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in the aggregate.
3. Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3) square feet in area
relating to the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
4. Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed without restriction as to
number provided that no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
5. Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
6. No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20) feet above the ground.
7. Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
J. Storm Water Runoff:
1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water
runoff from the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where
possible, existing natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces
and wooded areas shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage
infiltration of storm water.
2. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure
proper functioning.
K. Septic Waste Disposal:
1. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following: a)
clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any
associated fill extensions, shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland
edge of a wetland and b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential
use in the shoreland zone.
L. Essential Services:
1. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing
public ways and existing service corridors.
2. The installation of essential services other then road-side distribution lines, is not
allowed in a Resource Protection or Stream Protection District, except to provide
services to a permitted use within said district, or except where the applicant
demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists. Where allowed, such
structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on
surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
26
3. Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and
related equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction:
Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be
accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal
disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground surface. A permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral exploration, which
exceeds the above limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes shall be
immediately capped, filled or secured by other equally effective measures, to restore
disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
1. A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved by the Planning Board before
a permit is granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be
undertaken to fulfill the requirements of Section 4, below.
2. No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features
shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA, and within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland. Extraction operations shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet,
horizontal distance, of any property line, without written permission of the owner of
such adjacent property.
3. Developers of new gravel pits shall demonstrate that no reasonable mining site
outside the Shoreland Zone exists. When gravel pits must be located within the
zone, they shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line
and no less than seventy-five (75) feet and screened from the river by existing
vegetation.
4. Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction operations at any
extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete when less than one
hundred (100) cubic yards of materials are removed in any consecutive twelve (12)
month period, ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with
the following:
a. All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an
approved location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site
may be buried or covered on-site.
b. The final graded slope shall be two and one half to one (2½:1) slope or flatter.
27
c. Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall
be reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional
topsoil or loam shall be obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete
the stabilization project.
5. In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose
such conditions as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with
mineral extraction operations on surrounding uses and resources.
N. Agriculture:
1. All spreading and storage of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with
the Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the former Maine Department of
Agriculture on November 1, 2001 and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S. §
4201-4209).
2. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond,
classified GPA, or within seventy-five (75) feet horizontal distance, of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. All manure storage areas within the
shoreland zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no
discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water.
3. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000)
square feet in surface area, within the shoreland zone shall require a
Conservation Plan to be filed with the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the
provisions of said plan shall be considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
4. There shall be no new tilling of soil within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA; within
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies; nor within
twenty-five feet (25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and
freshwater wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this
Ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may be maintained.
5. Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within one
hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified GPA; within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of other
water bodies, nor; within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary
streams, and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing
farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback
provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance
with a Conservation Plan that has been filed with the Planning Board.
28
O. Timber Harvesting
1. Shoreline integrity and sedimentation. Persons conducting timber harvesting and
related activities must take reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of
shoreline integrity, the occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance
of water body and tributary stream banks, water body and tributary stream
channels, shorelines, and soil lying within water bodies, tributary streams and
wetlands. If, despite such precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity,
sedimentation of water, or the disturbance of water body and tributary stream
banks, water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within
water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be
corrected.
2. Slash treatment. Timber harvesting and related activities shall be conducted such
that slash or debris is not left below normal high-water line of any water body or
tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland. Section 15.O.1. and 2. does not
apply to minor, incidental amounts of slash that result from timber harvesting and
related activities otherwise conducted in compliance with this section.
a. Slash actively used to protect soil from disturbance by equipment or to stabilize
exposed soil, may be left in place, provided that no part thereof extends more
than four (4) feet above the ground.
b. Adjacent to great ponds, rivers and wetlands:
1) No accumulation of slash shall be left within fifty (50) feet horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland; and
2) Between fifty (50) feet and two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland, all
slash larger than three (3) inches in diameter must be disposed of in such a
manner that no part thereof extends more than four (4) feet above the
ground.
3. Timber harvesting and related activities must leave adequate tree cover and shall
be conducted so that a well-distributed stand of trees is retained. This requirement
may be satisfied by following one of the following three options:
a. Option 1 - Forty percent (40%) volume removal, as follows:
1) Harvesting of no more than forty percent (40%) of the total volume on each
acre of trees four and one half (4½) inches DBH or greater in any ten (10)
year period is allowed. Volume may be considered to be equivalent to
basal area;
2) A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation
29
including existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
3) Within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of rivers, streams, and great ponds, and within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater wetlands, there must
be no cleared openings. At distances greater than seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a river or great pond or
upland edge of a wetland, timber harvesting and related activities must not
create single cleared openings greater than fourteen thousand (14,000)
square feet in the forest canopy. Where such openings exceed ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, they must be at least one hundred (100)
feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such cleared openings will be included in
the calculation of total volume removal. Volume may be considered
equivalent to basal area.
b. Option 2 - Sixty (60) square foot basal area retention, as follows:
1) The residual stand must contain an average basal area of at least sixty (60)
square feet per acre of woody vegetation greater than or equal to one (1)
inch DBH, of which forty (40) square feet per acre must be greater than or
equal to four and one half (4½) inches DBH;
2) A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation
including existing ground cover, must be maintained; and
3) Within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of water bodies and within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of
the upland edge of wetlands, there must be no cleared openings. At
distances greater than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a river or great pond, or upland edge of a wetland,
timber harvesting and related activities must not create single cleared
openings greater than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet in the forest
canopy. Where such openings exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet,
they must be at least one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, apart.
Such cleared openings will be included in the calculation of the average
basal area. Volume may be considered equivalent to basal area.
c. Option 3 (Outcome based), which requires:
1) An alternative method proposed in an application, signed by a Licensed
Forester or certified wildlife professional, submitted by the landowner or
designated agent to the State of Maine Department of Conservation’s
Bureau of Forestry (Bureau) for review and approval, which provides
equal or better protection of the shoreland area than this rule.
2) Landowners must designate on the Forest Operations Notification form
30
required by 12 M.R.S. chapter 805, subchapter 5, which option they
choose to use. If landowners choose Option 1 or Option 2, compliance
will be determined solely on the criteria for the option chosen. If
landowners choose Option 3, timber harvesting and related activities may
not begin until the Bureau has approved the alternative method.
3) The Bureau may verify that adequate tree cover and a well-distributed
stand of trees is retained through a field procedure that uses sample plots
that are located randomly or systematically to provide a fair representation
of the harvest area.
4. Skid trails, yards, and equipment operation. This requirement applies to the
construction, maintenance, and use of skid trail and yards in shoreland areas.
a. Equipment used in timber harvesting and related activities shall not use river,
stream, or tributary stream channels as travel routes except when surface
waters are frozen and snow covered, and the activity will not result in any
ground disturbance.
b. Skid trails and yards must be designed and constructed to prevent sediment
and concentrated water runoff from entering a water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Upon termination of their use, skid trails and yards must be stabilized.
c. Setbacks:
1) Equipment must be operated to avoid the exposure of mineral soil within
twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of any water body, tributary
stream, or wetland. On slopes of ten percent (10%) or greater, the setback
for equipment operation must be increased by twenty (20) feet, horizontal
distance, plus an additional ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five
percent (5%) increase in slope above ten percent (10%). Where slopes fall
away from the resource, no increase in the twenty-five (25) foot setback is
required.
2) Where such setbacks are impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be
used to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
Such techniques may include the installation of sump holes or settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and ditch
water turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the
disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
5. Land Management Roads. Land management roads, including approaches to
crossings of water bodies, tributary stream channels, and wetlands, ditches, and
other related structures, must be designed, constructed, and maintained to prevent
sediment and concentrated water runoff from directly entering the water body,
31
tributary stream or wetland. Surface water on or adjacent to water crossing
approaches must be diverted through vegetative filter strips to avoid sedimentation
of the watercourse or wetland. Because roadside ditches may not extend to the
resource being crossed, vegetative filter strips must be established in accordance
with the setback requirements in Section 15.O.1. through 7. of this rule.
a. Land management roads and associated ditches, excavation, and fill must be
set back at least:
1) One hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a great pond, river, water body, or freshwater wetland;
2) Fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, from the high-water line of streams and
tributary streams; and
3) Twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
tributary streams.
b. The minimum one hundred (100) foot setback specified in Section 15.O.5.a.1),
above, may be reduced to no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, and
the fifty (50) foot setback specified in Section 15.O.1. through 5.a.2), above,
may be reduced to no less than twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, if,
prior to construction, the landowner or the landowner’s designated agent
demonstrates to the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable
alternative exists and that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques
include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the
effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such
precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
c. On slopes of ten percent (10%) or greater, the land management road setback
must be increased by at least twenty (20) feet, horizontal distance, plus an
additional ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five percent (5%) increase
in slope above ten percent (10%).
d. New land management roads are not allowed in a Resource Protection District,
unless, prior to construction, the landowner or the landowner’s designated
agent makes a clear demonstration to the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no
reasonable alternative route exists outside the shoreland zone, and that the
new road must be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water
line and screened from the river by existing vegetation.
e. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts, and other water control
installations associated with roads must be maintained on a regular basis to
32
assure effective functioning. Drainage structures shall deliver a dispersed flow
of water into an unscarified filter strip no less than the width indicated in the
setback requirements in Section 15.O.1. through 7. Where such a filter strip is
impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be used to avoid sedimentation of
the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include the
installation of sump holes or setting basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water turnouts placed to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such
precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
f. Road closeout or discontinuance: Maintenance of the water control
installations required in Section 15.O.1. through 5.e must continue until use of
the road is discontinued and the road is put to bed by effective installation of
water bars or other adequate road drainage structures at appropriate intervals,
constructed to avoid surface water flowing over or under the water bar, and
extending a sufficient distance beyond the traveled way so that water does not
re-enter the road surface.
g. Upgrading existing roads: Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads
must conform to the provisions of Section 15.O.1. Any non-conforming existing
road may continue to exist and be maintained, as long as the non-conforming
conditions are not made more non-conforming.
h. Exception: Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads need not
conform to the setback requirements of Section 15.O.1. through 5.a., if, prior to
extension or enlargement, the landowner or landowner’s designated agent
demonstrates to the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable
alternative exists and that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts
placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
1) Additional measures: In addition to the foregoing minimum requirements,
persons undertaking construction and maintenance of roads and river,
stream and tributary stream crossings must take reasonable measures to
avoid sedimentation of surface waters.
6. Crossings of water bodies: Crossings of rivers, streams, and tributary streams
must allow for fish passage at all times of the year, must not impound water, and
must allow for the maintenance of normal flows.
33
a. Determination of flow: Provided they are properly applied and used for the
circumstances for which they are designed, methods including but not limited to
the following are acceptable as a means of calculating the ten (10) year and
twenty-five (25) year frequency water flows and thereby determining water
crossing sizes as required in Section 15.O.1. : The United States Geological
Survey (USGS) Methods; specifically: Hodgkins, G. 1999. Estimating the
Magnitude of Peak Flows for Streams in Maine for Selected Recurrence
Intervals, U.S. Geological Survey, Water Resources Investigations Report 99-
4008, 45 pp.
b. Upgrading existing water crossings: Extension or enlargement of presently
existing water crossings must conform to the provisions of Section 15.O.1. Any
non-conforming existing water crossing may continue to exist and be
maintained, as long as the non-conforming conditions are not made more nonconforming;
however, any maintenance or repair work done below the normal
high-water line must conform to the provisions of Section 15.O.1.
c. Other Agency Permits: Any timber harvesting and related activities involving
design, construction, and maintenance of crossings on water bodies other than
a river, stream, or tributary stream may require a permit from the Land Use
Regulation Commission, the Department of Environmental Protection, or the
US Army Corps of Engineers.
d. Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the design, construction,
and maintenance of crossings of freshwater wetlands identified by the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as essential wildlife habitat require
prior consultation with the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
e. Notice to Bureau of Forestry: Written notice of all water crossing construction
maintenance, alteration, and replacement activities in shoreland areas must be
given to the Bureau prior to the commencement of such activities. Such notice
must contain all information required by the Bureau, including:
1) A map showing the location of all proposed permanent crossings;
2) The GPS location of all proposed permanent crossings;
3) For any temporary or permanent crossing that requires a permit from State
or federal agencies, a copy of the approved permit or permits; and
4) A statement signed by the responsible party that all temporary and
permanent crossings will be constructed, maintained, and closed out in
accordance with the requirements of this Section.
f. Water crossing standards: All crossings of rivers require a bridge or culvert
sized according to the requirements of Section 15.O.1. through 6.g., below.
Streams and tributary streams may be crossed using temporary structures that
are not bridges or culverts provided:
34
1) Concentrated water runoff does not enter the stream or tributary stream;
2) Sedimentation of surface waters is reasonably avoided;
3) There is no substantial disturbance of the bank, or stream or tributary
stream channel;
4) Fish passage is not impeded; and
5) Water flow is not unreasonably impeded.
Subject to Section 15.O.1. through 6.f.5), above, skid trail crossings of streams
and tributary streams when channels of such streams and tributary streams are
frozen and snow covered or are composed of a hard surface which will not be
eroded or otherwise damaged are not required to use permanent or temporary
structures.
g. Bridge and Culvert Sizing: For crossings of river, stream and tributary stream
channels with a bridge or culvert, the following requirements apply:
1) Bridges and culverts must be installed and maintained to provide an
opening sufficient in size and structure to accommodate ten (10) year
frequency water flows or with a cross-sectional area at least equal to two
and one half (2½) times the cross-sectional area of the river, stream or
tributary stream channel.
2) Temporary bridge and culvert sizes may be smaller than provided in
Section 15.O.1. through 6.g.1), if techniques are effectively employed such
that in the event of culvert or bridge failure, the natural course of water flow
is maintained and sedimentation of the water body or tributary stream is
avoided. Such crossing structures must be at least as wide as the channel
and placed above the normal high-water line. Techniques may include, but
are not limited to, the effective use of any, a combination of, or all of the
following:
a) Use of temporary skidder bridges;
b) Removing culverts prior to onset of frozen ground conditions;
c) Using water bars in conjunction with culverts; and
d) Using road dips in conjunction with culverts.
3) Culverts utilized in river, stream or tributary stream crossings must:
a) Be installed at or below river, stream, or tributary streambed elevation;
35
b) Be seated on firm ground;
c) Have soil compacted at least halfway up the side of the culvert;
d) Be covered by soil to a minimum depth of one (1) foot or according to
the culvert manufacturer’s specifications, whichever is greater; and
e) Have a headwall at the inlet end which is adequately stabilized by riprap
or other suitable means to reasonable avoid erosion of material around
the culvert.
4) River, stream, and tributary stream crossings allowed under Section 15.O.1,
but located in flood hazard areas (i.e. A zones) as identified on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) of Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps (FHBM), must be designed and constructed under stricter standards
contained in that community’s National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
For example, a water crossing may be required to pass a 100-year flood
event.
5) Exception: Skid trail crossings of tributary streams within shoreland areas
and wetlands adjacent to such streams may be undertaken in a manner not
in conformity with the requirements of the foregoing subsections provided
persons conducting such activities take reasonable measures to avoid the
disruption of shoreline integrity, the occurrence of sedimentation of water,
and the disturbance of stream banks, stream channels, shorelines, and soil
lying within ponds and wetlands. If, despite such precautions, the disruption
of shoreline integrity, sedimentation of water, or the disturbance of stream
banks, stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within ponds and
wetlands occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
h. Skid trail closeout. Upon completion of timber harvesting and related activities,
or upon the expiration of a Forest Operations Notification, whichever is earlier,
the following requirements apply:
1) Bridges and culverts installed for river, stream, and tributary stream
crossings by skid trails must either be removed and areas of exposed soil
stabilized, or upgraded to comply with the closeout standards for land
management roads in Section 15.O.1. through 6.i., below;
2) Water crossing structures that are not bridges or culverts must either be
removed immediately following timber harvesting and related activities, or, if
frozen into the river, stream, or tributary stream bed or bank, as soon as
practical after snowmelt; and
3) River, stream, and tributary stream channels, banks and approaches to
crossings of water bodies and tributary streams must be immediately
36
stabilized on completion of harvest, or if the ground is frozen and/or snow
covered, as soon as practical after snowmelt. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions
must be corrected.
i. Land management road closeout. Maintenance of the water control features
must continue until use of the road is discontinued and the road is put to bed
by taking the following actions:
1) Effective installation of water bars or other adequate road drainage
structures at appropriate intervals, constructed to reasonably avoid surface
water flowing over or under the water bar, and extending sufficient distance
beyond the traveled way so that water does not re-enter the road surface;
2) Water crossing structures must be appropriately sized or dismantled and
removed in a manner that reasonably avoids sedimentation of the water
body or tributary stream; and
3) Any bridge or water crossing culvert in roads to be discontinued shall satisfy
one of the following requirements:
a) It shall be designed to provide an opening sufficient in size and structure
to accommodate twenty-five (25) year frequency water flows;
b) It shall be designed to provide an opening with a cross- sectional area of
the river, stream or tributary stream at least three and one half (3½)
times the cross-sectional area of the river, stream, or tributary stream
channel; or
c) It shall be dismantled and removed in a fashion to reasonably avoid
sedimentation of the river, stream, or tributary stream.
If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
7. Slope Table:
Filter strips, skid trail setbacks, and land management road setbacks must be
maintained as specified in Section 15.O.1., but in no case shall be less than shown
in the following table:
37
Average slope of land between exposed
mineral soil and the shoreline (percent)
Width of strip between exposed mineral soil
and shoreline (feet along surface of the
ground)
0 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting:
1. In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of
vegetation within the strip of land extending seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, inland from the normal high-water line, except to remove hazard trees as
described in section Q.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation
shall be limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that
district.
2. Except in areas as described in Section 15.P.1., above, within a strip of land
extending one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal
high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA, or within a strip extending seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
a. There shall be no cleared opening greater than two hundred fifty (250) square
feet in the forest canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a forested
canopy is not present) as measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub
crown. However, a single footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width as
measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed for accessing the
shoreline provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer
strip is not created.
b. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed, provided that a
well-distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained. For
the purposes of Section 15.P.2.b., a “well-distributed stand of trees” adjacent
to a great pond classified GPA or a river or stream flowing to a great pond
classified GPA, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of twenty-four
(24) or more in each twenty-five (25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangular twelve
hundred fifty (1,250) square feet area as determined by the following rating
38
system.
Diameter of Tree at four and one half (4½) feet Above Ground
Points:
2 in. - < 4 in. 1
4 in. - < 8 in. 2
8 in. - < 12 in. 4
12 in. or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a
“well-distributed stand of trees” is defined as maintaining a minimum rating
score of sixteen (16) per twenty-five (25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangular
area.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
1) The twenty-five (25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangular plots must be
established where the landowner or lessee proposes clearing within the
required buffer;
2) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
3) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation
removed except as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
4) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down
to the minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
and;
5) Where conditions permit, no more than fifty percent (50%) of the points on
any twenty-five (25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangular area may consist of
trees greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15.P.2.b, “other natural vegetation” is defined as
retaining existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground
cover and retaining at least five (5) saplings less than two (2) inches in
diameter at four and one half (4½) feet above ground level for each twenty-five
(25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangle area. If five (5) saplings do not exist, no
woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until five (5)
saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than forty percent (40%) of
the total volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at
four and one half (4½) feet above ground level may be removed in any ten
(10) year period.
39
c. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under
three (3) feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the
forest duff layer, shall not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a
footpath or other permitted uses as described in Section 15.P.2. and 2.a.,
above.
d. Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom one third (1/3) of the tree is allowed.
e. In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of
storm-damaged, dead or hazard trees results in the creation of cleared
openings, these openings shall be replanted with native tree species in
accordance with Section 15.Q., below, unless existing new tree growth is
present.
f. In order to maintain the vegetation in the shoreline buffer, clearing or removal
of vegetation for allowed activities, including associated construction and
related equipment operation, within or outside the shoreline buffer, must
comply with the requirements of Section 15.P.2.
Section 15.P.2. does not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities
adjacent to public swimming areas as long as cleared areas are limited to the
minimum area necessary.
3. At distances greater than one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from a great
pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of any
other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be
allowed on any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting of not more than
forty percent (40%) of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter,
measured four and one half (4½) feet above ground level. Tree removal in
conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included in the forty
percent (40%) calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be
considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose including but not limited to,
principal and accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas,
exceed in the aggregate, twenty-five (25%) of the lot area within the shoreland
zone or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including land
previously cleared. This provision applies to the portion of a lot within the
shoreland zone, including the buffer area, but shall not apply to the General
Development District.
4. Existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained but shall not be
enlarged, except as allowed by this Ordinance.
5. Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees,
40
or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of Section 15.
Q. Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal.
1. Hazard trees in the shoreland zone may be removed without a permit after
consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer if the following requirements are
met:
a. Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of a hazard tree results in a cleared
opening in the tree canopy greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet,
replacement with native tree species is required, unless there is new tree
growth already present. New tree growth must be as near as practicable to
where the hazard tree was removed and be at least two (2) inches in
diameter, measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the ground level. If
new growth is not present, then replacement trees shall consist of native
species and be at least four (4) feet in height, and be no less than two (2)
inches in diameter. Stumps may not be removed.
b. Outside of the shoreline buffer, when the removal of hazard trees exceeds
forty (40) percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter,
measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above ground level in any ten (10)
year period, and/or results in cleared openings exceeding twenty-five (25)
percent of the lot area within the shoreland zone, or ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, whichever is greater, replacement with native tree species is
required, unless there is new tree growth already present. New tree growth
must be as near as practicable to where the hazard tree was removed and be
at least two (2) inches in diameter, measured at four and one half (4.5) feet
above the ground level. If new growth is not present, then replacement trees
shall consist of native species and be at least two (2) inches in diameter,
measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the ground level.
c. The removal of standing dead trees, resulting from natural causes, is
permissible without the need for replanting or a permit, as long as the
removal does not result in the creation of new lawn areas, or other
permanently cleared areas, and stumps are not removed. For the purposes
of this provision dead trees are those trees that contain no foliage during the
growing season.
d. The Code Enforcement Officer may require the property owner to submit an
evaluation from a licensed forester or arborist before any hazard tree can be
removed within the shoreland zone.
e. The Code Enforcement Officer may require more than a one–for-one
replacement for hazard trees removed that exceed eight (8) inches in
diameter measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the ground level.
41
2. Storm-damaged trees in the shoreland zone may be removed without a permit
after consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer if the following
requirements are met:
a. Within the shoreline buffer, when the removal of storm-damaged trees results
in a cleared opening in the tree canopy greater than two hundred fifty (250)
square feet, replanting is not required, but the area shall be required to
naturally revegetate, and the following requirements must be met:
1) The area from which a storm-damaged tree is removed does not result in
new lawn areas, or other permanently cleared areas;
2) Stumps from the storm-damaged trees may not be removed;
3) Limbs damaged from a storm event may be pruned even if they extend
beyond the bottom one-third (1/3) of the tree; and
4) If after one growing season, no natural regeneration or regrowth is
present, replanting of native tree seedlings or saplings is required at a
density of one seedling per every eighty (80) square feet of lost canopy.
b. Outside of the shoreline buffer, if the removal of storm damaged trees exceeds
40% of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at four
and one half (4.5) feet above the ground level in any ten (10) year period, or
results, in the aggregate, in cleared openings exceeding 25% of the lot area
within the shoreland zone or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is
greater, and no natural regeneration occurs within one growing season, then
native tree seedlings or saplings shall be replanted on a one-for-one basis.
R. Exemptions to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements
The following activities are exempt from the clearing and vegetation removal
standards set forth in Section 15.P., provided that all other applicable requirements
of this chapter are complied with, and the removal of vegetation is limited to that
which is necessary:
1. The removal of vegetation that occurs at least once every two (2) years for the
maintenance of legally existing areas that do not comply with the vegetation
standards in this chapter, such as but not limited to cleared openings in the
canopy or fields. Such areas shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this
section. If any of these areas, due to lack of removal of vegetation every two (2)
years, reverts back to primarily woody vegetation, the requirements of Section
15.P. apply;
2. The removal of vegetation from the location of allowed structures or allowed
uses, when the shoreline setback requirements of section 15.B. are not
42
applicable;
3. The removal of vegetation from the location of public swimming areas associated
with an allowed public recreational facility;
4. The removal of vegetation associated with allowed agricultural uses, provided
best management practices are utilized, and provided all requirements of section
15.N. are complied with;
5. The removal of vegetation associated with brownfields or voluntary response
action program (VRAP) projects provided that the removal of vegetation is
necessary for remediation activities to clean-up contamination on a site in a
general development district, or other equivalent zoning district approved by the
Commissioner that is part of a state or federal brownfields program or a
voluntary response action program pursuant 38 M.R.S. §343-E, and that is
located along a river that does not flow to a great pond classified as GPA
pursuant to 38 M.R.S. § 465-A.
6. The removal of non-native invasive vegetation species, provided the following
minimum requirements are met:
a. If removal of vegetation occurs via wheeled or tracked motorized equipment,
the wheeled or tracked motorized equipment is operated and stored at least
twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline, except that
wheeled or tracked equipment may be operated or stored on existing
structural surfaces, such as pavement or gravel;
b. Removal of vegetation within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from
the shoreline occurs via hand tools; and
c. If applicable clearing and vegetation removal standards are exceeded due to
the removal of non-native invasive species vegetation, the area shall be
revegetated with native species to achieve compliance.
7. The removal of vegetation associated with emergency response activities
conducted by the Department, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and
their agents.
S. Revegetation Requirements.
When revegetation is required in response to violations of the vegetation standards
set forth in Section 15.P. to address the removal of non- native invasive species of
vegetation, or as a mechanism to allow for development that may otherwise not be
permissible due to the vegetation standards, including removal of vegetation in
conjunction with a shoreline stabilization project, the revegetation must comply with
the following requirements.
43
1. The property owner must submit a revegetation plan, prepared with and signed
by a qualified professional that describes revegetation activities and
maintenance. The plan must include a scaled site plan, depicting where
vegetation was, or is to be removed, where existing vegetation is to remain, and
where vegetation is to be planted, including a list of all vegetation to be planted.
2. Revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and in the same
area where vegetation was removed and at a density comparable to the preexisting
vegetation, except where a shoreline stabilization activity does not allow
revegetation to occur in the same area and at a density comparable to the preexisting
vegetation, in which case revegetation must occur along the same
segment of shoreline and as close as possible to the area where vegetation was
removed:
3. If part of a permitted activity, revegetation shall occur before the expiration of the
permit. If the activity or revegetation is not completed before the expiration of the
permit, a new revegetation plan shall be submitted with any renewal or new
permit application.
4. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for trees and
saplings:
a. All trees and saplings removed must be replaced with native noninvasive
species;
b. Replacement vegetation must at a minimum consist of saplings;
c. If more than three (3) trees or saplings are planted, then at least three (3)
different species shall be used;
d. No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of trees and
saplings planted;
e. If revegetation is required for a shoreline stabilization project, and it is not
possible to plant trees and saplings in the same area where trees or saplings
were removed, then trees or sapling must be planted in a location that
effectively reestablishes the screening between the shoreline and structures;
and
f. A survival rate of at least eighty (80) percent of planted trees or saplings is
required for a minimum five (5) years period.
5. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for woody
vegetation and other vegetation under three (3) feet in height:
44
1. All woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height must be
replaced with native noninvasive species of woody vegetation and vegetation
under three (3) feet in height as applicable;
2. Woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height shall be
planted in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for
effective infiltration of stormwater;
3. If more than three (3) woody vegetation plants are to be planted, then at least
three (3) different species shall be planted;
4. No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of planted woody
vegetation plants; and
5. Survival of planted woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in
height must be sufficient to remain in compliance with the standards
contained within this chapter for minimum of five (5) years
6. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for ground
vegetation and ground cover:
a. All ground vegetation and ground cover removed must be replaced with
native herbaceous vegetation, in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent
erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater;
b. Where necessary due to a lack of sufficient ground cover, an area must be
supplemented with a minimum four (4) inch depth of leaf mulch and/or bark
mulch to prevent erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater;
and
c. Survival and functionality of ground vegetation and ground cover must be
sufficient to remain in compliance with the standards contained within this
chapter for minimum of five (5) years.
T. Erosion and Sedimentation Control:
1. All activities, which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities
which result in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall also
require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be
submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall include, where
applicable, provisions for:
a. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
b. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion
ditches.
45
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or rip-rap.
2. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to
fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts
and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours
shall be followed as closely as possible.
3. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the
proposed project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all
stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction
shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
4. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one
(1) week from the time it was last actively worked, by use of rip-rap, sod, seed, and
mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall
occur within nine (9) months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per
five-hundred (500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of
vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may
be required to maintain the mulch cover.
c. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation
into the water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or
silt fences.
5. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected
from erosion from water flowing through them. Drainage ways shall be designed
and constructed in order to carry water from a twenty-five (25) year storm or
greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with rip-rap.
U. Soils:
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or
structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental
impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and
water pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring
subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other
similar intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by State-certified professionals. Certified persons
may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional
Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other persons who have training
and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The report shall
be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land
46
and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The
soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil
limitations where they exist.
V. Water Quality:
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the State
any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will
impair designated uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream
or wetland.
W. Archaeological Sites:
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on
or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, as determined by the permitting authority shall be submitted by the applicant
to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least
twenty (20) days prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting
authority shall consider comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a
decision on the application.
11-1.16 Administration:
A. Administering Bodies and Agents:
1. Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed or
reappointed by July 1st.
2. Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the
provisions of 30-A M.R.S. § 2691.
3. Planning Board. A Planning Board shall be created in accordance with the
provisions of State law.
B. Permits Required:
After the effective date of this Ordinance no person shall, without first obtaining a
permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the
district in which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an
existing use or structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person who
is issued a permit pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a copy of the permit on site
while the work authorized by the permit is performed.
1. A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as long as:
47
a. The replacement culvert is not more than twenty-five (25%) longer than the culvert
being replaced;
b. The replacement culvert is not longer than seventy-five (75) feet; and
c. Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the
water, and the crossing does not block fish passage in the watercourse.
2. A permit is not required for an archeological excavation as long as the excavation
is conducted by an archeologist listed on the State Historic Preservation Officer’s
level 1 or level 2 approved list, and unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is
prevented by means of adequate and timely temporary and permanent
stabilization measures.
3. Any permit required by this Ordinance shall be in addition to any other permit
required by other law or ordinance.
C. Permit Application:
1. Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application, including a scaled
site plan, on a form provided by the municipality, to the appropriate official as
indicated in Section 14.
2. All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can show evidence
of right, title, or interest in the property or by an agent, representative, tenant, or
contractor of the owner with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit
hereunder, certifying that the information in the application is complete and correct.
3. All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board, as appropriate, shall note upon each application the date and time of its
receipt.
4. If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a
completed application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation
approved by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be submitted whenever the nature of
the proposed structure or use would require the installation of a subsurface
sewage disposal system.
5. When an excavation contractor will perform an activity that requires or results in
more than one (1) cubic yard of soil disturbance, the person responsible for
management of erosion and sedimentation control practices at the site must be
certified in erosion control practices by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection. This person must be present at the site each day earthmoving activity
occurs for a duration that is sufficient to ensure that proper erosion and
sedimentation control practices are followed. This is required until erosion and
sedimentation control measures have been installed, which will either stay in place
48
permanently or stay in place until the area is sufficiently covered with vegetation
necessary to prevent soil erosion. The name and certification number of the
person who will oversee the activity causing or resulting in soil disturbance shall be
included on the permit application. This requirement does not apply to a person or
firm engaged in agriculture or timber harvesting if Best Management Practices
(BMP) for erosion and sedimentation control are used; and municipal, State and
federal employees engaged in projects associated with that employment.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits:
Within thirty-five (35) days of the date of receiving a written application, the Planning
Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as indicated in Section 14, shall notify the
applicant in writing either that the application is a complete application, or, if the
application is incomplete, that specified additional material is needed to make the
application complete. The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, as
appropriate, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all permit applications in
writing within thirty-five (35) days of receiving a completed application. However, if the
Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision on the application shall
occur within thirty-five (35) days after the first available date on the Planning Board's
agenda following receipt of the completed application, or within thirty-five (35) days of
the public hearing, if the proposed use or structure is found to be in conformance with
the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in
conformity with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the Board shall
approve an application or approve it with conditions if it makes a positive finding based
on the information presented that the proposed use:
1. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
2. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
3. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
4. Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or
other wildlife habitat;
5. Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland
waters;
6. Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan;
7. Will avoid problems associated with flood plain development and use; and
49
8. Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as
conditions shall be stated in writing. No approval shall be granted for an application
involving a structure if the structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or
would violate any other local ordinance or regulation or statute administered by the
municipality.
E. Special Exceptions:
In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16.D., above, excepting structure setback
requirements, the Planning Board may approve a permit for a single residential
structure the Resource Protection District or the Agricultural and Forest District
provided that the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
1. There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource
Protection District, where the structure can be built.
2. The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established
and recorded in the Registry of Deeds of the county in which the lot is located
before the adoption of the Resource Protection District.
3. All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems, and other improvements are:
a. Located on natural ground slopes of less than twenty percent (20%); and
b. Located outside the floodway of the 100-year flood-plain along rivers and
artificially formed great ponds along rivers, based on detailed flood insurance
studies and as delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all
buildings, including basements, are elevated at least one (1) foot above the
100-year floodplain elevation; and the development is otherwise in compliance
with any applicable municipal floodplain ordinance.
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency
Maps, it is deemed to be one half (½) the width of the 100-year floodplain.
4. The total footprint, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of all
principal and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of fifteen-hundred
(1,500) square feet. This limitation shall not be reduced by variance.
5. All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from
the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland to the greatest practical extent, but not less than seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance. In determining the greatest practical extent, the Planning
Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil
50
erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed building
site’s elevation in regard to the flood-plain, and its proximity to moderate-value and
high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration and Extension of Permit and Completion Date
1. Expiration of Permit
All Shoreland Zoning permits shall expire within one (1) year of the date of
issuance if a substantial start is not made in construction or in the use of the
property during that period. If work is not completed within two (2) years from
the date of issuance, a new application must be made (See 3 Extension of
Completion Date). The CEO shall make determinations regarding
commencement and completion.
a. In determining commencement the CEO shall consider:
1) Surveying;
2) Land work (to include but not be limited to clearing, grading, erosion and
storm water runoff control and access road preparation); and
3) Foundation work if applicable
b. In determining completion the CEO shall consider:
1) Final grading;
2) Completion of access roads to include final surfacing, culverts, and
ditches;
3) Permanent erosion and storm water runoff control;
4) External building completion; and
5) Finished landscaping and seeding of appropriate areas.
2. Extension of Permit
Permits may be extended for one (1) year from the date of issuance by the CEO
for projects not commencing within one (1) year of initial Board approval. Written
extension requests must be submitted to the CEO at least forty-five (45) days
before the one (1) year expiration.
Proposal approvals which are granted a one (1) year extension from the date of
51
issuance shall also have their completion date extended by one (1) year.
Before extending an approval the CEO must determine that extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant exist. Extenuating
circumstances may include but are not limited to procurement of financing, legal
issues, availability of materials, availability of qualified contractors, and adverse
weather conditions.
3. Extension of Completion Date
The CEO may extend the completion date of a commenced project by one (1)
year beyond the allotted two (2) years. In determining this extension the CEO
shall consider factors such as, but not limited to, financial hardship, legal
difficulties, site condition problems, contract delay, disruption in supply of labor
and/or materials, or personal issues (illness, injury, death in the family, etc.)
G. Installation of Public Utility Service:
A public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind may
not install services to any new structure located in the shoreland zone unless written
authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under
this or any previous ordinance has been issued by the appropriate municipal officials
or other written arrangements have been made between the municipal officials and
the utility.
H. Appeals:
1. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have the
following powers:
a. Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an
appellate basis, where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error
in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act
by, the Planning Board in the administration of this Ordinance; and to hear and
decide administrative appeals on a de novo basis where it is alleged by an
aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in his
or her review of and action on a permit application under this Ordinance. Any
order, requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act, in the
enforcement of this Ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
b. Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations
set forth in this Ordinance.
2. Variance Appeals. Variances may be granted only under the following conditions:
52
a. Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including, but
not limited to, lot width, structure height, percent of lot coverage, and setback
requirements.
b. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise
prohibited by Ordinance.
c. The Board of Appeals shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
1) The proposed structure or use would meet all provisions of Section 15,
except for the specific provision which has created the non-conformity and
from which relief is sought; and
2) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in undue
hardship. The term "undue hardship" means:
a) That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
b) That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not the general conditions of the neighborhood;
c) That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality; and
d) That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner.
d. Notwithstanding Section 16.H.2.c.2), above, the Board of Appeals or the Code
Enforcement Officer if authorized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S. §4353-A,
may grant a variance to an owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of
making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or
regularly uses the dwelling. The Board shall restrict any variance granted
under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the construction
of structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person
with the disability. The Board shall impose conditions on the variance,
including limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that
the person with the disability lives in the dwelling. The term “structures
necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling” shall include railing, wall
or roof systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the structure. Any
permit issued pursuant to this subsection is subject to Sections 16.H.2.f. and
16.H.4.b.4), below.
e. The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in
order to ensure conformance with the purposes and provisions of this
Ordinance to the greatest extent possible, and in doing so may impose such
conditions to a variance as it deems necessary. The party receiving the
53
variance shall comply with any conditions imposed.
f. A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting
information supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal
officials to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection at
least twenty (20) days prior to action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments
received from the Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals
shall be made part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by the
Board of Appeals.
3. Administrative Appeals
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer,
the Board of Appeals shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may
receive and consider new evidence and testimony, be it oral or written testimony.
When acting in “de novo” capacity the Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the
matter afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of evidence and the law,
and reaching its own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it shall hold
an appellate hearing, and may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only
upon finding the decision was contrary to specific provision of the Ordinance or
contrary to the facts presented to the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals may
only review the record of the proceedings before the Planning Board. The Board
of Appeals shall not receive or consider any evidence which was not presented to
the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals may receive and consider written or
oral arguments. If the Board of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning
Board proceedings are inadequate, the Board of Appeals may remand the matter
to the Planning Board for additional fact finding.
4. Appeal Procedure:
a. Making an Appeal:
1) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals
by an aggrieved party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or
the Planning Board, except for enforcement related matters as described in
Section 16.H.1.a., above. Such an appeal shall be taken within thirty (30)
days of the date of the official written decision appealed from and not
otherwise, except that the Appeals Board, upon a showing of good cause,
may waive the thirty (30) day requirement.
2) Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals
a written notice of appeal, which includes:
a) A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why
the appeal or variance should be granted.
54
b) A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings
and structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to the
relief sought.
3) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal or a variance,
the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall
transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of
the decision appealed from.
4) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an administrative
appeal or a request for a variance within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt
of a complete written application, unless this time period is extended by
the parties.
b. Decision by Board of Appeals:
1) A majority of the full voting membership of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
2) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
3) The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and variance appeals
within thirty-five (35) days after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a
written decision on all appeals.
4) All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a
statement of findings and conclusions as well as the reasons or basis
therefore, and the appropriate order, relief or denial thereof. The Board of
Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its decision, including a
statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by the Board. The
Board shall cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or handdelivered
to the applicant and to the Department of Environmental
Protection within seven (7) days of the Board’s decision. Copies of
decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board,
Code Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers.
5. Appeal to Superior Court: Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S. § 2691(3)(F), any
aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the
Board of Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State
laws within forty-five (45) days from the date of any decision of the Board of
Appeals.
6. Reconsideration: In accordance with 30-A M.R.S. § 2691(3)(F), the Board of
Appeals may reconsider any decision within forty-five (45) days of its prior
decision. A request to the Board to reconsider a decision must be filed within ten
(10) days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the
55
action taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed within forty-five
(45) days of the date of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a
decision shall require a positive vote of the majority of the Board members
originally voting on the decision, and proper notification to the landowner,
petitioner, Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and other parties of interest,
including abutters and those who testified at the original hearing(s). The Board
may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within fifteen
(15) days after the decision on reconsideration.
I. Enforcement:
1. Nuisances - Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
2. Code Enforcement Officer:
a. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of
this Ordinance is being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of
land, buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or
structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall
be submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as a permanent
record.
b. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to insure
compliance with all applicable laws and conditions attached to permit
approvals. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all complaints
of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
c. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential
transactions of the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or
denied, variances granted or denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits,
appeals, court actions, violations investigated, violations found, and fees
collected.
3. Legal Actions: When the above action does not result in the correction or
abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon
notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and
all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions
of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the municipality. The
municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into
administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
56
Ordinance and recovering fines without Court action. Such agreements shall not
allow an illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing
evidence that the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct
result of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal official and there is no
evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the removal of the structure
or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and safety or will result in
substantial environmental damage.
4. Fines: Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent
or a contractor, who violates any provision or requirement of this Ordinance shall
be penalized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S. § 4452.
11-1.17 Definitions:
Accessory structure or use - a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated shall not subordinate the
principal use of the lot. A deck or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage
attached to the principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the
principal structure.
Aggrieved party - an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the
granting or denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land
abuts land for which a permit or variance has been granted; or any other person or group
of persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of
such permit or variance.
Agriculture - the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or
animals, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy
animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables;
and ornamental and green house products. Agriculture does not include forest
management and timber harvesting activities.
Aquaculture - the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater plant or animal
species.
Basal Area - the area of cross-section of a tree stem at four and one half (4-½) feet above
ground level and inclusive of bark.
Basement - any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of six (6) feet or more
and having more than fifty percent (50%) of its volume below the existing ground level.
Boat Launching Facility - a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of
watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for
vehicles and trailers.
Bureau of Forestry - State of Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and
57
Forestry.
Campground - any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in
temporary living quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other
shelters.
Canopy - the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Commercial use - the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home
occupation," defined below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of
income from the buying and selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of
residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
Cross-sectional area - the cross-sectional area of a stream or tributary channel is
determined by multiplying the stream or tributary stream channel width by the average
stream or tributary stream channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is
the straight line distance from the normal high-water line on one side of the channel to the
normal high-water line on the opposite side of the channel. The average stream or
tributary stream channel depth is the average of the vertical distances from a straight line
between the normal high-water lines of the stream or tributary stream channel to the
bottom of the channel.
DBH - the diameter of a standing tree measured four and one half (4½) feet from ground
level.
Development - a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation,
or the addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional requirements - numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including
but not limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability - any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or
mental condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental
conditions or illness; and also includes the physical or mental condition of a person which
constitutes a substantial handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental
handicap, by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory
impairment which requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or related services.
Disruption of shoreline integrity - the alteration of the physical shape, properties, or
condition of a shoreline at any location by timber harvesting and related activities. A
shoreline where shoreline integrity has been disrupted is recognized by compacted,
scarified and/or rutted soil, an abnormal channel or shoreline cross-section, and in the
case of flowing waters, a profile and character altered from natural conditions.
Driveway - a vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving two
(2) single-family dwellings or one two-family dwelling, or less.
58
Emergency operations - operations conducted for the public health, safety or general
welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law
enforcement, and operations to rescue human beings, property and livestock from the
threat of destruction or injury.
Essential services - gas, electrical or communication facilities; stream, fuel, electric power
or water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone
cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar
pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and associated storage
tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories,
but shall not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of
such services.
Expansion of a structure - an increase in the footprint of a structure, including all
extensions such as, but not limited to attached: decks, garages, porches and
greenhouses.
Expansion of use - the addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the
use of more footprint of a structure or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family - one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping
unit.
Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation by more than one (1) foot in height.
Floor area - the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by
exterior walls.
Footprint – the entire area of ground covered by the structure(s) on a lot, including but not
limited to cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, as well as unenclosed
structures, such as patios and decks.
Forest management activities - timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation
activities, pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand
improvement, pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated
activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or maintenance of
roads.
Forested wetland - a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6)
meters tall or taller [approximately twenty (20) feet].
Forest stand - a contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class distribution,
composition, and structure, and growing on site of sufficiently uniform quality, to be a
59
distinguishable unit.
Foundation - the supporting substructure of a building or other structure excluding
wooden sills and post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base
consisting of concrete, block, brick or similar material.
Freshwater wetland - freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than
forested wetlands, which are:
1. Of ten (10) or more contiguous acres; or of less than ten (10) contiguous acres
and adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook such
that in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of ten (10) acres;
and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a
duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support,
a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not
conform to the criteria of this definition.
Functionally water-dependent uses - those uses that require, for their primary purpose,
location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, inland waters
and that can not be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not
limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, waterfront dock
facilities, boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, shoreline
structures necessary for erosion control purposes, and uses that primarily provide general
public access to inland waters. Recreational boat storage buildings are not considered to
be a functionally water-dependent use.
Great pond - any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in
excess of ten (10) acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased
which has a surface area in excess of thirty (30) acres except for the purposes of this
Ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is completely
surrounded by land held by a single owner.
Great pond classified GPA - any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to 38 M.R.S. Article
4-A § 465-A. This classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers that
are defined as great ponds.
Ground cover - small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed
organic matter of the forest floor.
Harvest area - the area where timber harvesting and related activities, including the
cutting of trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road construction take place. The area
affected by a harvest encompasses the area within the outer boundaries of these
activities, excepting un-harvested areas greater than ten (10) acres within the area
affected by a harvest.
60
Hazard tree – a tree with a structural defect, combination of defects, or disease resulting
in a structural defect that under the normal range of environmental conditions at the site
exhibits a high probability of failure and loss of a major structural component of the tree in
a manner that will strike a target. A normal range of environmental conditions does not
include meteorological anomalies, such as, but not limited to: hurricanes, hurricane-force
winds, tornados, microbursts, or significant ice storm events. Hazard trees also include
those trees that pose a serious and imminent risk to bank stability. A target is the area
where personal injury or property damage could occur if the tree or portion of the tree
fails. Targets include roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, campsites, and other
developed area where people frequently gather and linger.
Height of a structure - the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to
construction) grade at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the
structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances that have
no floor area.
Home occupation - an occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a
residential structure or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with
the residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses; and 2) which
employs no more than two (2) persons other than family members residing in the home.
Hydric Soils - Hydric soils have been defined by the USDA Soil Conservation Service as
soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to
develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
Increase in non-conformity of a structure – any change in a structure or property which
causes further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the non-conformity
such as, but not limited to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback
distance, increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property changes
or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which cause no
further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the existing structure shall not
be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in
nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary
streams if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any
portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded
laterally provided that the expansion extends no closer to the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the existing structure from that water body,
tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions which in-fill
irregularly shaped structures.
Individual private campsite - an area of land which is not associated with a campground,
but which is developed for repeated camping and involves site improvements which may
include but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.
Industrial - the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing
of goods, or the extraction of minerals.
61
Institutional - a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library,
public or private school, hospital, or municipality owned or operated building, structure or
land used for public purposes.
Land Management Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of
motorized vehicles and used primarily for timber harvesting and related activities,
including associated log yards, but not including skid trails or skid roads.
Licensed Forester - a forester licensed under 32 M.R.S. Chapter 76.
Lot area - the area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below
the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas
beneath roads serving more than two (2) lots.
Market value - the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under
prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both
conversant with the property and with prevailing general price levels.
Mineral exploration - hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the
nature or extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and
which include reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction - any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes
more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock,
peat, or other like material from its natural location and to transport the product removed,
away from the extraction site.
Minimum lot width - the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only
two (2) lot lines extend into the Shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be
side lot lines.
Multi-unit residential - a residential structure containing three (3) or more residential
dwelling units.
Native - indigenous to the local forests.
Non-conforming condition - non-conforming lot, structure, or use which is allowed solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment
took effect.
Non-conforming lot - a single lot of record, which at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of
the district in which it is located.
62
Non-conforming structure - a structure which does not meet any one or more of the
following dimensional requirements; setback, height, lot coverage or footprint, but which is
allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or
subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-conforming use - use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is
not allowed in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments
took effect.
Non-native invasive species of vegetation – species of vegetation listed by the Maine
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry as being invasive in Maine
ecosystems and not native to Maine ecosystems.
Normal high-water line - that line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the
character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and
which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land.
Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland
vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level
of the river or great pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of
the river or great pond.
Outlet stream – any perennial or intermittent stream, as shown on the most recent highest
resolution version of the national hydrography dataset available from the United States
Geological Survey on the website of the United States Geological Survey or the national
map, that flows from a freshwater wetland.
Person - an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate,
partnership, association, two (2) or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or
other legal entity.
Piers, docks, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or beyond the normal
high-water line or within a wetland -
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7)
months in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more
in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Principal structure - a structure other than one which is used for purposes wholly
incidental or accessory to the use of another structure or use on the same lot.
Principal use - a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use
on the same lot.
63
Public facility - any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation
areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a
governmental body or public entity.
Recent flood plain soils - the following soil series as described and identified by the
National Cooperative Soil Survey:
Alluvial Fryeburg Lovewell Podunk Suncook
Charles Hadley Medomak Rumney Sunday
Cornish Limerick Ondawa Saco Winooski
Recreational facility - a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure
time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat
launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle - a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and
designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which
may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In
order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its
tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system - a system intended to replace: 1) an existing system which is either
malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the
structure, or 2) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential dwelling unit - a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively
for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time,
and containing cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile
homes, and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of
the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
Residual basal area - the average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested
site.
Riprap - rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion
control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to
one (1) unit vertical or less.
Residual stand - a stand of trees remaining in the forest following timber harvesting and
related activities.
River - a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that
point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25) square miles to its
mouth.
64
Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or
other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized
vehicles, excluding a driveway as defined.
Sapling – a tree species that is less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half
(4.5) feet above ground level.
Seedling – a young tree species that is less than four and one half (4.5) feet in height
above ground level.
Service drop - any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of
a water body provided that:
1. In the case of electric service:
a. The placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located
entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a
roadway right-of-way; and
b. The total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet,
horizontal distances.
2. In the case of telephone service:
a. The extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of
telephone wires to existing utility poles, or
b. The extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement
underground is less than one thousand (1,000) feet, in length.
Setback - the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body
or tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland to the nearest part of a structure, road,
parking space or other regulated object or area.
Shore frontage - the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a
straight line between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Shoreland zone - the land area located within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond, or river, within two hundred fifty
(250) feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
Shoreline - the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a fresh water.
Skid Road or Skid Trail - a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to
haul or drag forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of
which requires minimal excavation.
65
Slash - the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
Storm-damaged tree – a tree that has been uprooted, blown down, is lying on the ground,
or that remains standing and is damaged beyond the point of recovery as the result of a
storm event.
Stream - a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of
two (2) perennial streams as depicted on the most recent, highest resolution version of
the national hydrography dataset available from the United States Geological Survey on
the website of the United States Geological Survey or the national map to the point where
the stream becomes a river, or where the stream meets the shoreland zone of another
water body or wetland. When a stream meets the shoreland zone of a water body or
wetland and a channel forms downstream of the waterbody or wetland as an outlet, that
channel is also a stream.
Structure - anything temporarily or permanently located, built, constructed, or erected for
the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind, or
anything constructed or erected on or in the ground. The term includes structures
temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios, and satellite dishes. Structure
does not include fences, poles and wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated
with service drops, including guy wires and guy anchors, subsurface waste water disposal
systems as defined in Title 30-A, § 4201, Subsection 5; geothermal heat exchange wells
as defined in Title 32, § 4700-E, Subsection 3-C; or wells or water wells as defined in
Title 32, § 4700-E, Subsection 8.
Substantial start - completion of thirty percent (30%) of a permitted structure or use
measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system - any system designed to dispose of waste or waste
water on or beneath the surface of the earth: includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks,
disposal fields, grandfathered cesspools, holding tanks, pretreatment filter, piping, or any
other fixture, mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any
discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S. § 414, any surface waste water disposal
system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water treatment system.
Sustained slope - a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is
substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Timber harvesting - the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. “Timber harvesting” does not include the cutting or removal of
vegetation within the shoreland zone when associated with any other land use activities.
The cutting or removal of trees in the Shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two (2)
acres within the Shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting
or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to Section 15.P., Clearing or Removal of
Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
66
Timber harvesting and related activities - timber harvesting, the construction and
maintenance of roads used primarily for timber harvesting and other activities conducted
to facilitate timber harvesting.
Tree - a woody perennial plant with a well-defined trunk(s) at least two (2) inches in
diameter at four and one half (4.5) feet above the ground, with a more or less definite
crown, and reaching a height of at least ten (10) feet at maturity.
Tributary stream - a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface
water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a
bed, devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or
bedrock; and which is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary
stream” does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in
disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by human activity.
This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance,
and only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone
of the receiving water body or wetland.
Upland edge of a wetland - the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of
a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a
duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of
wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are
approximately twenty (20) feet tall or taller.
Vegetation - all live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both
over and under four (4) inches in diameter, measured at four and one half (4½) feet
above ground level.
Volume of a structure - the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed
exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body - any great pond, river, or stream.
Water Crossing - any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, or
stream, tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland.
Such projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines,
sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition
includes crossings for timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wetland - a freshwater wetland.
Wetland vegetation - technically called "hydrophytes" are plants growing in water or on a
substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water
content.
Windfirm - the ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist windthrow,
wind rocking, and major breakage.
67
Woody Vegetation - live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
11-1.18 Fees:
A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the Town Clerk and a copy
of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Planning Board and/or Board of Appeals needs
the assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be
paid in full by the applicant within ten (10) days after the town submits a bill to the
applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be
grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by the
municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to
such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An
applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision of the Planning Board may appeal that
decision to the Board of Appeals.
Whittier Rd
Fairbanks Rd
Holley Rd
Wilton Rd
Farmington Falls Rd
Temp le Rd
Industry Rd
High St
Titcomb Hill Rd
Davis Rd
Town Farm Rd
Bailey Hill Rd
S Strong Rd
Mosher Hill Rd
Webster Rd
Knowlton Corner Rd
Owen Mann Rd
New Vineyard Rd
Hovey Rd
Brown Rd
Weeks Mills Rd
Porter Hill Rd
Middle St
Clover Mill Rd
Lucy Knowles Rd
Mason Rd
Perham St
Voter Hill Rd
Main St
Morrison Hill Rd
Horn Hill Rd
Ramsdell Rd
Maple Ave
Cowen Hill Rd
Seamon Rd
Swain Rd
Savage Rd
Osborne Rd
Douglas Ln
Clearview Ln
Front St
Currier Rd
Vista Ln
Hammond Rd
Red Schoolhouse Rd
Anson St
Marvel St
Granite Hts
Marwick Rd
N Chesterville Rd
Twigsnapper Rd
Music Rd
Hardy Ln
North St
Hemlo ck Rd
Court St
Howard Ln
Brookside Ln
Box Shop Hl
Croswell Rd
Sewall Rd
Stanley Rd
Hillside Dr
Stewart Ave
Ski Slope Rd
Waugh Rd
Smiley Rd
Livermore Falls Rd
Dump Rd
Dunham Rd
Prescott St
Poverty Ln
Russells Mills Rd
Barlen St
Belcher Rd
Homestead Ln
Oakes St
Fyfe Rd
Galilee Rd
Trillium Ln
Bridge St
Franklin Ave
Earl Rd
Lake Ave
Eubank Ln
Tyler Ln
Woodfield Dr
Pear Tree Ln
Mohawk Dr
Perkins St
Old Quarry Rd
Chandler Ln
Fox Run L n
Philbrick St
School St
Clark L n
Sunset Ave
Johnson Hts
Skunk Hollow Rd
Broadway
Frederick Ln
Seminole Dr
Brier Ln
Dutch Dr
Barker Rd
Edgehill Ln
Cedar Ln
Harris Ln
Rocky Rd
Stone Hill Rd
Hill St
Sandy River Ter
Rosewood Dr
County Way
Spruce Ln
Highland Ave
Hilltop Ests
Corson Ln
Hurst Ln
Meadow Brook Hts
Pine Tree Ln
West Shore Rd
Mooselook Ln
Deerfield Ln
Gilbert Ave
Cherrywood Ln
Cook Ave
Durrell Dr
Archer Rd
Summit Ave
Welch Rd
Chuck's Ln
Shady Grove Ln
Smiling Goat Ln
Mt Blue Cir
Moore Ave
Depot St
Park St
Leavitt Hill Rd
Pierpole Rd
Cushm an Dr
Sunny Hill Dr
West Shore Rd
Farmington,
Maine
Farm & Forest
General Development
Limited Residential
Resource Protection
Stream Protection
Wetland
0 4,000 8,000
Feet
February 2010

2
Town of Farmington
Chapter 11 – Land Use
Table of Contents
Article 3 – Signs
11-3.1 Title 3
11-3.2 Authority & Administration 3
11-3.3 Purposes 3
11-3.4 Applicability 3
11-3.5 Validity 3
11-3.6 Conflicts with other Ordinances 3
11-3.7 Effective Date 4
11-3.8 Definitions 4
11-3.9 Permit Required 4
11-3.10 Exemptions 5
11-3.11 Prohibited Signs 7
11-3.12 Temporary Signs 8
11-3.13 Non-conforming Signs 8
11-3.14 Sign Standards by Zoning Districts 8
11-3.15 Enforcement 12
11-3.16 Penalties 12
11-3.17 Appeals 12
11-3.18 Amendments 12
3
Town of Farmington
Sign Ordinance
Chapter 11 - Land Use
11- 3.1 Title:
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the Town of Farmington Sign Ordinance
and will be referred to herein as “this Ordinance”. This Ordinance limits the erection of
signs to the zoning district(s) under the Zoning Ordinance Table of Uses; prescribes
definitions of sign terminology; provides for the permitting and regulation of signs; and
provides for additional miscellaneous standards for signs.
11- 3.2 Authority and Administration:
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling of Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of
the Maine Constitution and the provisions of 30-A M.R.S. §3001 et. seq. (Home Rule)
and Section 4312 et. seq. (Planning and Land Use).
11- 3.3 Purpose:
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate signage within the Town of Farmington in a
way which provides sufficient on-site identification of business locations while also
serving the public’s interest in having such signage erected to provide business
identification in an orderly, safe and functional manner.
11- 3.4 Applicability:
This Ordinance shall not exempt any property owner from obtaining other permits or
meeting any requirements of any other Town Ordinances, State or federal laws or
regulations. Where requirements differ from the provisions of this Ordinance, the
stricter shall apply.
11- 3.5 Validity:
If any part of this Ordinance is found to be invalid, the remainder of this Ordinance shall
remain in effect.
11- 3.6 Conflicts with Other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
11- 3.7 Effective Date:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date this Ordinance is adopted by the
voters at Town Meeting.
4
11- 3.8 Definitions:
Attached Sign. A sign affixed parallel to a wall or printed on a wall or window, any part
of which does not extend more than eighteen (18) inches from the wall. An attached
sign may not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building.
Ground Signs. A sign attached to the ground, or to a separate structure attached to
the ground, the sole purpose of said structure being to support the sign.
Person. Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or
corporation as well as an individual, but does not include a governmental unit.
Premises. One or more parcels of land which are in the same ownership and are
contiguous, and including all buildings and other structures thereon.
Roof Sign. A sign wholly erected on the roof structure or parapet wall of any building or
which is displayed above the eaves of a building.
Sign. Every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture,
stroke, stripe, trademark or reading matter, including awnings containing identification or
advertisement matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or
convey information when the same is placed so as to be visible from within any street or
public way, including the sign face and supporting structure.
Advertisement Sign. A sign which is used or intended to be used to attract
attention regarding commercial ventures.
Identification Sign. A sign limited to family name, address and/or name of property.
Sign Face. One entire side of a sign as viewed by an observer, which includes the
area of the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, and which
includes that part of the supporting structure forming the border and background
thereof. NOTE: If a sign is double faced, both sides of the sign apply to square footage
requirements.
Temporary Signs/Banners:
Temporary Business Signs/Banners. Signs/banners for products, services, or
promotion of same not to exceed thirty (30) days in duration.
Temporary Election and Campaign Signs/Banners. Signs/banners not
exceeding sixteen (16) square feet of sign face and erected no more than forty-two
(42) days prior to the election/campaign and removed within seventy-two (72) hours
after election/campaign.
Temporary Public Events Signs/Banners. Signs/banners for public events
erected at official municipally-maintained locations no more than fourteen (14) days
prior to the event and removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the event.
Visibility. Capable of being seen without visual aid by a person of normal vision acuity.
5
11- 3.9 Permit Required:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or keep within the Town of Farmington
any sign or other advertising structure as defined in this Ordinance which is visible
from within the limits of any street or public way without first obtaining a sign permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer and paying the required fee.
1. Applications shall be made on forms to be provided by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
2. Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay a permit fee
of twelve dollars $12.00 plus an additional fee of fifty cents ($.50) per square foot
of sign face for each sign over forty (40) square feet of sign face.
11- 3.10 Exemptions:
A. Exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of such signs from the
responsibility of complying with applicable provisions of this Ordinance. The
exemptions shall apply to the requirement for sign permit only and no sign permit
shall be required for the erection of the following signs:
1. One sign not exceeding one (1) sq. ft. in area and bearing only property number,
post box numbers, and/or the name of occupants residing at premises.
2. Signs including off-premise signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in
discharge of any governmental functions, or required by law, ordinance or other
governmental regulation.
3. Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, not exceeding
four (4) sq. ft. in area and bearing no commercial matter. Where confusion would
occur, the name of the business may be included on the sign.
4. Signs located on the interior of a structure.
5. One real estate “for sale” sign not exceeding six (6) sq. ft. in area per lot or per
dwelling unit located in the Residential, Village Residential, Village Business and
Farm and Forest, and not exceeding fifteen (15) sq. ft. in area per lot located in
the General Purpose and Residential/Light Commercial District.
6. Fuel price/informational signs meeting the following standards:
a. Sign size limited to one (1) sq. ft. each;
b. One (1) sign permitted per pump and per other product sold on premises;
c. Sign must be affixed to pump;
d. Sign must advertise motor vehicle fuel or motor vehicle product sold on
premises; and
e. Information attached to pump and describing how to use fuel pump is exempt
from standards.
6
7. Memorial signs or tablets, name of historic buildings and date of erection when
engraved in surface of building or constructed of permanent material.
8. “Posted”, “No Trespassing”, “Beware of Dog” and “Private Driveway” signs of no
greater than two (2) sq. ft. each in area.
9. Holiday decoration of a temporary nature and not containing advertising matter.
10. Scoreboards for athletic events.
11. Sponsor panels.
Though exempt from the permitting process, the following standards shall apply
to all sponsor panels:
a. Sponsor panels will be allowed to be located only at the athletic fields and
facilities.
b. Sponsor panels shall be no larger than 4’ high by 8’ wide.
c. All sponsor panels, installed at Hippach Field shall be made of steel or
aluminum. The dark green background color shall be an exact match to that
of existing panels, with white lettering for business names and logos. Phone
numbers or business addresses are not allowed.
d. All sponsor panels, installed at the Elks Club Little League Field in West
Farmington, Philbrick Park Little League Field in Farmington Falls, and Mt.
Blue High School Football Field, are allowed to use multi-colors and logos.
Phone numbers, and business addresses are allowed.
Any patron that wishes to erect a sponsor panel will commit to a three (3) year
agreement with the Town and will pay a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fee prior
to panel installation. There will be a renewal fee of $100.00 per year, thereafter.
Fees may be waived at the discretion of the Town Manager in the case of major
donors to municipal facilities. The patron will be responsible for the cost of the
panel and will follow the manufacturing guidelines as recommended by the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
12. Service bay instruction signs, such as instructional signs for automatic teller
machines (ATM’s) and food boards for drive-in restaurants, but which do not
contain other information which would not be needed by an individual utilizing the
service bay or drive-in facility. Such exempt signs shall not exceed fifteen (15)
sq. ft. in sign area.
13. Traffic or other federal, State or municipal signs, and legal notices and other such
temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs.
14. Temporary building construction with a sign face of not more than thirty-two (32)
sq. ft.
7
15. Election and campaign signs, provided such signs do not exceed sixteen (16)
square feet of sign face and are erected no more than forty-two (42) days prior to
the event and removed within seventy-two (72) hours after such events.
16. Public events signs, although not allowed within the public rights-of-way, may be
erected at official municipally-maintained locations for such signs, no more than
fourteen (14) days prior to the event and are removed within twenty-four (24)
hours after. See 23 M.R.S. §1925 and any subsequently adopted rules including
but not limited to those found in Chapter 201 and Chapter 203.
17. Official Business Directional Signs (OBDS), and traveler’s directional, church and
service organization signs, provided that such display no advertising matter but
only directional and informational matter for the public convenience.
11- 3.11 Prohibited Signs:
A. No sign shall:
1. Be directly affixed to any rock, ledge, or other natural feature (except for the
signs referred to in Section 11-3.10 A (8) hereinabove);
2. Interfere with or obstruct the view or safety of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
3. Be neon, flash, blink, fluctuate, move or be otherwise animated or consist of
banners, pennants, ribbons, streamers, or similar devices (except for the signs
referred to in Section 11-3.10 A (12) hereinabove);
4. Be mobile, portable or wheeled signs, except for permitted temporary signs;
5. Violate any provision of any State law relative to outdoor advertising;
6. Advertise or publicize an activity not conducted on the premises upon which the
sign is located (off-premise) except for those allowed by the Maine Department of
Transportation under the OBDS program, the Maine Travelers Information
Services Act, and MDOT policies;
7. Be located in any street or public right-of-way, public park or other public
property;
8. Remain on the premises longer than 30 days after the cessation of the business;
9. Signs containing LEDs are not allowed in the Town's Village Business Historic
District as defined in the Town's Zoning Ordinance in §11-8.9.E. (A).
B. Prohibited Locations:
All signs and banners of any kind shall be prohibited in the traffic island at the
intersection of Farmington Falls Road and Main Street, in the traffic island bounded
by Bridge Street, Water Street and the Wilton Road in West Farmington, in the traffic
8
islands at the intersection of High Street and the Farmington Falls Road, and all
municipally-owned property except as exempted in §11-3.10.A.16.
11- 3.12 Temporary Signs:
Temporary Advertising Banners. The Code Enforcement Officer may approve a banner
upon application of a business, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, when said
banner is for a new product, service, or part of a franchise promotion. There shall be no
permit fee. Such temporary signs/banners must be located on the premises on which
the business is conducted.
11- 3.13 Non-conforming Signs:
A. A non-conforming sign shall be defined as a sign legally in existence and erected on
or before the date of enactment of this Ordinance and may be maintained for an
indefinite time although not in conformance with this Ordinance.
1. Non-conforming signs shall not be enlarged or altered in a manner which would
increase the non-conformity thereof.
2. Any non-conforming sign which is damaged or destroyed may be replaced as
originally erected within a period of twelve (12) months from said damage. After
the twelve (12) month period, any non-conforming sign shall not be changed,
reconstructed or replaced except in conformity with this Ordinance
11- 3.14 Sign Standards by Zoning Districts:
All signs shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, safe and secure manner.
A. Farm & Forest
Residential
Village Residential Zones
The following standards shall apply to all signs in the Farm & Forest, Residential, and
Village Residential Zones:
1. Maximum number of sign faces permitted shall not exceed two (2) per lot.
2. Maximum sign size:
a. Signs for residential & home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) sq.
ft.
b. Signs for other permitted uses shall not exceed fifty (50) sq. ft.
3. The types of signs permitted are attached or ground identification signs.
4. The minimum setback shall be at least five (5) feet from the property line and
shall be clear of the State or Town right-of-way.
5. The maximum height of ground signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
9
6. No sign shall be located on the roof of a building.
7. No sign shall obstruct traffic, obscure vision and/or create a public safety hazard.
B. Village Business
Village Commercial
Residential/Light Commercial Zone
The following standards shall apply to all signs in the Village Business, Village
Commercial and Residential/Light Commercial Zones:
1. Maximum number of sign faces permitted per single use lot shall not exceed six
(6), (except for lots abutting more than one street, in which case two (2)
additional sign faces, either attached or ground, per each additional street
frontage are allowed).
2. Maximum total signage per lot shall not exceed one hundred (100) sq. ft. with no
individual sign to exceed fifty (50) sq. ft. in sign area. When lots abutt more than
one street and an additional sign is used, the total signage shall not exceed one
hundred twenty-five (125) sq. ft.
3. Types of signs permitted are attached or ground identification and advertisement
signs.
4. Minimum setbacks:
Village Business and Village Commercial: No minimum setback is required as
long as all parts of the sign(s) are located within property lines and shall be clear
of the State or Town right-of-way.
Residential/Light Commercial: A minimum setback of five (5) feet from the
property line shall be required. All parts of the sign(s) shall be located within
property lines and clear of the State or Town right-of-way.
5. Maximum height of ground signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.
6. No sign shall be located on the roof of a building.
7. No sign shall obstruct traffic, obscure vision and/or create a public safety hazard.
8. Signs on multi-unit lots. Notwithstanding the standards of B. 1-3 above, the
following standards shall apply to signs on multi-unit lots:
a. Individual businesses shall not be allowed to apply for a sign permit unless
they can show that their sign proposal is part of an overall sign plan for the
multi-unit lot which meets the standards of this section. The purpose of the
standard is to coordinate all the signage on a multi-use site;
b. One (1) attached or ground identification sign per business not exceeding
twenty (20) sq. ft. in sign area;
10
c. One (1) attached identification sign per each business in the complex with an
allowable sign area of one (1) sq. ft. per each linear foot of the business unit’s
building frontage, but in no case shall the sign exceed forty (40) sq. ft. in sign
area;
d. One (1) joint identification sign no larger than fifty (50) sq. ft. in sign area;
e. For lots abutting more than one (1) street, additional signage meeting the
standards of 8 b, c, or d above is allowed per each additional street frontage;
f. Illumination: All illuminated signs shall have lights which are shielded or
hooded so that the light source is not visible off of the premises. Only white,
mercury, sodium or metal halide lights shall be used for external illumination.
9. Signs in the Village Business Historic District. In addition to B. 1-8 above, all
signs in the Village Business Historic District shall be made of solid or composite
material that is opaque (not translucent or transparent) and, if illuminated,
externally illuminated. Any sign in existence at the time of adoption of this
amendment (07-19-04) that does not meet this new standard shall be allowed to
remain for the life of said sign. (Proof of existence shall be a valid sign permit on
file with the Town). Upon replacement of such non-conforming signs, such
replacement signs must be made to meet the new standard. Also see §11-
3.11.A.09 of this Ordinance.
C. General Purpose Zone
The following standards shall apply to all signs in the General Purpose Zone.
1. For single use lots the maximum number of sign faces permitted per lot shall not
exceed six (6), (except for lots abutting more than one street in which case two
(2) additional attached or ground identification signs are allowed per each
additional street frontage).
2. Maximum total signage per lot is not to exceed one hundred (100) sq. ft. with no
individual sign to exceed one hundred (100) sq. ft. The maximum signage total
may be increased by 25% for each of the following circumstances, if applicable:
a. The distance of the building from the road exceeds 100 feet;
b. The lot frontage of the business premise exceeds 200 feet;
c. The speed limit of the adjacent roadway is 40 M.P.H. or greater.
3. Types of signs permitted are attached or ground identification and advertisement
signs.
4. Minimum setback. All signs (unless otherwise stated) shall be set back at least
five (5) feet from the property line and shall be clear of the State or Town right-ofway.
5. Maximum height of ground signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet.
11
6. Roof signs shall not extend further than five (5) feet above the roofline of the
building to which they are attached, and are not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet
from ground level.
7. No sign shall obstruct traffic, obscure vision and/or create a public safety hazard.
8. Signs on multi-unit lots. Notwithstanding the standards of 1-3 above, the
following standards shall apply to signs on multi-unit lots:
a. Individual business shall not be allowed to apply for a sign permit unless they
can show that their sign proposal is part of an overall sign plan for the multiunit
lot which meets the standards of this section. The purpose of the
standard is to coordinate the signage on a multi-use site.
b. One (1) attached or ground identification sign per business not exceeding
thirty-five (35) sq. ft. in sign area;
c. One (1) attached identification sign per each business in the complex with an
allowable sign area of one (1) square foot per each linear foot of the business
unit’s building frontage, but in no case shall the sign exceed seventy (70) sq.
ft. in sign area;
d. One (1) joint identification sign no greater than one hundred (100) sq. ft. sign
area;
e. For lots abutting more than one (1) street, additional signage meeting the
standards of b, c, or d above is allowed per each additional street frontage.
9. Illumination: All illuminated signs shall have lights which are shielded or hooded
so that the light source is not visible off of the premises. Only white, mercury,
sodium or metal halide lights shall be used for external illumination.
11- 3.15 Enforcement:
Any sign not in compliance with any provision of this Ordinance, or any sign which no
longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, or agent or person having the
beneficial use of the premises, is a violation of this Ordinance. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall order the violation corrected within thirty (30) days. Failure to correct the
violation within thirty (30) days shall be a civil violation. The Code Enforcement Officer
is authorized to commence an action seeking penalties, injunctive relief, and attorney’s
fees to correct the violation.
11- 3.16 Penalties:
Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
requirements shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S. §4452. The owner or
tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein
provided.
12
11- 3.17 Appeals:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Code Enforcement Officer may appeal to the
Board of Appeals by filing a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
Code Enforcement Officer’s notification. Administrative appeals and dimensional
variance applications submitted under this Ordinance shall be subject to the standards
and procedures established by the Town of Farmington Board of Appeals Ordinance.
11- 3.18 Amendments:
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
1. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board of Selectmen has so
voted;
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of
votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial elections.
B. Public Hearing: The Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment. Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised in
a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least 7 days prior to the
hearing.
C. Adoption of Amendment: An amendment of this Ordinance shall be adopted by a
majority vote of a Town Meeting.
TOWN OF FARMINGTON
Site Review Ordinance
ENACTED: August 2, 1995
AMENDED: March 11, 2002
November 22, 2016
CERTIFIED BY: Leanne E. Pinkham
Town Clerk
Town of Farmington
Chapter 11 – Land Use
Table of Contents
Article 5 – Site Review
11-5.1 Title 1
11-5.2 Authority, Administration and Applicability 1
11-5.3 Purposes 2
11-5.4 Conflicts with Other Ordinances 2
11-5.5 Effective Date 2
11-5.6 Validity and Severability 2
11-5.7 Definitions 2
11-5.8 Levels of Review and Review Procedures 4
11-5.9 Approval, Conditions, Findings, Denial 12
11-5.10 Site Plan Revision 12
11-5.11 Expiration and Extension of Approval and Completion Date 12
11-5.12 Fees 13
11-5.13 Site Review Application Requirements 13
11-5.14 Performance Standards 22
11-5.15 Appeals 28
11-5.16 Amendments 28
11-5.17 Enforcement 29
1
Town of Farmington
Site Review Ordinance
11-5.1. Title
This Ordinance, which repeals and replaces the Site Review Ordinance adopted on
August 2, 1995, shall be known and cited as the Town of Farmington Site Review
Ordinance and will be referred to as “this Ordinance”. This Ordinance establishes a
process for review and approval of uses of land or structures, and construction,
alteration or expansion of structures; prescribes application and approval criteria;
implements the Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance; and provides for additional
performance standards.
11-5.2. Authority, Administration and Applicability
WHEREAS, the residents of the Town, desiring to preserve, maintain and promote
the viability, sustainability and quality of life which are characteristic of the Town,
adopted a Site Review Ordinance and subsequently wrote and adopted the
Comprehensive Plan as a guide to the growth and development of the Town; and
WHEREAS, the residents of the Town, recognizing that the particular use of land or
structures in a particular location may impact on community and/or individual goals,
adopted the Zoning Ordinance, thereby implementing one of the strategies set forth in
the Comprehensive Plan and directed the Planning Board to administer the Ordinance;
and
WHEREAS, there is a recognized need to balance implementation of the Zoning
Ordinance, the rights of landowners and their abutters, and the protection of that which
is held in common by all residents; and
NOW THEREFORE, this Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions
of Article VIII, part 2 section 1, of the Maine Constitution; the provisions of Title 30-A,
MRSA §3001 (Municipal Home Rule Authority) and the provisions of Title 30-A MRSA
§4312 et. seq. (Planning and Land Use Regulation Act).
The Planning Board of the Town of Farmington, herein referred to as “the Board”, shall
administer this Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall apply to all proposals regarding the use of land and/or structures,
alteration of land, and all construction of structures including erection, relocation,
alteration or expansion of such within the Town of Farmington.
Persons or entities wishing to change the use of land or structures as defined above,
must first obtain approval from the Code Enforcement Officer, herein after referred to
as the “CEO”, or the Board and shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and
other applicable ordinances. This approval must be received before any building
construction activity, or site preparation may commence.
2
11-5.3. Purposes
The purposes of this Ordinance are to:
A. Provide local review of projects, which may or may not be governed by State law or
regulation, that potentially impact the community or residents of the community and
to assure consistency with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan;
B. Protect public health and safety, and promote the general welfare and quality of life
of the Town;
C. Maintain and protect the rural, agricultural character of the Town by fitting projects
harmoniously into the fabric of the community;
D. Conserve the natural resources of the Town and protect the environment and those
resources held in common by the public from exploitation, abuse and degradation;
E. Protect historical, archeological, and recreational resources of the Town;
F. Balance the rights of landowners and/or tenants with the corresponding rights of
abutting and neighboring landowners and/or tenants and minimize adverse impacts
on adjacent property; and
G. Identify potential problems created by a particular project and seek alternatives that
minimize the impact on municipal services.
11-5.4. Conflict with Other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with other
provisions of this Ordinance, or of any other ordinance, regulation or standard, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
11-5.5 Effective Date
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be August 2, 1995. (To be updated after
amendments are approved at Town Meeting.)
11-5.6. Validity and Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
11-5.7. Definitions
In general, words and terms used in these regulations shall have their customary
dictionary meanings. More specifically, certain words and terms used herein are
defined below. Additional definitions maybe found in the Zoning Ordinance or in the
various referenced Town Ordinances. Definitions from all Town Ordinances are
collated in the Town of Farmington Lexicon for ease of reference.
3
Abutter. Abutter shall mean the owner(s) of record of property sharing a common
boundary with a given piece of property, whether or not these properties are separated
by a public or private street or right-of-way.
Agent. Agent shall mean a person empowered to act for another.
Applicant. Applicant shall mean the person seeking approval to change the use of
land and/or structures, alter land, or construct structures including erection, relocation,
alteration or expansion of such.
Aquifer. Aquifer shall mean a geological formation composed of rock, sand, gravel or
any other permeable bedrock or surficial geological formation that stores and transmits
significant quantities of recoverable water.
Campground. Campground shall mean a plot of ground upon which two or more
campsites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by camping units of
the general public for recreational use as transient living quarters.
Commercial. Commercial shall mean any connection with the buying or selling of
goods or services on or away from the premises including the provision of facilities for a
fee.
Hazardous Materials. Hazardous Materials shall mean any waste as designated by
the Maine Board of Environmental Protection in Chapter 850 of their Rules under the
authority of 38 MRSA, Section 1301, et. seq.
Historic or Archaeological Resources. Historic or Archaeological Resources shall
mean areas identified by a governmental agency such as the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission as having significant value as an historic or archaeological
resource and any areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
Home Occupation. Home Occupation shall mean an occupation or profession which
is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit
which is incidental to residential use and employs no more than one full-time
equivalent outside employee. The home occupation must be carried on by the owner of
the home, who is living in the dwelling.
Major Projects. Major Projects shall mean the construction of any new structures or
structure expansion or building addition having a total floor area of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet or more; and/or the construction of any surface parking area(s) for
more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet; and/or a change in the use of a total floor
area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
4
Owner of Record. Owner of Record shall mean the party, individual, entity,
corporation, trust or business which is currently listed at the Franklin County Registry of
Deeds as the owner of a subject parcel, lot or property.
Person. Person shall mean an individual, corporation, governmental agency,
municipality, trust, estate, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a
joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Public Street. Public Street shall mean a street or road maintained by the Town of
Farmington or the State of Maine.
Vicinity. Vicinity shall mean an area which encompasses the property and people who
live in close proximity to one another and share a common landscape with its inherent
sounds, noises, fumes, odors and other characteristics of a neighborhood.
Wetlands. As defined by Title 38, MRSA, Section 480 B.4
11-5.8 Levels of Review and Review Procedures
A. General Provisions
1. All changes of the use of land (as defined in the Zoning Ordinance Table of
Uses) and/or structure(s), alteration of land, and all construction of structures
including the erection, relocation, alteration or expansion of such within the Town
shall be reported to the Code Enforcement Office before they are commenced.
2. All proposals must comply with all applicable standards of this Ordinance, the
Zoning Ordinance and other applicable land use ordinances.
3. The Zoning Ordinance Table of Uses establishes the appropriateness of specific
land uses in six defined zones. This Ordinance establishes the process and
standards by which review is conducted. As such, proposed uses in certain
categories under the Table of Uses may only require reporting to the CEO.
Proposed uses in certain categories may be reviewed and approved by the CEO
if properly documented to prove minimal or no impact on abutting properties or
resources. All other proposed uses must be reviewed and approved by the
Board.
4. Certain proposed uses, because of the nature of the activities associated with the
use, may have more than one applicable use category in the Table of Uses. In
such cases the more restrictive category shall apply.
5. Proposed commercial or industrial uses not specifically listed in the Zoning
Ordinance Table of Uses or that would not be generally recognized by the CEO
as a subset of an existing category shall be referred to the Zoning Board for
interpretation, clarification and decision of where the proposed use fits in
the Table of Uses.
5
6. Overlay Districts and Subdivisions
a. Proposals within certain overlay districts and proposals for subdivisions must
first be reviewed and approved subject to application requirements and
performance standards set forth in the applicable ordinance or regulations.
1) Shoreland Zoning Ordinance (11-1)
2) Floodplain Management Ordinance (11-2)
3) Wellhead Protection Ordinance (11-7)
4) Subdivision Regulations
b. In addition the proposal may require review and approval subject to
application requirements and performance standards contained in this
Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance and/or other applicable land use
ordinances, when determined to be applicable by the CEO or Board.
B. Levels of Review
1. Uses Not Requiring Approval
a. The following uses, when listed as (Y) “Yes, permitted, subject to land use
standards” in the Zoning Ordinance Table of Uses do not require CEO or
Board approval.
1) Construction of detached single-family and two-family dwellings and
accessory structures.
2) The normal and customary practices of agriculture and agricultural
management activities. These practices shall be conducted, where
applicable, according to and described in the State of Maine Strategy for
Managing Nonpoint Source Pollution from Agricultural Sources and Best
Management System Guidelines published by the Nonpoint Source
Agricultural Task Force and dated October 9, 1991 and as amended
thereafter.
Construction of accessory structures or expansion of existing structures
used for normal and customary agricultural practices not exceeding five
thousand (5000) sq. ft. in new construction or not exceeding twenty five
percent (25%) expansion of any existing building in area.
3) The normal and customary practices of forestry activities. These activities
shall be conducted, where applicable, according to and described in the
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Maine Timber Harvesting
Operations dated February 1991 and issued by the Maine Forest Service
and as amended thereafter.
6
4) The relocation of an existing retail or service business within the Town of
Farmington which is in compliance with all local and State laws and
regulations providing that the relocation meets the following criteria:
a) The relocated business will be located within existing structures,
currently used for retail or service business and there will be no
new buildings, demolitions, or building additions; and
b) The relocated business will not require any new curb cuts,
driveways, or parking areas; and
c) The relocated business will not require any additional Town
services.
5) Home Occupations that meet the following criteria:
a) The primary activity associated with the Home Occupation is listed as
(Y) “Yes, permitted, subject to land use standards” in the Zoning
Ordinance Table of Uses;
b) The home occupation meets all of the performance standards
contained in 11-8.11.B of the Zoning Ordinance; and
c) The proposal does not seek to expand the dwelling or accessory
structure, or seek to construct a new structure to accommodate the
home occupation.
6) Telecommunication facilities exempted in 11-11.9 of the Wireless
Telecommunication Facility Siting Ordinance.
7) Earthmoving activities exempted in 11-9.10 of the Soil Erosion &
Stormwater Runoff Management Ordinance.
8) Extraction activities exempted in 11-8.11C. Extractive Industry
performance standard in the Zoning Ordinance.
b. Although the uses listed above (11-5.8.B1a.) do not require CEO or Board
approval they remain subject to and must comply with applicable
standards of Town land use ordinances. The CEO shall make available
information necessary to comply with applicable standards.
c. When the use does not require CEO or Board approval, the applicant must
complete a Registration Form with the Code Enforcement Office stating the
name, address and phone number of owner; name, address and phone
number of property owner (if different); and, if a business, the name, location
and nature of the business.
7
2. CEO Review and Approval
Uses listed as (Y) “Yes, permitted subject to land use standards” in the Table
of Uses means that the generic use category is acceptable in the zoning
district, however a specific proposal for change to a permitted use or
expansion of a current use, must be reviewed and approved by the CEO.
Before approving such proposal, the CEO must find that the specific proposal
conforms to the standards and criteria of this and other applicable ordinances
and meets the following criteria:
a. The use will not require alteration of existing land or the natural
environment beyond the parameter of the CEO’s authority under the
Town’s Shoreland Zoning, Floodplain and Soil Erosion Control/Storm
Water Management Ordinances;
b. The use will not require the addition of new structures or expansion of an
existing structure which seeks to expand by more than one thousand (1000)
sq. ft. or twenty-five percent (25%) in area (which ever is lesser) in any ten
(10) year period, regarding (but not limited to) floor space, parking area,
seating capacity, outdoor storage area or other facilities;
c. The use will not create health, safety or municipal resource problems;
d. The use will not have adverse impacts on the subject property or abutting
properties;
A proposal not meeting the criteria stated above and/or a proposal the CEO
feels he/she cannot approve will, at the request of the applicant, be
processed for review by the Board.
The Board and abutting landowners will be notified of all CEO
determinations.
3. Board Review and Approval
a. Proposals for use not meeting the criteria set forth in 11-5.8.B.2. above,
proposals the CEO feels he/she cannot approve, proposals subject to
review under 11-5.8.B.2. that a member of the Board requests Board
consideration and/or an abutter has requested review.
b. Uses listed as (Y*) “permitted subject to land use standards and Planning
Board approval” means that the generic use category is acceptable in the
zoning districts, however a specific proposal in a particular location must
be developed in accordance with a detailed plan reviewed and approved
by the Board. Before approving such uses the Board must find that the
specific proposal in the particular location conforms to the standards and
criteria of this and other applicable ordinances.
8
c. Uses listed as (*) “permitted on a site specific basis, subject to land use
standards and Planning Board approval” in the Table of Uses means that
the generic use category is not generally acceptable in the zoning district,
but that a specific proposal in a particular location developed in
accordance with a detailed plan reviewed and approved by the Board may
be allowed. In addition to providing all the submissions required for site
review, an applicant for such a use must submit a detailed statement
describing the probable impacts of the use with reference to the criteria
listed below. The applicant must demonstrate to the Board that the
specific proposal in the particular location conforms to the standards and
criteria of this and other applicable ordinances and meets the following
criteria:
1) The use will be developed, implemented and operated in a way which
is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and with the stated purpose
of the zoning district in which the use is to be located;
2) The use will be developed, implemented and operated in a way which
will not have adverse impacts on the subject property and on nearby
properties which are greater in degree or different in kind from the
impacts of permitted uses existing in the vicinity of the proposed use;
3) The use will be developed, implemented and operated in a way which
will not alter the essential character of the area in which it is located;
4) The use will be developed, implemented and operated in a way which
will not substantially reduce the value of or impair the reasonable use
of adjoining properties;
5) Sounds, noises, odors, fumes, vibrations, smoke, dust and discharges
to the air which will be generated by the proposed use shall not be
greater in degree, either in number of occurrences or magnitude
(levels) or concentration, or different in kind than those generated by
permitted uses existing in the vicinity of the proposed use. If detectable
at or beyond the boundary of the property, the use will be developed,
implemented and/or operated in such a way that the change in ambient
conditions, existing at the time, will not adversely impact residents in
the vicinity of the proposed use;
6) The hours of operation of the proposed use will be compatible with
those of permitted uses existing in the vicinity of the proposed use;
7) The use will be developed, implemented and operated in a way which
will not create public health, safety or municipal resource problems
greater in degree or different in kind from those connected with
permitted uses existing in the vicinity of the proposed use;
8) The proposed use will not create erosion and sedimentation problems,
9
water quality problems or problems associated with floodplain
development; and
9) The proposed use will not have unreasonable adverse impacts on
natural resources and archaeological or historic resources.
4. Additional Review Considerations
a. Notice to Abutters
1) CEO Review
Abutting property owners shall be notified by certified mail, by the Town, of
an application which the CEO determines is ready for approval by the
CEO. Abutters will have a fifteen (15) day period (from date of CEO’s
determination) to request consideration by the Board. The cost of
notification shall be borne by the applicant.
2) Board Review
Abutting property owners shall be notified by certified mail, by the Town, at
least fifteen (15) days prior to initial Board consideration, of a pending
application for Site Review. This notice shall indicate the time, date and
place of Board consideration of the application. The cost of notification shall
be borne by the applicant.
a. Onsite Visit
All applications shall have an onsite visit by the CEO. An additional site
visit(s) may be scheduled by the Board.
b. Public Hearing
If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall publish notice of the
day, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality at least twice, the date of the first publication to be at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The cost of advertising shall
be borne by the applicant.
Notice of the public hearing shall be sent through regular mail to all
abutters of the proposed development fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing by the Town of Farmington.
c. Professional Review
1) Professional Services
The Board may require that a fully qualified consultant(s) review one or
more submissions of an application and report as to compliance or
10
noncompliance with this Ordinance and recommend, if possible,
procedures which will result in compliance. The consultant(s) shall be
determined by the Board to be competent in a field germane to the I
issue under consideration and shall be mutually acceptable to the
Board and the applicant. The consultant shall estimate the cost of
such review and the applicant shall deposit with the Town the full
estimated cost which the Town shall place in an escrow account. The
Town shall pay the consultant from the escrow account and reimburse
the applicant if funds remain after payments are completed. If
escrowed funds are insufficient, the applicant shall deposit additional
funds with the Town, based on the consultant’s estimate, sufficient for
completion (if said completion is still desired).
2) Additional Studies
The Board may require the applicant to undertake any study which the
Board deems necessary to insure that the requirements of the
Ordinance are met. The costs of all such studies shall be borne by the
applicant.
d. Departmental Notification and Review
The application shall be forwarded to applicable department heads for
their comments and recommendations. All comments and
recommendations shall be received within fifteen (15) days unless an
extension is requested by the department head.
C. Review Procedures
1. The CEO shall review all proposals to determine if CEO or Board approval is
required and within seven (7) days make his/her determination and notify the
applicant.
2. Where CEO or Board approval is required, the CEO shall provide the applicant
with all necessary application forms, advise the applicant of review criteria and
performance standards contained in any applicable Town land use ordinances
and inform the applicant of any other submissions he/she feels necessary to
deem the application complete for initial review.
3. Where CEO approval is required, a second meeting will be scheduled for final
review of the completed application and required submissions. Within seven (7)
days the CEO shall notify the Board and the applicant of his determination.
An application which the CEO determines is ready for approval by the CEO
will be considered finally approved after a fifteen (15) day period (from the date
of the CEO’s determination) unless consideration by the Board has been
11
requested by a Board member or an abutter.
If such consideration has been requested the Board shall, at its next meeting,
determine if further Board review and approval is required.
4. Where Board approval is required, the CEO shall review the application and
required submissions to determine if all requested information has been provided
and required fees, reimbursements, and deposits have been received. Upon
completion of this review the applicant shall be placed upon the next available
Board agenda for Initial Review allowing for a fifteen (15) day processing and
notification period. The CEO shall forward the application to the Board along
with any written comments and recommendations from applicable department
heads provided that the proposal is not known to be in violation of any Town land
use ordinances.
a. Initial Review
The applicant, or his duly authorized agent, shall attend the meeting of the
Board to discuss the proposal. The Board shall provide the applicant with a
dated receipt of the Site Review initial application at the Board meeting where
the application is first presented and heard by the Board. If the applicant or
agent is not present, the Board shall table the review of the application.
Review of the application shall be rescheduled at a subsequent meeting of
the Board at the request of the applicant. Absence of the applicant at a
second Board meeting shall result in the nullification of the application and
will require resubmission of the application.
b. Complete Application
Within fifteen (15) days of the Board’s receipt of a Site Review initial
application, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing that the
application is complete, or what additional submissions and/or
additional studies are required for a complete application. The
Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing and/or conduct
an additional onsite visit once the application is determined by the
Board to be a complete application.
c. Subsequent Review
If additional submissions, additional studies, public hearing(s), or an
additional onsite visit, were required as a result of the initial review, a
final review will be scheduled by the Board to consider these additional
findings and to determine that the application is complete. The Board
reserves the right to require professional review of any submission in which
compliance or noncompliance with the standards of this ordinance or any
other applicable land use ordinance exists.
12
11-5.9. Approval, Conditions, Findings, Denial
Within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, or within sixty (60) days of receipt of a
complete application, if no hearing is held, or within another time limit as may be
otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the Board shall make
findings of fact on the application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application. The Board may attach conditions to the proposal approval to ensure
conformity with the standards and criteria of this Ordinance and/or other applicable
ordinances. The Board shall specify, in writing, its findings of facts and reasons for any
conditions or denial.
11-5.10. Site Plan Revision
The site shall be developed and maintained as depicted in the site plan and the written
submission of the applicant. Modification of any approved site plan or alteration of a
parcel which was the subject of site plan approval shall require approval of the revised
site plan by the CEO or Board, whichever is applicable.
11-5.11. Expiration and Extension of Approval and Completion Date
A. Expiration of Approval
All Site Review approvals shall expire within one (1) year of the date of issuance
unless work thereunder is commenced. Normally, if work is not completed within
two (2) years from the date of issuance, a new application must be made (See C.
Extension of Completion Date). The CEO shall make determinations regarding
commencement and completion.
1. In determining commencement the CEO shall consider:
a. Surveying;
b. Land work (to include but not be limited to clearing, grading, erosion and
storm water runoff control and access road preparation); and
c. Foundation work if applicable.
2. In determining completion the CEO shall consider:
a. Final grading;
b. Completion of access roads to include final surfacing, culverts, and ditches;
c. Permanent erosion and storm water runoff control;
d. External building completion; and
e. Finished landscaping and seeding of appropriate areas.
B. Extension of Approval
Proposal approvals may be extended for one (1) year from the date of issuance by
the CEO for projects not commencing within one (1) year of initial Board approval.
Written extension requests must be submitted to the CEO at least forty-five (45)
days before the one (1) year expiration.
13
Proposal approvals which are granted a one (1) year extension from the date
of issuance shall also have their completion date extended by one (1) year.
Before extending an approval the CEO must determine that extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant exist. Extenuating
circumstances may include but are not limited to procurement of financing, legal
issues, availability of materials, availability of qualified contractors, and adverse
weather conditions.
C. Extension of Completion Date
The CEO may extend the completion date of a commenced proposal by one (1)
year beyond the allotted two (2) years.
In determining this extension the CEO shall consider factors such as, but not limited
to, financial hardship, legal difficulties, site condition problems, contract delay,
disruption in supply of labor and/or materials, or personal issues (illness,
injury, death in the family, etc.)
11-5.12. Fees
A. All applications must be accompanied by the appropriate application fee that shall
be set by the Board of Selectmen.
B. All applicable fees including but not limited to postage reimbursement, advertising
fees, consultant fees, will be the responsibility of the applicant and must be paid
before receiving written confirmation of approval by the CEO or Board.
11-5.13. Site Review Application Requirements
A. General Requirements
1. If the applicant and the property owner of record are not one in the same, the
applicant shall provide evidence of consent to the proposal by the property
owner. A statement signed by the property owner, shall delegate to the
applicant the right to develop and implement the proposal in accordance with a
complete Site Review Application approved by the Board. This shall include
any changes or conditions required by the Board.
2. If another person(s) is/are to represent the applicant in dealings with the Board
that person(s) shall be designated as an agent, in writing, by the applicant.
3. All applications for Site Review shall be submitted on application forms
provided by the Code Enforcement Office. The required fees, ten (10) sets of
the application form, and ten (10) sets of the required plans, maps and
14
supplemental information shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Office.
4. Maps, plans or other drawings must of a scale sufficient to allow for review of
the proposal under the performance standards of this Ordinance and other
applicable ordinances. In no case shall the scale be more than one hundred
(100) feet to the inch for that portion of the tract of land being proposed for the
project.
B. Submission Requirements for a Complete Site Review Application
A complete site review application shall contain the following:
1. A fully executed and signed Town of Farmington Site Review Application
form;
2. A signed Site Review Check List of required submissions;
3. Property owner’s statement if owner and applicant are not one in the same;
4. Statement designating agents(s) if applicable;
5. Letter(s) of Review from applicable Town departments;
6. Copy of deed;
7. Evidence of payment of application fee;
8. A site plan if applicable (See 11-5.13.C1);
9. A detailed narrative appropriate to the project describing the proposed
development activity;
10. Building plans showing, as a minimum, the first floor footprint and all
elevations;
11. Required supplemental information or additional studies; and
12. Copies of all applicable local, State and federal approvals and permits,
provided, however, that the Board may approve site plans subject to the
issuance of special local, State and federal licenses and permits in cases
where it determines that it is not feasible for the applicant to obtain them
at the time of site review.
C. Site Plan Requirements
1. A basic Site Plan shall, for new construction and/or land alteration (not for
change of use within an already permitted structure) be sufficient to allow
15
review of the following items:
a. Dimensions of all lot lines (including street frontage) and total square
footage of the lot;
b. The location of all required setbacks;
c. The location, dimensions and first floor area (sq.ft.) and height of all
existing and proposed buildings;
d. Location and width of proposed streets, curbs, driveways, sidewalks,
bike paths, if any;
e. Location of existing and/or proposed fences, retaining walls, parking
spaces, loading areas, open spaces, stands of trees, open drainage
courses, service areas and easements (rights-of-way, drainage, utility
and grading, etc);
f. Location of wells and septic systems on site (planned or existing);
g. Plan scale and orientation to North; and
h. Location, dimensions, and character of all existing and/or proposed signs
and exterior lighting.
2. Major projects or any projects involving significant grading or the construction of
roadways, utilities, stormwater drainage facilities, or similar items shall have a
site plan prepared by a professional licensed to practice site design and/or
engineering in the State of Maine.
3. When an architect, engineer, surveyor, geologist, soil scientist or other
professionals licensed or certified and issued a seal by the State of Maine,
prepared the plan, the preparer’s seal shall be affixed to the plan.
4. An approval block must be provided on the plan drawing for the signatures of
the Planning Board and date together with the following words, “Approved:
Town of Farmington Planning Board”.
D. Supplemental Information
All applications shall contain at least a detailed narrative appropriate to the project
describing the existing conditions of the site and proposed development activities.
Depending on the size, complexity and/or nature of the proposal, the CEO and/or
the Board may require sufficient information on one or more of the following to allow
for review of the proposal under the performance standards of this Ordinance and
other applicable ordinances.
16
Supplemental information may be in the form of a detailed narrative, reports,
studies, surveys, charts, maps, plans or other drawings.
1. Existing Conditions
To allow for a thorough understanding of existing conditions on the proposed
site, information on one or more of the following may be required:
a. Location of zoning district boundaries of the property if located in two or more
zoning districts and/or overlay districts;
b. Boundaries of all contiguous property under the control of the owner or
applicant regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this time;
c. The bearings and distances of all property lines and the source of this
information. A formal boundary survey may not be required when sufficient
information is available to establish all property boundaries on the ground;
d. The location of existing buildings within fifty (50) feet of the parcel to be
developed and the location of intersection roads or driveways within twohundred
(200) feet of the parcel;
e. All existing contours and proposed grade elevations of the entire site.
Contour intervals shall be twenty (20) feet or as specified by the Board;
f. Locations and size of any existing sewer and water mains, culverts and
drains on the property to be developed and of any that will serve the
development from abutting streets or land;
g. Location, names and present widths of existing streets and rights-of-way
within or adjacent to the proposed development; and
h. Location, dimensions and ground floor elevations of all existing buildings on
the site.
2. Proposed Development Activities
To allow for a thorough review of the proposal, information on one or more of the
following maybe required:
a. Location, dimensions and materials to be used in the construction of
proposed driveways, parking and loading areas and walkways;
b. A utility plan showing provisions for water supply and wastewater disposal
including the size and location of all piping, holding tanks, leach fields, etc;
c. Location and nature of electrical, telephone and any other utility services to
17
be installed on the site;
d. A landscaping schedule keyed to the site plan and indicating the varieties
and sizes of trees, shrubs, and other vegetation to be planted on the site;
e. Locations of all existing and/or proposed easements (rights-of-way, drainage,
utility, grading, etc.) and other legal restrictions that may affect the premises;
f. An on-site soils investigation report by a Maine Department of Human
Services licensed Site Evaluator for sites not served by Town sewer. The
report shall identify the types of soil, location of test pits, and proposed
location and design for the subsurface disposal system; and
g. An Access Management Plan containing, as a minimum, the information
listed below:
1) Site description - A description of the site, including, as applicable, the
locations of driveways and streets located on any property immediately
adjacent to the site and across the street or road in the immediate vicinity
of the project driveway(s);
2) Overall use of the parcel - A description of the existing and proposed
uses of the site;
3) Traffic distribution - A description and diagram of the anticipated
distribution of traffic entering and exiting the site;
4) Vehicular circulation system within the parcel - A description and
diagram of the anticipated distribution of traffic within the lot and
the parking;
5) Trip distribution description and diagram - A description and diagram of
the anticipated distribution of traffic entering and exiting the site, to
include the relationship of all driveways and intersecting roads exiting
onto the roadway in terms of angle and grade;
6) Driveway volume - Accompanying the Access Management Plan shall be
a letter that shall certify the number of peak hour vehicle trips that the
proposed land use will generate (according to the Trip Generation
Manual, 6th Edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers
or any subsequent adopted revision);
7) Minimum sight distance for all exiting driveways in both directions –
Measurement shall be from the driver’s seat of a vehicle that is ten (10)
feet behind the curb (or edge of shoulder) line with the height of eye three
and one-half (3½) feet above the pavement and the height of object four
and one-quarter (4¼) feet; and
18
8) Driveway spacing - Spacing between the development’s driveway and
driveways on contiguous lots.
3. Impacts of the Proposed Development Activities
To allow for a thorough review of the potential impacts of the proposal on
adjacent properties, the community or the environment, information on one or
more of the following may be required:
a. Assessment of all machinery, processes and activities likely to generate air
pollution, fumes/odors, sound or noise, to include type, size, location and
potential impacts beyond the lot lines;
b. The provision for handling all solid wastes, including hazardous and special
wastes and the location and proposed screening of any on-site collection or
storage facilities; and
c. Traffic Impact Study
1) If the project meets a) or b) below, the developer shall provide a full
traffic impact study at his/her own expense:
a) Volume: During any one (1) hour period, traffic (inbound or outbound)
attributable to the development equals or exceeds one hundred (100)
passenger car equivalents per hour at the project driveway(s).
b) Safety or capacity deficiencies: The Planning Board determines that a
traffic impact study must be conducted because of traffic safety or
capacity deficiencies in the vicinity of the development.
2) In general, the Traffic Impact Study shall include a description of the
traffic movement to be generated by the development, including types
and peak hour, average daily vehicle trips, travel routes, and duration
of traffic movement both during and following construction. The study
shall contain, as a minimum, the information listed below:
a) Site description - A description of the site, including, as applicable,
the locations of driveways and streets located on any property
immediately adjacent to the site and across the street or road in the
immediate vicinity of the project driveway(s);
b) Use description (site) - A description of the existing and proposed
uses of the site;
c) Regional map - A regional map showing the site, and roads in the
vicinity of the development, and other proposed projects in the vicinity
19
of the development;
d) Description of traffic increases - A description of any traffic increases
that are likely to occur in the vicinity of the development during the
study period. The Developer shall include, as applicable, projects
that are: under construction and not fully occupied; are pending State
or local approval; or have State or local approval, but are not
constructed or fully occupied;
e) Trip generation calculation and summary table - The study shall
include a calculation of the trip generation for the development and
other likely traffic increases, including a summary table listing each
type of land use, the size involved, the average trip generation used,
and the resultant total trips generated;
f) Trip distribution description and diagram - The study shall include a
description and diagram of the anticipated distribution of traffic
entering and exiting the site; and
g) Definition of the study area - The study shall include a definition
of the study area, including all links and intersections using the
following threshold criteria:
i) The study area shall include the first major intersection to
either side of the project driveway(s);
ii) The study area shall be expanded beyond the first major
intersection(s) to either side of the project driveway to include
those links and intersections for which, during any one (1)-
hour peak period, traffic attributable to the development equals or
exceeds the following at any intersection in the vicinity of the
development:
- Twenty-five (25) vehicles in a left-turn only lane;
- Thirty-five (35) vehicles in a through lane, right-turn lane, or a
combined through and right-turn lane; or
- Thirty-five (35) vehicles (multiplying the left-turn lane volume by
1.5) in a combined left-turn, through and right-turn lane;
iii) Capacity analysis of signalized intersections located outside
of the study area may be required, if these signals are, or
should be, interconnected with an intersection located within
the study area. The study area may need to be extended, if
signal progression on a signal interconnect system is changed.
20
h) Use description and diagram (roads) - The study shall include a
description and diagram of an anticipated utilization of roads and
intersections in the vicinity of the development.
i) Diagram/documentation of traffic volume - The study shall include a
diagram and appropriate documentation of the traffic volume on roads
and intersections in the vicinity of the development for both the
estimated annual average daily traffic and the AM/PM peak hour
traffic (including turns during the peak hour). The study shall show
the following on the traffic diagrams:
i) Existing traffic volume based on actual counts;
ii) Traffic attributable to other projects that are proposed or
approved;
iii) Traffic attributable to the development assuming full build-out and
full occupancy;
iv) Projected traffic volume for the design hour at the time the
development will begin operation, assuming full build-out and full
occupancy of the development; and
v) Left-turn lane/right-turn lane warrant analysis.
j) Capacity analysis - The study shall include a capacity analysis for
determination of the level of service for each road and intersection in
the vicinity of the development. Capacity analyses must be
performed for all intersections that are currently operated or will be
operated as part of a signal interconnect system. The analysis shall
report whether or not length of storage for through or turning lanes is
adequate.
k) Traffic signal analysis - The study shall include an analysis of the
need for new traffic signals in the vicinity of the development. The
“Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices” shall be used as the
basis to analyze the need for construction or elimination of traffic
signals, as appropriate.
l) Sight distance determination - The study shall include a
determination of the available sight distance in all directions at each
intersection in the vicinity of the development.
m) Inventory and analysis of accidents - The study shall include an
inventory and analysis of traffic accidents in the vicinity of the
development during the most recent three (3) year period. A
21
collision diagram shall be provided for all links and intersections
found to meet MDOT criteria for “High Accident Locations.”
n) Description of improvements - The study shall include a description
of recommendations for improvements to deficient roads or
intersections, and the results of implementation of the
recommendations.
d. Assessment of stormwater runoff and potential effect on ground water and
contiguous soils.
e. Assessment of proposed exterior lighting and its impact on adjacent
properties.
E. Performance Guarantee
The Board may require the posting of an improvement guarantee in such amount as is
reasonably necessary to ensure the proper installation and maintenance of all offsite
improvements, and onsite improvements with offsite impacts, required as a condition of
approval. The nature and duration of the guarantee shall be structured to achieve this
goal without adding unnecessary costs to the applicant.
In the event that a development is abandoned, the performance guarantee may be
utilized to stabilize, secure, and/or restore the site as may be necessary, including, but
not limited to, re-vegetation of areas, grading and fencing.
11-5.14. Performance Standards
The following criteria and standards shall be utilized by the Board in reviewing
applications for Site Plan Review approval.
A. Landscaping
The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state and enhanced insofar as
practicable by minimizing tree removal, disturbance of soil, and retaining existing
vegetation during construction, and/or placing new plantings as specified in
Landscaping Standards of the Town of Farmington’s Zoning Ordinance (11-8.11 E).
Environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains and
unique natural features, and natural drainage areas will be maintained and
preserved to the maximum extent as delineated in the Town of Farmington’s
Floodplain Management Ordinance and by State and federal law.
B. Historic and Archaeological Resources
If any portion of the site has been identified or is found to contain historic or
22
archaeological resources, the Maine Historic Preservation Commission must be
notified and requested to make an evaluation of the site and include subsequent
measures for protecting these resources.
C. Relation to Proposed Buildings to Existing Environment
Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to existing buildings which
represent the historic character of the community and that have a visual relationship
to the proposed structures, so as to have a minimally adverse affect on the aesthetic
qualities of the developed and neighboring areas.
D. Vehicular Access and Parking
The proposed development shall provide safe access to and from public and private
roads. Safe access shall be assured by providing an adequate number and
location of access points, with respect to sight-distances, intersections, schools and
other traffic generators.
E. Off-Street Parking
A use shall not be extended and no structure shall be constructed or enlarged
unless sufficient off-street automobile parking space is provided. The location of
parking to the side or rear of buildings is encouraged. (See the Town of
Farmington’s Zoning Ordinance 11-8.11.D.)
F. Soil Erosion Control & Storm Water Management
Adequate provisions shall be made to minimize soil erosion and to allow for storm
water runoff so that the removal of surface waters will not adversely affect
neighboring properties, downstream conditions, or the public storm drainage. All
activities must be in compliance with the Town of Farmington Soil Erosion Control &
Storm Water Runoff Management Ordinance.
In addition, all erosion and sedimentation controls shall be completed in
conformance with the Best Management Practices (BMP’S) as described in:
The Maine Forest Service - Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Maine
Timber Harvesting Operations Best Management Practices. Maine Forest Services.
June, 1991 and as amended thereafter;
State of Maine Strategy for Managing Nonpoint Source Pollution from Agricultural
Sources and Best Management System Guidelines. NPS Agricultural Task Force.
October, 1991 and as amended thereafter; and
Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction Best Management
Practices. Cumberland County SWCD/Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, March 1991 and as amended thereafter.
23
G. Site Conditions
1. Within thirty (30) days of completion of building, developed areas shall be
cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees,
roots and debris and excess or scrap building materials shall be removed.
2. Final sitework must be completed within two (2) years from the date of issuance
(see 11-5.10 A).
3. No significant change shall be made in the elevation or contour of any lot or site
by the removal of earth to another lot or site other than as shown on the
approved Site Review Plan.
H. Advertising Features
The size, location, design, lighting and materials of all exterior signs and outdoor
advertising structures or features shall not detract from the design of proposed
buildings and structures and the surrounding properties, and must be in
compliance with the Town of Farmington Sign Ordinance.
I. Hours of Operation
The hours of operation of the proposed development will not have an
unreasonable adverse effect on prevailing conditions in the vicinity due to
noise during otherwise quiet hours of the day, excessive lighting during the
nighttime hours, conditions conducive to loitering, disorderly conduct or
public safety problems, or other conditions in the nature of a nuisance. If the
prevailing character in the vicinity of the development is rural or residential,
operation during certain nighttime, weekend and holiday hours shall be
presumed to have an adverse impact, but may be allowed by the Planning
Board if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed development can be
operated in ways which will not create adverse impacts during those hours.
These certain nighttime, weekend and holiday hours shall be determined on a
site specific basis by the Planning Board.
J. Special Features
Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations, service areas, truck
loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar accessory areas and
structures, shall be subject to such setbacks, screen plantings, or other screening
methods deemed reasonable, practicable and required by the Planning Board (see
11-8.9 E. and 11-8.11 E. of the Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance).
K. Exterior Lighting
All exterior lighting shall be designed to encourage energy efficiency, to ensure
safe movement of people and vehicles, and to minimize adverse impact on
24
neighboring properties and public ways. Lighting shall be arranged to minimize
glare and reflection on adjacent properties and the traveling public (see 11-8.11F. of
the Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance).
L. Emergency Vehicle Access
Provisions shall be made for providing and maintaining convenient and safe
emergency vehicle access to all buildings and structures. Fire lanes shall be not
less than twenty (20) feet of unobstructed width, able to withstand live loads of fire
apparatus and have a minimum of 13 ft. 6 in. of vertical clearance. An approved
turnaround for fire apparatus shall be provided where an access road is a dead end
and is in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet in length; the turnaround shall have a
minimum centerline radius of fifty (50) feet.
M. Public Services
The development will not have an unreasonable adverse impact on the public
services including municipal road systems, fire department, police department, sewer
department, and other municipal services and facilities.
N. Ground Water
The proposed development shall not result in a reduction of the quality or a
substantial reduction in the quantity of ground water. In making this determination,
the Board shall consider the location of aquifers and aquifer recharge areas and the
nature of the proposed development and its potential threat to ground water
resources. The Board may place conditions upon an application to minimize
potential impacts to the Town’s ground water resources.
1. The use will not decrease the quantity of ground water available on nearby
properties below that needed to support existing uses, potential expansions of
existing uses or allowable uses. Projects anticipating the use of more than
the State average yield of five (5) gallons per minute (7,200 gallons per day)
from bedrock wells and the State average minimum high yield of ten (10)
gallons per minute (14,400 gallons per day) from wells in sand and gravel
aquifers will require evaluation by a State licensed hydrogeologist.
2. The use will not increase the contaminant concentration in the ground water to
more than eighty percent (80%) of the State and federal Primary and Secondary
Drinking Water Standards.
3. For above ground fuel storage, and chemicals or industrial wastes and
potentially harmful raw materials, an impermeable diked area shall be provided.
The diked area must be sized to contain the total volume of fuel tanks and piping;
roofed to prevent accumulation of rainwater in the diked area and shall be
properly vented. There shall be no drains in the facility. All concrete, whether
walls or pads, shall be reinforced concrete and shall be designed by a
25
Professional Engineer Registered in the State of Maine when required by the
Board. All such storage structures must be approved by the State Fire
Marshal’s Office.
4. Underground petroleum tanks shall be installed in accordance with the standards
promulgated by the Maine Board of Environmental Protection.
O. Air Pollution
The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development shall not create
emission levels of dust, dirt, fly ash, vapors, or gases which could lower ambient air
quality, at any point beyond the lot line of the commercial or industrial establishment
creating that emission. All such activities shall also comply with applicable federal
and State regulations.
P. Fumes/Odors
The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development will not produce
offensive, harmful or unhealthy fumes or odors, that are greater in degree, or
different in kind than those generated by permitted uses existing in the
vicinity of the proposed use. If detectable at or beyond the boundary of the
property, the use will be developed, implemented and/or operated in such a
way that the change in ambient conditions, existing at the time, will not
adversely impact residents in the vicinity of the proposed use and/or
development.
An exception to this standard will exist when the Planning Board and
residents of the vicinity of the proposed development are generally in
agreement that the change in the ambient environment is acceptable. Such
an exception pre-supposes that there will be a recognizable change in the
ambient environment.
Q. Noise (unwanted sound)
The applicant must demonstrate that the nature of sound emanations from the
proposed development, regardless of sound pressure level, duration and intensity
will not be inconsistent with and will not be abhorrent to the ambient sound
environment (nature of sound emanations) generally experienced in the vicinity in
which the development is proposed.
An exception to the performance standard for noise will exist when the Planning
Board and residents of the vicinity of the proposed development are generally in
agreement that the proposed change in the sound environment is acceptable. Such
an exception pre-supposes that there will be a recognizable change to the ambient
sound environment.
R. Sound Pressure
26
The proposed development must not exceed federal and State mandated maximum
sound pressure levels at or beyond the boundaries of the development.
1. Sound Level Measurement
Sound pressure levels shall be measured with a sound level meter with a
frequency weighting network manufactured according to standards prescribed by
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. All
measuring meters must be calibrated by a certified laboratory and certificates of
calibration shall be made available to the Board upon their request.
Measurements shall be made at all abutting lot lines of the site, at a height of at
least four (4) feet above the ground surface.
In measuring sound pressure levels under this sections, sounds with a
continuous duration of less than sixty (60) seconds shall be measured by the
maximum reading on a sound level meter set to the A weighted scale and the
fast meter response (L maxfast).
Sounds with a continuous duration of sixty (60) seconds or more shall be
measure on the basis of the energy average sound level over a period of sixty
(60) seconds equivalent sound level (LEQ).
2. Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels
The maximum permissible sound pressure level at or beyond the boundaries of
the development of any continuous, regular or frequent source of sound produced
by an activity shall be as follows:
a. Sixty (60) dBA between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. as measured
at or within the boundaries of any residential zone.
b. Fifty (50) dBA between the hours of between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and
7:00 A.M. as measured at or within the boundaries of any residential zone.
c. In addition to the sound pressure level standards established above, best
practicable sound abatement techniques shall be employed to minimize noise
impacts.
S. Sewage Disposal
The development shall provide for suitable sewage disposal. All individual on-site
systems will be designed by a licensed Site Evaluator in full compliance with the
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
All installation and connection of building sewers and the discharge of waters
and wastes into the public sewer system shall be done in compliance with the
Town of Farmington Sewer Use Ordinance.
27
T. Waste Disposal
The proposed development will provide for adequate disposal of solid and
hazardous wastes in a timely manner. All disposal activities shall be done in
compliance with the Town of Farmington Solid Waste Ordinance and all applicable
State and federal laws.
1. All solid and hazardous wastes will be disposed of at a licensed disposal facility
having adequate capacity to accept the project’s wastes.
2. All hazardous waste will be disposed of at a licensed hazardous waste disposal
facility and evidence of a contractual arrangement with the licensed facility
and/or licensed hauler shall be submitted.
U. Setbacks
The proposed development will provide adequate setbacks and shall be done in
compliance with the Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance (See Sections 11-8.9 E).
V. Screening and Buffering
No industrial or commercial buildings or uses shall be established in, or adjacent to,
a residential use, or an existing agricultural use unless a landscaped buffer strip is
provided to create a visual screen between the uses. Where no natural vegetation
can be maintained or due to varying site conditions, the landscaping screen may
consist of fences, walls, tree plantings, hedges or combinations thereof. The
buffering shall be sufficient to minimize the impacts of any kind of potential use such
as; loading and unloading operations, outdoor storage areas, vehicle parking,
mineral extraction, waste collection and disposal areas. Where a potential safety
hazard to small children would exist, physical screening or barriers shall be used to
deter entry to such premises. The buffer areas shall be maintained and vegetation
replace to insure continuous year-round screening.
W. Connectivity
Highway Connectivity:
The Planning Board may determine that a proposed commercial retail and/or service
business project is best served by utilization of an existing abutting retail and/or
service businesses' highway access driveway versus a curb-cut for the construction
of a new additional highway opening to service the applicant's site. In these
instances, the Board may require that an applicant submit an alternative access plan
after discussing same with said abutter. It is understood that accomplishing such a
joined/shared highway access road requires negotiation and agreement, and likely
deeded easements and compensation for same.
28
The feasibility of such alternative access plans will be determined by the Board and
applicant jointly, based on factors such as financial, legal, physical, and
compatibility. The goal is to reduce the number of curb-cuts to increase highway
safety, enabling in-fill development of properties that otherwise might not be viable.
Background Connectivity:
The Planning Board may determine that a proposed commercial retail and/or service
business project is best served by utilization of a background connector to an
existing abutting retail and/or service businesses in addition to a new curb-cut for
the construction of a highway opening to service the applicant's site.
In these instances, the Board may require that an applicant submit
a background connection plan after discussing same with said abutter. It is
understood that accomplishing such a joined/shared connector requires negotiation
and agreement, and likely deeded easements.
The feasibility of such background connection plans will be determined by the Board
and applicant jointly, based on factors such as financial, legal, physical, and
compatibility. The goal is to allow and increase access to more businesses via
background connectors thereby reducing the number of vehicles having to re-enter
the highway to access abutting and neighboring businesses.
11-5.15. Appeals
Any person aggrieved by the final action of the CEO or Planning Board may appeal to
the Board of Appeals by filing a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after receipt of
the CEO’s or Planning Board’s notification. The CEO determination under §11-5.8C.3
that an application is ready for approval by the CEO is not a final, appealable action
until 15 (fifteen) days have passed from the date of such determination and no abutter
or Planning Board member has requested Planning Board review. Administrative
appeals submitted under this Ordinance shall be subject to the standards and
procedures established by the Town of Farmington Board of Appeals Ordinance.
11-5.16. Amendments
A. Initiation of Amendments
An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
1. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board of Selectmen has so
voted;
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the
number of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial elections;
B. Public Hearing
29
The Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment.
Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
11-5.17. Enforcement
A. Violations
1. Any violation of this Ordinance, including failure to comply with any condition,
shall be deemed to be a violation of 30-A §4452. Every day a violation exists
constitutes a separate violation.
2. Commencement of any project without Planning Board or CEO approval shall
be considered a violation of this Ordinance. Any party committing such a
violation shall immediately cease project operations, whether of a construction,
renovation or business nature, upon notification by the CEO per B.1. below or
upon self-discovery of the violation. In such cases, an after-the-fact (ATF)
application for Site Review must be immediately filed with the CEO. The ATF
application fee will be double the normal application fee and must be paid prior
to Planning Board or CEO review. Payment of this ATF application fee does not
preclude the Town from pursuing fines and/or penalties under 30A MRSA
§4452 (per A. 1. above and D. below) or preclude the Town from negotiating
and executing an administrative consent agreement to recover fines without
court action (per C. below).
B. Code Enforcement Officer
1. It shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the
CEO finds that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he/she shall
notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work being done,
removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement or mitigation of
violations. A copy of such notices shall be submitted to the municipal officers
and be maintained as a permanent record.
2. The CEO shall conduct on-site inspections to insure compliance with all
applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The CEO shall also
investigate all complaints of alleged violations of the Ordinance.
3. The CEO shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of the CEO,
including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions,
violations investigated, violations found and fees collected.
C. Legal Actions
30
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the
violation, the Municipal Officers, upon receiving written notification from the CEO,
shall institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable,
including injunctions of violations and the impositions of penalties and/or fines in
order to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The Municipal Officers or their
authorized agent are hereby authorized to enter into administrative consent
agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this Ordinance and
recovering fines without court action.
D. Penalties/Fines
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner’s agent or a
contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance, or
upon failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall be penalized in
accordance with title 30-MRSA Section 4452. The owner or tenant of any
building, structure, premises, or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor,
agent, or other person who commits, participates in, or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and be subject to the penalties
herein provided.
TOWN OF FARMINGTON
Soil Erosion control & Storm Water Runoff
Management Ordinance
ENACTED: November 18, 1999
CERTIFIED BY: Leanne E. Pinkham
Town Clerk
Town of Farmington
Chapter 11 – Land Use
Table of Contents
Article 9 – Soil Erosion Control & Storm Water Management Ordinance
11 – 9.1 Title 1
11 – 9.2 Authority & Administration 1
11 – 9.3 Purpose 1
11 – 9.4 Applicability 1
11 – 9.5 Conflicts with Other Ordinances 1
11 – 9.6 Effective Date 1
11 – 9.7 Validity 2
11 – 9.8 Definitions 2
11 – 9.9 Permit Required 2
11 – 9.10 Exemptions 3
11 – 9.11 Application Procedure 4
11 – 9.12 Enforcement 9
11 – 9.13 Appeals 11
11 – 9.14 Amendments 11
1
Town of Farmington
Soil Erosion Control & Storm Water Management Ordinance
Chapter 11
Land Use
11 – 9.1 Title:
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Town of Farmington Soil Erosion
Control & Storm Water Management Ordinance and will be referred to herein as “this
Ordinance” and prescribes definitions of earthmoving; provides for permitting and
regulation.
11 – 9.2 Authority and Administration:
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling of Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1, of
the Maine Constitution and the provisions of Title 30-A MRSA Section 3001 et. seq.
(Home Rule) and Section 4312 et. seq. (Planning and Land Use).
11 – 9.3 Purpose:
The purpose of this Ordinance is to conserve soil resources, protect water, maintain
public health and safety by regulating earth-moving and other activities resulting in the
exposure of soils, and to address the affects of development on both the quantity and
quality of storm water runoff.
11 – 9.4 Applicability:
This Ordinance shall not exempt any property owner from obtaining other permits or
meeting any requirements of any other Town Ordinances, State or federal laws or
regulations. Where requirements or conditions of any such permits, ordinances, laws or
regulations differ from the provisions of these performance standards, the stricter shall
apply.
11 – 9.5 Conflicts with Other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
11 – 9.6 Effective Date:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date this Ordinance is adopted by the
voters at Town Meeting.
2
11 – 9.7 Validity:
If any part of this Ordinance is found to be invalid, the remainder of these performance
standards shall remain in effect.
11 – 9.8 Definitions:
Earth-Moving Activities. Earth-moving activities means any activity in which earth is
moved from one location on a site to a different location on the site, in which earth is
removed from a site, or in which earth is brought onto a site, including, but not limited to,
any stripping of vegetation or topsoil, or any grading, excavation, filling or storage or
disposal of earth or soil.
Permit. Permit means a soil erosion control/storm water management permit issued
pursuant to this Ordinance.
Shoreland Zone. All areas as definded in the Town of Farmington Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance.
Soil. Soil means sand, silt, clay, gravel, rock, or any combination of any of the
foregoing.
11 – 9.9 Permit Required:
No person may engage in any earth-moving activity, as defined in this Ordinance, or
perform any activity resulting in exposure of soils, without first obtaining a Soil Erosion
Control/Storm Water Management Permit. This Ordinance provides for certain
exemptions (see Article 9.10).
A. Code Enforcement Officer’s Authority. The Code Enforcement Officer
(CEO) shall have the authority to act on soil erosion control/storm water
management permit applications for the following earth-moving activities:
1. Any earth-moving activity of ten (10) cubic yards or less within a
Shoreland Zone.
2. Any earth-moving activity of greater than twenty-five (25) cubic yards but not
exceeding fifty (50) cubic yards outside a Shoreland Zone.
B. Planning Board Authority. The Planning Board shall have the authority
to act on soil erosion control/storm water management permit applications
for the following earth-moving activities:
1. Any earth-moving activity of greater than ten (10) cubic yards within a
Shoreland Zone.
3
2. Any earth-moving activity of greater than fifty (50) cubic yards outside of
a Shoreland Zone.
3. Clearing of lots for commercial sale or commercial development.
(NOTE: The Site Review Ordinance includes additional requirements
with regards to clearing of trees, vegetation and/or soil).
11 – 9.10 Exemptions:
The following activities DO NOT require a soil erosion control/storm water management
permit:
A. Any earth-moving activity of twenty-five (25) cubic yards or less outside
the Shoreland Zone. (For earth-moving activity of greater than twenty-five
(25) cubic yards outside the Shoreland Zone see Articles 9.9 A 2 and
9.9 B 2).
B. Any earth-moving activity relating to the construction of a single family
dwelling or private, residential use projects of less than 5,000 square feet
of ground surface area, provided the earth-moving activity is not within the
Shoreland Zone and does not adversely impact abutters.
C. Any earth-moving activity required for the installation of any approved
subsurface waste-water disposal system (less than 2,000 GPD in capacity)
or sewer connection. (The disturbed area shall be loamed, seeded and
mulched within one week from the time it was last actively worked. Per
Best Management Practices (BMP’s), dormant seeding to be used in the
fall.)
D. Any earth-moving activity for approved solid waste disposal facilities.
E. Cemetery graves.
F. Tilling of gardens.
G. Agricultural activities such as plowing, earth-moving, tilling, and seeding
provided the person(s) involved follow appropriate BMP’s as described in
the manual entitled State of Maine Strategy for Managing Nonpoint Source
Pollution from Agricultural Sources and Best Management System
Guidelines published by the Nonpoint Source Agricultural Task Force
dated October 9, 1991. At least three (3) copies shall be kept on file with
the Code Enforcement Office and available for public use, inspection and
examination.
H. Forestry activities, including cutting, logging, thinning, planting, burning,
trail and road building, and harvesting, if the person(s) involved follow
4
appropriate BMP’s as described in the Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook for Maine Timber Harvesting Operations dated February 1991
and issued by the Maine Forest Service. At least three (3) copies shall be
kept on file with the Code Enforcement Office and available for public use,
inspection and examination.
I. Any earth-moving activities or exposure of soils required in an emergency
response involving public health or safety. Subsequent soil stabilization
activities at emergency sites are the responsibility of the landowner or the
individual or entity responsible for the emergency situation where
appropriate.
11 – 9.11 Application Procedures:
A. Code Enforcement Officer Application: (See Article 9.9 A)
The application package must include all of the following items:
1. A completed application form.
2. A general site location map.
3. A site plan including a landscaping plan, existing vegetation
preservation, and buffer areas.
4. A soil erosion control plan and a storm water management plan, which
may be presented in a written narrative form without a map.
5. All appropriate fees.
B. Planning Board Application: (See Article 9.9 B)
The application package must include all of the following items:
1. A completed application form.
2. A general site location map.
3. A site plan including a landscaping plan, existing vegetation
preservation, and buffer areas.
4. A topographical map.
5. A soil map.
6. A detailed soil erosion control plan and a storm water management plan
including a map and a written narrative.
5
7. A detailed description of the development plan.
8. All appropriate fees.
C. Soil Erosion Control Standards: The soil erosion control plan submitted
with an application for a soil erosion control/storm water management
permit must include appropriate practices as described in Maine Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction - Best Management
Practices (BMP’s) dated March 1991, and published by the Cumberland
County Soil and Water Conservation District and the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection. At least three (3) copies of this handbook shall
be kept on file with the Code Enforcement Office and available for public
use, examination and inspection.
Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and waterbodies shall
be minimized by employing the following standards in accordance with the
above referenced BMP’s:
1. Stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and regrading or other
development shall be accomplished in such a way as to minimize
erosion.
2. Except for surplus topsoil from road construction, parking areas, and building
excavations, topsoil is not to be removed from a development site.
3. The duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
4. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed
erodable areas during development.
5. Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measures
shall be installed as soon as feasible after construction ends.
6. Until a disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in run-off water shall be
trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or other
acceptable methods.
7. The top of a cut or the bottom of a fill section shall not be closer than
ten (10) feet to an adjoining property, unless otherwise specified by the
Planning Board.
8. During grading operations, methods of dust control shall be employed
wherever appropriate.
D. Storm Water Management Standards: The storm water management
6
plan submitted with an application for a soil erosion control/storm water
management permit must conform to the standards and practices
delineated in the Storm Water Management Best Management Practices
(BMP’s) as established by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection. At least three (3) copies of the BMP’s shall be kept on file with
the Code Enforcement Office and available for public use, examination
and inspection.
If the estimated post-development peak rate of storm water runoff from the
affected land is calculated to be greater than the pre-development peak
runoff peak rates, in any watershed within the boundaries of the affected
land during any phase of development, then a detention basin or other
acceptable engineered disbursement system shall be designed and
constructed to maintain pre-development runoff peak rates from the site.
If the outflow is to be conveyed into a man-made piped or open
drainage system, the applicant shall demonstrate by hydraulic analysis
that the downstream channel or system capacity is sufficient to carry the
flow without adverse effects. The design of piped or open channel
systems shall be based on a 25-year flow frequency without surcharge or
flooding of areas not specifically planned for such flooding.
Storm water runoff systems shall be fully cognizant of upstream runoff
which must pass over or through the site to be developed. The system
shall be designed to pass upstream flows generated by a 25-year
frequency through the proposed development without surcharging the
system or flooding areas not specifically planned for such flooding.
Storm water runoff systems shall be designed to assure provision of both
major and minor components which will serve the combined objectives of
access convenience, property protection, erosion control, and pollution
control.
E. Fees:
1. $50.00 – permit application fee*
2. These fees shall be doubled for after-the-fact permits.
*The Town of Farmington shall be exempt from the application fee.
F. Performance Guarantee: The Planning Board may require a
performance guarantee based on the projected complexity of the
proposed erosion control and/or storm water management measures
required of the project, and/or the potential for significant cost to the Town
and/or other landowners if the erosion control and/or storm water
7
management measures are not adequately installed. The performance
guarantee may be in the form of a bond issued by a reputable bonding
company, or a letter of credit, or cash from the applicant in an amount to
cover the estimated cost of installing and completing all erosion control
measures specified in the application. Any performance guarantee
required by the Planning Board shall remain in place and in effect until all
temporary erosion control and/or storm water management measures are
removed and permanent erosion and sediment control and/or storm water
management measures have been installed and found by the CEO to
be operating satisfactorily.
G. Application Procedure:
1. Submitting an Application: The review process by the CEO or Planning
Board begins with the receipt of a completed application form,
application fee, and with all the required plans and maps. Within thirty
(30) days from the receipt of an application, the Planning Board will
notify the applicant in writing whether the application is complete or, if
incomplete, which additional information is needed to complete the
application.
2. Complete Application: After the CEO or Planning Board has determined that
the application is complete, the CEO or Planning Board shall begin review of
the permit application to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
3. Public Hearing: The Planning Board may at its discretion, decide to hold a
public hearing on an application for a soil erosion control/storm water
management permit. In the event that the Planning Board determines to hold
a public hearing on a permit application, such a public hearing shall be held
within thirty (30) days after receiving a complete application. The Planning
Board shall give notice of the date, time and place of such hearing to the
applicant and shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at
least two times, the date of the first publication to be at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing. Public hearings will not be held on permit applications
reviewed by the CEO.
Within forty-five (45) days after the CEO or the Planning Board
determines that it has received a completed application, the CEO or
Planning Board shall, in writing, (a) approve the permit application and
issue the permit; (b) approve the permit application subject to conditions
and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or, (c) disapprove the
permit application, indicating the deficiencies. The applicant shall
comply with all terms of the application.
8
4. The CEO or the Planning Board shall approve an application for a soil
erosion control/storm water management permit when it finds that:
a. The proposed earth-moving activity will:
1. be conducted in accordance with soil erosion control and storm
water management plans consistent with the requirements of this
Ordinance; and
2. be conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Maine
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best
Management Practices, dated March 1991, or latest version
thereof, and published by the Cumberland County Soil and Water
Conservation District and the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection; and
3. be conducted in accordance with the standards and practices
delineated in the Storm Water Management Best Management
Practices as established by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection; and
4. not cause unreasonable erosion of earth or soil or unreasonable
adverse impacts on water quality; and
5. be done by an applicant who has the financial capacity and
an agent/contractor who has the technical ability to conduct the
earth-moving activity in accordance with the approved soil
erosion control plan.
b. The applicant has filed an acceptable landscape, existing
vegetation preservation, and buffer areas plan which is in
compliance with the Landscape Performance Standards of the
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Farmington.
c. Any aggrieved party wishing to submit additional information, not
previously presented, may file a new application.
H. Other Requirements: The CEO or the Planning Board may request
additional information deemed necessary to meet the provisions of this
Ordinance. The requested evidence or documentation, such as the
services of a consulting engineer, geologist, or the Franklin County
Soil & Water Conservation District (FCSWCD) shall be secured and
submitted by the applicant.
The notice of request shall include the reasons justifying the request for the
9
additional evidence or documentation. The Planning Board in a written
agreement from the applicant and at the applicant’s expense, may secure a
consultant, the District’s engineer (FCSWCD), or other qualified person for
all or part of the review process. The applicant shall provide the additional
information within forty-five (45) days unless agreed otherwise. All costs
associated with such review, including the costs of any consultants, hired by
the Planning Board will be paid by the applicant prior to issuance of a soil
erosion control/storm water management permit.
In the event that the CEO or Planning Board determines that the review of
an application requires additional evidence or documentation, the Planning
Board shall notify the applicant in writing within ten (10) days following the
determination that a complete application has been filed.
I. Permit Duration: Any work authorized by this permit shall be completed
within one (1) year of the date of the permit unless otherwise specified in the
permit. The CEO or the Planning Board may, upon a showing of reasonable
cause, renew a soil erosion permit for one (1) additional period, not to
exceed one (1) year, provided that the plans have not been substantially
changed since the original application, and provided that the applicant has
complied with the applicable soil erosion control and storm water
management plans and all conditions of the original permit.
11 – 9.12 Enforcement:
A. Responsibility: The CEO shall inspect the project area at any time as
necessary to insure compliance with the application, permit, and this
Ordinance. The applicant shall notify the CEO promptly once
the project area has been finally stabilized. Upon notification of final
stabilization, the CEO shall inspect the project area and issue a certificate
of final inspection upon determination of full compliance with the
application, the permit, and this Ordinance.
B. Violations: It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person:
1. to engage in any activity requiring an erosion control/storm water
management permit without first obtaining a permit;
2. to fail to comply with the terms of an erosion control/storm water
management permit or any permit conditions; or
3. to utilize improperly designed or installed erosion controls or
storm water management components.
Upon detection of a violation, the CEO shall require immediate measures
to temporarily correct the violation. Once such temporary measures have
10
been completed, the CEO may negotiate an agreement to permanently
correct the violation. If a permit has not been obtained, the violator must
immediately apply for an after-the-fact permit. The CEO may issue a stop
work order if conditions warrant, at which time all earth-moving activities
must cease. The violator shall make immediate corrective measures as
outlined by the CEO.
When a violator fails to voluntarily correct a violation, the CEO shall send
written notification to the violator, stating:
1. what the violation is;
2. the penalties for the violation;
3. means by which to come into compliance and;
4. a deadline for compliance.
Copies of this letter will be sent to the Town Manager and Town Attorney.
If the deadline passes without correction, the CEO shall contact Town
officials for assistance in pursuing enforcement through legal action.
Each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
Ordinance is committed or continue shall constitute a separate
civil violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section,
any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
required to restore the site to the condition existing prior to commencement
of the violation, or to bear the expense of such restoration. In addition, any
other penalty authorized with this section, the Town may seek injunctive
relief including restoration of the site to the condition existing prior to the
commencement of the violation.
C. Penalties: Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a
landowner’s agent or a contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in
violation of this Ordinance, or upon failure to comply with any of its
requirements, shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-A MRSA
Section 4452.
D. Inadequate Erosion & Sediment Control and/or Storm Water
Management Plans: The CEO may order the submission of supplemental
plans and implementation of additional erosion and sediment control and/or
storm water management measures deemed necessary to correct conditions
or problems not adequately addressed by a previous application or permit.
These plans must be submitted to the Planning Board if the Board issued the
permit. The permits shall be modified or conditions added as necessary to
meet the standards of this Ordinance.
11
11 - 9.13 Appeals:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board
may appeal to the Board of Appeals by filing a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days
after receipt of the Code Enforcement Officer’s or Planning Board’s notification.
Administrative appeals submitted under this Ordinance shall be subject to the standards
and procedures established by the Town of Farmington Board of Appeals Ordinance.
11 – 9.14 Amendments:
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be
initiated by:
1. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board of Selectmen has
so voted;
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of
votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial elections.
B. Public Hearing: The Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment . Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least seven (7) days
prior to the hearing.
C. Adoption of Amendment: An amendment of this Ordinance shall be
adopted by a majority vote of a Town Meeting.


1
Town of Farmington
Subdivision Ordinance
11-10.1 Title
This Ordinance replaces the Farmington Subdivision Regulations (4-3-78 and
subsequently modified on 9-12-01) and shall be known and cited as the Town of
Farmington Subdivision Ordinance and will be referred to as “this Ordinance”.
11-10.2 Authority, Administration, and Applicability
This Ordinance has been adopted in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4401
et. seq., as hereafter amended. It shall apply to all subdivisions (residential,
commercial and industrial) as defined by said State law.
The Planning Board of the Town of Farmington, herein referred to as “the Board”,
shall administer this Ordinance.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall govern all land and all structures of all
proposed subdivisions, as defined, within the boundaries of the Town of
Farmington.
No subdivision (as defined herein) within the Town of Farmington, shall be
permitted, except within the provisions and standards of this Ordinance. No
person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may sell, lease, develop, build upon
or convey for consideration any land or structure(s) requiring approval as a
subdivision, before applying for and receiving subdivision approval.
11-10.3 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance shall be:
A. To establish an administrative review process which will provide the Board
with sufficient evidence, data, and materials to carry out its responsibilities as
required by 30-A M.R.S.A. §4401 et seq., and be in accordance with the
Town’s goals, objectives and priorities as articulated in its Comprehensive
Plan;
B. To assure the comfort, health, safety and general welfare of the residents of
the Town of Farmington; and
2
C. To protect the environment and conserve the natural and cultural resources
of the Town of Farmington.
11-10.4 Validity and Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
11-10.5 Conflicts with Other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with other
provisions of this Ordinance, or of any other ordinance, regulation or standard,
the more restrictive provision shall apply.
11-10.6 Effective Date
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be July 22, 2003
11-10.7 Definitions
Abutter. Abutter shall mean the owner(s) of record of a property sharing a
common boundary with a given piece of property, whether or not these properties
are separated by public or private right-of-way.
Aggrieved Party: Aggrieved Party shall mean any person, body, company,
corporation, or other legal entity who has been denied or alleges to have been
denied some personal or property right or who has had an imposition, burden or
obligation impaired upon or whose pecuniary interest is directly affected.
Comprehensive Plan: Comprehensive Plan shall mean the Comprehensive
Plan adopted by the Town of Farmington on 7-15-98, amended on 11-18-99, and
as subsequently amended.
Easement: Easement shall mean the legal right of use of a portion of land for
specified purposes.
Fresh Water Wetland: Fresh Water Wetland shall mean fresh water swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas which are:
1. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a
duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do
support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soils; and
3
2. Not considered part of a great pond, river stream or brook.
These areas may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that
do not conform to the criteria.
Lot of Record: Lot of record shall mean a piece of land measured and set apart
for a specific use and recorded in the Franklin Country Registry of Deeds.
Stream, River or Brook: Stream, River or Brook shall mean a channel between
defined banks. A channel is created by the action of surface water and has two
(2) or more of the following characteristics:
1. It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most recent edition of the
U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topography map or if that is not
available, a 15-minute series topography map.
2. It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously for a period of
at least three (3) months of the year in most years.
3. The channel bed is primarily composed of material such as sand and
gravel, parent material or bedrock that has been deposited or scoured by
water.
4. The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic insects or
mollusks in the water or, if no surface water is present in the stream bed.
5. The channel bed contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid of
upland vegetation.
Stream, river, or brook does not mean a ditch or other drainage way constructed
and maintained solely for the purpose of draining storm water or a grassy swale.
Subdivision: Subdivision shall mean the subdivision of a tract or parcel of land
as defined in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. §4401et seq., and as hereafter amended.
A subdivision would include, but not be limited to, such developments as
apartments, condominiums, shopping centers, mobile home parks, industrial
parks, and planned unit and cluster developments.
Per Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4401 et seq., and upon enactment of this Ordinance,
the Town has elected not to count lots of forty (40) or more acres as lots for the
purposes of this Ordinance when the parcel of land being divided is located
entirely outside any shoreland area as defined in the Town’s Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance.
4
11-10.8 Review Procedure
This Ordinance shall provide an application and review procedure consisting of:
A. Pre-application meeting with the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO).
The applicant, or his agent who shall be authorized as such in writing, shall first
meet with the CEO to present general information regarding the proposed
subdivision. The CEO shall provide the applicant with all necessary application
forms, advise the applicant of review criteria, including the review criteria
contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4404 et seq., performance standards, and any
other applicable Town land use ordinances, and inform the applicant of any other
submissions that may be necessary to deem the application complete.
B. Submission of a complete application form and subdivision plan.
The applicant shall submit ten copies of the completed application form,
subdivision plan, and supplemental information to the CEO.
1. The application form shall include:
a. Name, address, and phone number of property owner, applicant,
and any other person involved in preparation of this application and
plan;
b. Name, address, and map and lot numbers of all abutting property
owners;
c. Location of the proposed subdivision;
d. Type of subdivision (residential, commercial or industrial);
e. Name of proposed subdivision;
f. Number of units;
g. Number of acres;
h. Existing use of proposed site;
i. Notification if site is in Tree Growth or Farm and Open Space;
j. Average number of vehicles per day anticipated using this site;
k. Nature of interior roads;
5
l. Manner in which police and fire service (access for emergency
vehicles) will be provided;
m. Impact on public infrastructure;
n. Water supply; and
o. Sewage disposal.
2. The subdivision plan shall include, but not be limited to:
a. A survey plan (to scale, recommended 1 inch : 100 feet) showing
the location of the entire proposed subdivision, boundaries of the tract,
lot lines with their approximate dimensions, location and width of all
streets, roads, rights-of-way, location of all existing and proposed
buildings, utility poles, walls or fences, brooks, culverts, soil test pits,
and permanent markers. The survey plan shall include the stamp and
signature of the surveyor, architect, engineer or planning consultant.
The survey plan must also include topography at twenty (20) foot
intervals unless otherwise prescribed by the Board. In addition, the
survey plan shall show the location of existing and proposed wells and
septic systems, the location of any existing natural and manmade
features including all rivers, streams, brooks, and wetlands within or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision which may influence the layout of
the proposed subdivision;
b. Septic suitability soil tests for every “non-sewered” lot in a residential,
commercial or industrial subdivision; and
c. The location and elevation of any 100-year floodplain. When any part of
a subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area as identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the plan shall indicate
that the principal structures on lots in the subdivision shall be
constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at least one
foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
3. Supplemental Information
Depending on the size, complexity and/or nature of the proposal, the CEO and/or
the Board may require sufficient information on one or more of the following to
allow for review of the proposal under the performance standards of this
Ordinance and other applicable ordinances:
6
a. A soil erosion control and storm water runoff management plan
using Best Management Practices (BMP’s) as stated in “Maine’s
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction” –
March 1991 or latest revision. [Note: If the proposed subdivision
triggers applicability of the Town’s Soil Erosion Control and Storm
Water Management Ordinance, an additional application for
approval under same must also be filed];
b. Parking plan [see Zoning Ordinance Performance Standards];
c. An Access Management Plan and/or a copy of the approved Driveway
or Entrance Permit issued by the Maine Department of Transportation
if a driveway(s) or entrance(s) will enter onto a State or State aid road
outside the urban compact area. [see Zoning Ordinance Performance
Standards];
d. Landscaping plan [see Zoning Ordinance Performance
Standards];
e. If applicable, a letter stating that the subdivision will not cause an
unreasonable burden on the water supply from either the
Farmington Water Department (FVC), or the Farmington Falls
Standard Water District (FFSWD);
f. If applicable, a letter from the Wastewater Treatment Facility
(WWTF) superintendent assessing the impact of the proposed
subdivision and stating that it will not cause an unreasonable
burden on the municipal sewer system. Commercial and industrial
subdivisions must state their plans for solid waste disposal;
g. A letter from the CEO stating that the proposed subdivision
property is in compliance with all applicable Town land use
ordinances, or State and federal requirements;
h. Letters from the Fire Chief, Police Chief, and Director of Public
Works stating that the proposed subdivision is adequately
designed for traffic safety and handling emergency vehicles;
i. Aerial photo (or copy of same) of subject and adjacent properties;
j. The location of and nature of significant wildlife habitat identified by the
Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife; and
k. The location of known archeological resources, historic buildings or sites,
unique natural areas, and scenic areas with a written description of how
such features will be maintained or impacts upon them minimized.
7
C. Onsite Visit
All proposed subdivision sites shall have an onsite visit by the CEO or
designated agent. Additional site visits may be scheduled by the Board.
D. Abutter Notification
When the CEO determines that the application and subdivision plan are
complete, abutting property owners shall be notified by certified mail, at least
fifteen (15) days prior to initial Board consideration of a pending application for
subdivision. This notice shall indicate the time, date and place of Board
consideration of the application. The cost of notification shall be borne by the
applicant.
E. Planning Board Review
When the CEO has determined that the application and subdivision plan
are complete, the CEO shall then place the application on the Board’s
agenda. The applicant, or duly authorized agent, who shall not be the CEO,
shall attend the meeting where the application is presented and reviewed by
the Board.
1. Public Hearing
In the event that the Board determines to hold a public hearing on the
proposed subdivision, it shall hold such hearing within thirty (30) days of the
receipt of the completed application, and shall publish notice of the date, time
and place of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least two
(2) times. The date of the first publication must be at least fourteen (14) days
before the hearing and the second notification must be at least seven (7) days
before the hearing. Notice of the hearing must be posted in the municipal
office building at least fourteen (14) days before the hearing.
2. Additional Studies
The Board may require the applicant to undertake any additional studies
which are reasonable and justifiable to accomplish the requirements of this
Ordinance. The costs of all such studies shall be borne by the applicant.
F. Performance Guarantee
The Board may require the posting of an improvement guarantee in such amount
as is reasonably necessary to ensure the proper installation and maintenance of
all offsite improvements, and onsite improvements with offsite impacts, required
as a condition of approval. The nature and duration of the guarantee shall be
structured to achieve this goal without adding unnecessary costs to the applicant.
8
In the event that a development is abandoned, the performance guarantee may
be utilized to stabilize, secure, and/or restore the site as may be necessary,
including, but not limited to, re-vegetation of areas, grading and fencing.
11-10.9 Fees/Costs
A. All applications must be accompanied by the appropriate application fee that
shall be set by the Board of Selectmen.
B. All applicable fees, including but not limited to postage reimbursement,
advertising fees, consultant fees, will be the responsibility of the applicant and
must be paid before receiving written confirmation of approval by the Board.
C. The cost of all first time street/road signs including any type of sign that is
required for the development i.e. – Stop, Curve, etc. will be the responsibility
of the developer.
11-10.10 Performance Standards
The following performance standards, in addition to the criteria contained in Title
30-A §4404.1-19, are to be used by the Board in reviewing subdivision
applications and shall serve as minimum requirements for approval. The
subdivision shall be approved, unless in the judgment of the Board the applicant
is not able to reasonably meet one or more of these standards. In all instances
the burden of proof shall be on the applicant, and such burden of proof shall
include the production of evidence necessary to demonstrate that the standards
will be met.
A. Landscape Preservation
The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as practicable by
minimizing tree removal and disturbance of soil, and retaining existing
vegetation during construction.
B. Vehicular Access
The proposed site layout shall provide for safe access and egress from public
and private roads by providing adequate location, numbers and control of
access points including site distances, turning lanes, and traffic signalization
when required by existing and projected traffic flow on the municipal and
State road systems. Access management plans must conform with all
performance standards for same in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
C. Parking and Circulation
The layout and design of all means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
including walkways, interior drives, and parking areas shall provide for safe
general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
service traffic, loading areas, and arrangement and use of parking areas.
9
Off-street parking and loading area plans must conform with all performance
standards for same in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
D. Soil Erosion/Stormwater Runoff/Drainage
The development shall not cause unreasonable soil erosion. Adequate
provision shall be made for surface drainage so that removal of surface
waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties, downstream water
quality, or the public storm drainage system. When possible, on-site
absorption of run-off waters shall be utilized to minimize discharges from the
site. If the proposed subdivision triggers applicability of the Town’s Soil
Erosion Control and Storm Water Management Ordinance, an additional
application must be filed.
E. Existing Utilities
The development shall not impose an unreasonable burden on sewers,
storm drains, water lines, or other public utilities.
F. Municipal Services
When the Board finds, based upon the recommendation of Department
Heads, that municipal services do not have sufficient capacity to service the
proposed subdivision, the Board may require phasing of the subdivision to
allow for the development of expanded municipal services, deny the
application, or require the applicant to assist in upgrading municipal services.
G. Exterior Lighting
All exterior lighting shall be designed to minimize adverse impact on
neighboring properties. Outdoor lighting plans must conform with all
performance standards for same in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
H. Groundwater Quality
The development shall not result in an obvious reduction of groundwater
quality. In making this determination, consideration shall be given to
topography, any underlying aquifers and aquifer recharge areas, the nature of
soils and subsoils and, if applicable, their ability to adequately support
subsurface wastewater disposal.
I. Water Supply
The developer shall provide reasonable evidence for an adequate water
supply for its intended use and will not cause an unreasonable burden on an
existing water district or water department, if one is to be utilized.
J. Sewer/Septic
The development shall provide for adequate sewage waste disposal in
accordance with the Town of Farmington Sewer Use Ordinance and the
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
10
K. Natural Areas/Historic Sites
The development shall not have an undue adverse effect on historic sites or
rare and irreplaceable natural areas.
L. Capacity
The applicant shall demonstrate adequate financial and technical capacity to
meet the above standards.
11-10.11 Approvals, Conditions, Findings, Denial
The Board, within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, or within sixty (60) days of
receiving the completed application if no hearing is held, or within such other time
limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to, shall deny or grant approval of the
proposed subdivision or grant approval with conditions as it may deem advisable
to satisfy the performance standards listed in Section 11-10.11 of this Ordinance
and the performance standards in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance. In all instances
the burden of proof shall be on the applicant.
Upon completion of the requirements of this Ordinance, and approval by the
Board, the majority of the Board shall sign the submitted plan which shall deem
the Board’s final approval. The plan shall be filed by the applicant with the
Franklin County Registry of Deeds. Any subdivision plan not so filed or recorded
within ninety (90) days of the date upon which such plan is approved and signed
by the Board as herein provided shall become null and void, unless the particular
circumstances of said applicant warrant the Board to grant an extension which
shall not exceed two (2) additional periods of ninety (90) days. The developer
shall bear the cost of any registration fees.
No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made on any plan
after approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in writing on the plan,
unless the plan is first resubmitted and the Board approves any modifications. In
the event that a plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, the
same shall be considered null and void.
11-10.12 Appeals
Any party aggrieved by the final determination by the Board may appeal to the
Farmington Board of Appeals by filing an application for appeal within thirty (30)
days after receipt of the Board’s decision. The Board of Appeals may affirm,
modify or reverse the Board’s decision after holding a public hearing and may
grant a variance as defined herein. Public hearings shall be held in accordance
with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §2691.
11
11-10.13 Amendments
A. An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
1. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board of Selectmen
has so voted;
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least ten percent (10%) of
the number of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial
elections.
11-10.14 Enforcement
A. Violations
1. Any violation of this Ordinance, including failure to comply with any
condition, shall be deemed to be a violation of 30-A M.R.S.A. §4452.
2. Commencement of any project without Planning Board or CEO approval
shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance. Any party committing
such a violation shall immediately cease project operations, whether of a
construction, renovation or business nature, upon notification by the CEO
per B.1. below or upon self-discovery of the violation. In such cases, an
after-the-fact (ATF) application for Subdivision Approval must be
immediately filed with the CEO. The ATF application fee will be double
the normal application fee and must be paid prior to Planning Board
review. Payment of this ATF application fee does not preclude the Town
from pursuing fines and/or penalties under 30A MRSA §4452 (per A. 1.
above and D. below) or preclude the Town from negotiating and
executing an administrative consent agreement to recover fines without
court action (per C. below).
B. Code Enforcement Officer
1. It shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the CEO finds that any provision of this Ordinance is being
violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such
violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or
structures, and abatement or mitigation of violations. A copy of such
notices shall be submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as
a permanent record.
12
2. The CEO shall conduct on-site inspections to insure compliance with
all applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The
CEO shall also investigate all complaints of alleged violations of the
Ordinance.
3. The CEO shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of
the CEO, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied,
variances granted or denied, revocation actions, revocation of
permits, appeals, court actions, violations investigated, violations
found and fees collected.
C. Legal Actions
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the
violation, the Municipal Officers, upon receiving written notification from the
CEO, shall institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or
equitable, including injunctions of violations and the impositions of penalties
and/or fines in order to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The
Municipal Officers or their authorized agent are hereby authorized to enter
into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating
violations of this Ordinance and recovering fines without court action.
D. Penalties/Fines
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner’s agent
or a contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this
Ordinance, or upon failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall be
penalized in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4452. The owner or
tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof and any architect,
builder contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, or
maintains such violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and be
subject to the penalties herein provided.
13
TOWN OF FARMINGTON
Public Wellhead Protection
Ordinance
ENACTED: May 28, 2013
CERTIFIED BY: ___________________________
Name
Town Clerk Affix Seal
Title
- 2 -
Town of Farmington
Public Wellhead Protection Ordinance
Table of Contents
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS ................................................................ 3
SECTION 1. TITLE ............................................................................... 3
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY ........................................................................ 3
SECTION 3. PURPOSE ........................................................................... 3
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE .................................................................. 3
SECTION 5. APPLICABILITY .................................................................... 3
SECTION 6. RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER ORDINANCES ..................................... 3
SECTION 7. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY .................................................... 4
SECTION 8. AMENDMENTS ...................................................................... 4
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, APPEALS AND PENALTIES ................. 5
SECTION 1. ADMINISTERING BODIES AND AGENTS .......................................... 5
SECTION 2. APPLICATION APPROVAL REQUIRED ........................................... 5
SECTION 3. NON-CONFORMANCE ............................................................. 5
SECTION 4. APPLICATIONS ................................................................... 11
SECTION 5. PLANNING BOARD, APPLICATION REVIEW AND HEARINGS ................ 11
SECTION 6. APPLICATION FEE ............................................................... 12
SECTION 7. INDEPENDENT REVIEW AND ADVICE .......................................... 13
SECTION 8. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES .................................................. 13
SECTION 9. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT ........................................................ 13
SECTION 10. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES ............................................... 14
SECTION 11. APPEALS .......................................................................... 15
ARTICLE III. LAND USE REQUIREMENTS ....................................................... 18
SECTION 1. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES .................................................... 18
SECTION 2. LAND USE TABLE ................................................................ 18
SECTION 3. LOT SPECIFICATIONS ........................................................... 22
SECTION 4. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ................................................. 23
SECTION 5. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ................................................... 31
SECTION 6. CONTROL OF EXISTING THREATS ............................................. 38
ARTICLE IV. DEFINITIONS ....................................................................... 39
- 3 -
WELLHEAD PROTECTION ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1. TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Public Wellhead
Protection Ordinance” of the Town of Farmington, Maine.
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article
VIII-A of the Maine Constitution, Title 30-A M.R.S. § 3001 (Home Rule),
Title 30-A M.R.S. § 4311 (Growth Management), and Title 22 M.R.S.
§2642 (Protection of Drinking Water Supplies).
SECTION 3. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public water supply in
the Town of Farmington, Maine from land uses which pose a threat to
the quality and/or quantity of the groundwater being extracted from the
wells which serve public water systems.
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its enactment by the Town.
Enacted: May 28, 2013.
SECTION 5. APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance applies to all land uses located or proposed within the
area delineated as the Wellhead Protection Zones on the official Town of
Farmington Zoning Map, official Wellhead Protection Area Map, or other
official map.
SECTION 6. RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance is inconsistent with another
provision of this Ordinance or with any other ordinance, regulation or
statue, the more restrictive provision shall control.
- 4 -
SECTION 7. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the
courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section
or provision of this Ordinance.
SECTION 8. AMENDMENTS
A. Initiation and Procedure
A proposal for an amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
(1) The Planning Board; (2) the Board of Selectmen; or (3) an
individual, through the petition process for placing articles on the
warrant for Town Meeting per Title 30-A M.R.S.§2522 .
Amendments proposed by the Planning Board under paragraph (1)
above shall be forwarded to the Board of Selectmen to be considered
for inclusion as an article in a future Town Meeting warrant.
Amendments proposed by the Board of Selectmen under paragraph (2)
above shall be forwarded to the Planning Board for advisory review and
comment prior to being considered for placement on a Town Meeting
warrant. In both cases, the Board of Selectmen shall have final
authority to determine whether to present the amendment by Warrant
Article to the Town Meeting for approval.
B. Public Hearing and Farmington Village Corporation – Water
Department (Water Department) Notification
The Board of Selectmen shall hold a Public Hearing on any proposed
Amendment, including amendments proposed by petition. . .
Notification of the Public Hearing and Water Department notification
shall follow the requirements pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S. § 4352.
C. Enactment
A proposed amendment to this Ordinance must be approved by a
majority vote of the Town Meeting.
- 5 -
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, APPEALS AND
PENALTIES
SECTION 1. ADMINISTERING BODIES AND AGENTS
A. Code Enforcement Officer
The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) of the Town of Farmington shall
administer and enforce this Ordinance. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall refer all applications requiring Planning Board review to the
Planning Board.
B. Planning Board
The Planning Board (PB) of the Town of Farmington shall review and
act upon applications as designated under this Ordinance.
SECTION 2. APPLICATION APPROVAL REQUIRED
After the effective date of this Ordinance, no person shall engage in any
land use activity identified in the Land Use Table listed in Article III,
Section 2 without filing application and obtaining approval under this
ordinance.
SECTION 3. NON_CONFORMANCE
Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses that existed before the
effective date of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue, subject to
the requirements set forth in this article.
A. General
(1) Transfer of Ownership
Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be
transferred, and the new owner may continue the nonconforming
use or continue to use the non-conforming
structure or lot.
(2) Repair and Maintenance
This Ordinance shall allow, without permit, the normal
upkeep and maintenance of non-conforming uses and
- 6 -
structures including repairs or renovations which do not
involve expansion of the non-conforming use or structure.
B. Non-Conforming Structures
(1) Expansion
A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded
after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board if such
addition or expansion has no greater impact than the
existing structure.
a. If any portion of a structure is less than the required
setback from the property line, that portion of the
structure shall not be expanded in floor area or
volume, by 30% or more, during the lifetime of the
structure.
b. Construction or enlargement of a foundation beneath
the existing structure shall not be considered an
expansion of the structure provided: that the
structure and new foundation are placed such that
the setback requirement is met to the greatest
practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board, basing its decision on the criteria specified
below in subsection 2. (Relocation); that the
completed foundation does not extend beyond the
exterior dimensions of the structure; and that the
foundation does not cause the structure to be
elevated by more than three (3) additional feet.
c. No structure which is less than the required setback
from the property line shall be expanded toward the
property line.
(2) Relocation
A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the
boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located
provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback
requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined
by the Planning Board, and provided that the applicant
demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal
system meets the requirements of State law and the State
of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or
that a new system can be installed in compliance with the
- 7 -
law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated
in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming
or have any greater adverse impact than the
existing location.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the
setback to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board
shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the
potential for soil erosion and sedimentation, the location of
other structures on the property and on adjacent
properties, the location of the septic system and other onsite
soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and
amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the
relocation.
(3) Reconstruction or Replacement
Any non-conforming structure which is removed, or
damaged or destroyed by more than fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the structure before such damage,
destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced
provided that a permit is obtained within two (2) years of
the date of said damage, destruction or removal. In no case
shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to
increase its non-conformity or have any greater adverse
impact than the existing structure.
Upon application within the above two (2) year period, the
Planning Board may grant an additional extension of any
permit issued for such reconstruction or replacement so long
as good faith progress has been demonstrated and a realistic
plan for completion of construction is presented to and
accepted by the Board. The Board may also require
evidence of ability to complete the project in the allotted
extension time, such as, but not limited to, bank letters of
credit and/or written agreements with suppliers or
contractors for goods and services required to complete
reconstruction or replacement.
Any non-conforming structure which is damaged or
destroyed by fifty percent (50%) or less of the market value
of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair,
may be reconstructed in place with a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
- 8 -
(4) Chance of a Use of a Non-Conforming Structure
The use of a non-conforming structure may not be changed
to another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a
written application, determines that the new use will have
no greater adverse impact on the subject or adjacent
properties and resources than that of the existing use. The
determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made
according to, but not limited to, the criteria listed in
subsection C3 below.
(5) Changes Mandated by Federal, State, and Local Laws or
Regulations
Any expansion, relocation, reconstruction or replacement of
any portion of a non-conforming structure which is
mandated by federal, State or local building and safety
codes, including, but not limited to the Americans with
Disabilities Act and State Fire Code, shall require review and
approval by the Planning Board regardless of whether the
required changes are to be performed at the same time as
other expansions, relocations, reconstruction or
replacement of the non-conforming structure. The Planning
Board shall not withhold approval for the mandated changes
unless the contemplated changes create a health or safety
hazard which is likely to affect the occupants and/or the
public.
(6) Written Documentation Required for Not Greater Adverse
Impact
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur as
a result of the expansion, relocation, reconstruction or
replacement, or change of use of a non-conforming
structure, the Planning Board shall also require written
documentation from the applicant regarding the probable
effects on public health and safety, if applicable, water
quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual
and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty,
floodplain management, archaeological and historic
resources, and functionally water-dependent uses.
C. Non-Conforming Uses
(1) Expansions
- 9 -
Expansions of non-conforming are prohibited, except that
the non-conforming use of a residential dwelling unit may,
after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, be
expanded within existing residential structures or within
expansions of such structures as permitted in Section B1 as
above.
(2) Resumption Prohibited
A lot, building or structure in or on which a non-conforming
use is discontinued for a period exceeding one (1) year, or
which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be
devoted to a non-conforming use except that the Planning
Board may, for good cause shown by the applicant, grant
up to a one (1) year extension to that time period. This
provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a
residential structure provided that the structure has been
used or maintained for residential purposes during the
preceding five (5) year period unless conditions outlined in
B3 exist.
(3) Change of Use
An existing non-conforming use may be changes to another
non-conforming use provided that the proposed use has no
greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent
properties and resources than the former use, as
determined by the Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall require written documentation from the applicant
regarding the probable effects. The determination of no
greater adverse impact shall be made according to, but be
not limited to, the criteria listed below:
a. That the proposed use is of the same character or
less noxious than the current nonconforming use;
b. That the proposed use will not create a traffic
hazard nor increase an existing traffic hazard;
c. That the amount of parking required meets the
minimum requirements for the use that exists on the
site or will be otherwise provided in accordance with
the Town of Farmington Traffic Ordinance, Site
Review Ordinance, and the Off-Street Parking and
Loading Performance Standard in the Zoning
Ordinance;
- 10 -
d. That the extent of noise, odors, vibrations, smoke,
dust, and air discharges of the proposed use shall be
equal to or less than the present use;
e. That the rate of surface water run-off from the site
will not be increased;
f. That the hours of operation of the proposed use will
be compatible with the existing, surrounding land
uses;
g. That the proposed use will have no greater adverse
impact on surrounding properties; and
h. That the proposed use will not create adverse effect
on public health and safety, erosion and
sedimentation, and if applicable, water quality, fish
and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and
actual points of public access to waters, natural
beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and
historic resources, and functionally water dependent
uses.
D. Non-Conforming Lots of Record
(1) Non-Conforming Lots of Record
A non-conforming lot of record as of the effective date of
this Ordinance or applicable amendment thereto may be
built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that
such lot is in compliance with State Minimum Lot Size Law
and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules and that all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance,
except lot size and frontage, can be met. Variance relating
to setbacks or other dimensional requirements not
involving lot size or frontage may only be obtained by
action of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Contiguous Built Lots
If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or
joint ownership of record at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not meet the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a
principal use or structure exists on each lot, the nonconforming
lots may be conveyed separately or together,
provided that the lots are in conformance with the State
Minimum Lot Size Law and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules.
- 11 -
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a
single lot of record on the effective date of this Ordinance,
each may be sold on a separate lot upon issuance of a
written determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that each resulting lot is in compliance with the State
Minimum Lot Size Law and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules and conforms to the greatest
extent possible with the dimensional requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 4. APPLICATIONS
An applicant under this Ordinance shall submit an application in writing
to the Planning Board, as designated in the Wellhead Protection Area
Land Use Table (Article III, Section 2). All applications shall be dated
and signed by the owner(s) or leasee(s). Such signatures shall certify
that the information in the application is complete and correct.
SECTION 5. PLANNING BOARD APPLICATION REVIEW AND HEARINGS
Within thirty (30) days of the date of receiving a written application and
fee, the CEO shall notify the applicant in writing, either that the
application is sufficient for initial Planning Board review or, if the
application is insufficient, that specified additional material is needed to
make the application sufficient. The CEO shall also notify the Water
Department upon receipt of a sufficient application. Once the
application is sufficient, the CEO shall forward a copy of same to the
Water Department and applicable department heads requesting that
they provide comments on the proposal. The CEO shall then place the
application on the next available Planning Board agenda, allowing for a
fifteen (15) day processing and notification period. The CEO shall
forward the application to the Board along with any written comments
and recommendations from the Water Department and applicable
department heads
Once the Planning Board has determined that a complete application has
been received, the Board shall approve or deny the application, in
writing, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the complete application, or
within thirty (30) days of a public hearing if one is held. The Board shall
specify, in writing, its findings of facts and reasons for any conditions or
denial.
The applicant, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the
meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the application. The Board
shall provide the applicant a dated receipt of the application at the
- 12 -
Board meeting where the application is first presented and heard by the
Board. The Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing on
the application.
Abutting property owners shall be notified by certified mail, by the
Town, at least fifteen (15) days prior to initial Planning Board
consideration of a pending application for review. This notice shall
indicate the time, date and place of Board consideration of the
application.
If the Planning Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall publish
notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality at least two times, the date of
the first publication to be at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.
Applications shall be approved if the proposed use or structure is found
to be in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Approvals
may be made subject to reasonable conditions to ensure conformity with
provisions of this Ordinance. If an application is either denied or
approved with conditions, the reasons shall be stated in writing.
When a proposed use in a Wellhead Protection Area requires Planning
Board approval under Article III, Section 2 of this Ordinance, the Board,
may, as a condition of its approval, require the applicant to (1) grant the
municipality of the Water Department permission to install and maintain
groundwater monitoring wells on the applicant’s property; or (2) install
monitoring wells and implement a groundwater testing and monitoring
program approved by the Board, at the applicant’s expense. The Board
may attach additional reasonable conditions to the approval to ensure
conformity with the standards and criteria of this Ordinance.
SECTION 6. APPLICATION FEE
An application fee of $50.00 must be submitted with an application.
- 13 -
SECTION 7. INDEPENDENT REVIEW AND ADVICE
A. Professional Services
The Planning Board may require an attorney or consultant to review
one or more aspects of an application for compliance or
noncompliance with this Ordinance and to advise the Board. The
attorney or consultant shall first estimate the cost of such review and
the applicant shall deposit, with the Town the full estimated cost,
which the Town shall place in an escrow account. The Town shall pay
the attorney or consultant from the escrow account and reimburse the
applicant if funds remain after payment. If escrowed funds are
insufficient, the applicant shall deposit additional funds with the
Town, based on attorney or consultant estimate, sufficient for
completion. The attorney or consultant shall be fully qualified to
provide the required information and shall be mutually acceptable to
the Town and the applicant.
B. Additional Studies
The Planning Board may require the applicant to undertake any study
that it deems reasonable and necessary to determine whether a
proposed activity meets the requirements of this ordinance. The costs
of such studies shall be borne by the applicant.
SECTION 8. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
The Planning Board may require the applicant to provide performance
guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs
of all required improvements. Performance guarantees may be made by
certified check, payable to the Town, or a savings account naming the
Town as owner, for the establishment of an escrow account; by an
irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution establishing
funding for the construction of the project, from which letter the Town
may draw if construction is inadequate; or by a performance bond,
payable to the Town, issues by a surety company and acceptable to the
Town. The form, time periods, conditions, and amount of performance
guarantees shall be determined by the Board.
SECTION 9. EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL
All application approvals shall expire within one (1) year of the date of
issuance unless work thereunder is commenced. If work is not
completed within two (2) years from the date of approval issuance, a
new application must be filed.
- 14 -
All approved plans which expire are subject to any subsequent changes
in requirements under Town Ordinances or State/Federal laws when
reapplication is made.
SECTION 10. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. Inspections and Complaints
The CEO shall investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this
Ordinance, pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S. § 4452. The CEO may seek
technical advice from a representative of the Water Department when
investigating complaints.
The CEO may also conduct site inspections to ensure compliance with
this Ordinance, pursuant to Title 30-A M.S.R. § 4452. During
investigations, the CEO may be accompanied by a representative of the
Water Department.
B. Notice of Violations
It shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce this Ordinance, in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and State laws. If the
CEO finds that any provision is being violated, the CEO shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violation. The notice shall
state the nature of the violation, the Ordinance provision or permit
condition violated, and the action necessary to correct the violation.
The notice shall inform the recipient of their right to appeal as to the
facts supporting the notice by the CEO, pursuant to Article II, Section
12 of this Ordinance. A copy of the notice shall be provided to the
Planning Board, Water Department, and Board of Selectmen.
C. Recordkeeping
The CEO shall keep a complete record of all transactions relating to
the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance, and shall
maintain a permanent record of those transactions at the Town Office.
Copies of all applications and approvals shall be provided to the Water
Department.
D. Legal Action
When a person does not correct a violation after receiving notice to do
so, the CEO shall notify the Board of Selectmen and the Water
Department. The Selectmen, or their authorized agent, may institute
- 15 -
all legal and equitable actions necessary to correct the violation and
recover fines and costs.
E. Penalties
Any person who continues to violate a provision of this Ordinance or
condition of a permit after receiving written notice to correct the
situation shall be subject to penalties as provided in Title 30-A M.R.S. §
4452.
SECTION 11. APPEALS
A. Time for Appeal
Any party aggrieved by a decision or order of the CEO or Planning
Board under this Ordinance may appeal the decision or order
concerned within thirty (30) days to the Board of Appeals. Appeals
shall be filed on forms to be provided by the Code Office for this
purpose. There is a $50.00 fee assessed with each appeal application
form.
B. Parties
For purposes of this section, the term “party” shall be limited to:
1. An applicant whose application is denied or granted with
conditions.
2. An applicant whose approval is suspended or revoked by the
CEO or PB.
3. A person owning property within a Wellhead Protection Area
designated in Appendix I of this Ordinance, who is adversely
affected by a decision or order of the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board with respect to any property
located in the same Wellhead Protection Area.
4. A person whose use of groundwater as a domestic water
supply is adversely affected by a decision or order of the CEO
or PB under this Ordinance.
5. The Town of Farmington, through its municipal officers.
6. The Farmington Water Department.
C. Decision or Order
The purposes of this section, the term “decision or order” shall not
include failure by the Code Enforcement Officer to take enforcement
action with respect to a particular person, property or alleged
- 16 -
violation, when the enforcement action has been requested by persons
or organizations other than the municipal officers.
D. Type of Review
An appeal from a decision or order may be taken to the Board of
Appeals under this section only where it is alleged that the decision or
order concern is based on an error of law or misinterpretation of this
Ordinance. All appeals to the Board of Appeals under this section shall
be reviewed by the Board of Appeals as purely appellate matters,
based on the administrative record made by the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board. No new evidence shall be received or
considered by the Board of Appeals as to any matter appealed to the
Board of Appeals under this section. No variance applications may be
made to the Board of Appeals under the Wellhead Protection
Ordinance.
E. Board’s Procedure
The Board of Appeals, within twenty (20) days from receipt of an
administrative appeal filing, shall determine a meeting date and
advertise notice of appeal application in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town, identifying the property involved, the nature
of the appeal, and the time and place of the Board meeting on the
matter. The meeting shall not be held earlier than ten (10) days after
the publication date of such notice.
Within three (3) business days after the date of publication of the
public hearing notice, the Board of Appeals shall mail by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of the notice of appeal to each of the
property owners whose property physically abuts the property listed in
the appeal. In addition, the Board shall mail the same notice, by first
class mail, to the other property owners whose property is located
within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property in rural areas
(Tax Maps labeled "R"), and within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of
the subject property in urban areas (Tax Maps labeled "U"). The
owners of property shall be considered to be those against whom taxes
are assessed. Failure of any property owner to receive a properly
mailed notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing
and shall not invalidate any action of the Board.
All appeals under this section shall be reviewed and decided by the
Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days following the Board's hearing
on the application. The Board shall issue its decision as to any appeal
in writing. The Board shall have authority to remand the matter to the
- 17 -
Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in appropriate cases. The
Board may reconsider its decision within thirty (30) days after the
original decision date. , In reviewing a request for reconsideration, the
Board shall not receive or consider any new evidence.
F. Appeals
Any party who is aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Appeals may
appeal that decision to the Franklin County Superior Court, in
accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S. § 2691 (3)(6) and Rule 80B, Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure. By statute, Title 30-A M.R.S. § 2691 (3) (6),
any appeal must be taken within 45 days of the vote on the original
decision by the Board of Appeals. A decision on reconsideration does
not extend this appeals period. The date of the Board’s vote, and not
the date of the written decision, starts the 45 day clock.
- 18 -
ARTICLE III. LAND USE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 1. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
The Wellhead Protection Zone consists of two (2) zones that are shown
on the official Town of Farmington Wellhead Protection Area Map, or
other official map. The two zones are defined:
A. Zone 1: Primary Recharge Area
Zone 1 includes the area immediately recharging the water supply, as
shown on the official Town of Farmington Wellhead Protection Area
Map, or other official map.
Zone 1 is delineated, as the area extending from the well(s) to the
2,500 day time of travel boundary.
B. Zone 2: Secondary Recharge Area
Zone 2 includes the primary recharge area shown on the official Town
of Farmington Wellhead Protection Area Map, or other official map.
Zone 2 is delineated, as the area extending from the outer boundary of
the Primary Recharge Area to the watershed’s groundwater divide or
Zone of Contribution, if delineated using technical studies.
SECTION 2. LAND USE TABLE
The following Wellhead Protection Zone Table supplements the existing
ordinances in the Town of Farmington. Where a land use is permitted in
the existing ordinances, the Wellhead Protection Zone table shall
control. Any proposed land use listed below is subject to the
requirements of this section and applicable performance standards. Any
proposed uses not listed are prohibited. All land uses and activities may
be subject to requirements of other Town ordinances and State rules and
regulations
Land Use
Zone
1
Zone
2
Applicable Performance
Standards
Aboveground Oil Storage4 N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Agricultural chemical
spreading or spraying
N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Chemical Spreading/Spraying
- 19 -
Land Use
Zone
1
Zone
2
Applicable Performance
Standards
Agricultural use of residuals N PB Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Agriculture N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Animal husbandry N PB
Chemical Storage
Wastewater and Solid Waste
Auto graveyard4 N N
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Vehicular Use and Storage
Auto parts/supply N PB Chemical Storage
Auto recycling business4 N N
Chemical Use
Chemical Storage
Vehicular Use and Storage
Auto repair/body shop4 N N
Chemical Use
Chemical Storage
Beauty parlor N PB
Chemical Use
Wastewater and Solid Waste
Boat builders, refinisher,
maintenance
N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Bulk Fuel Oil Storage >275
gallons
N PB Chemical Storage
Car wash N PB
Chemical Use
Wastewater and Solid Waste
Commercial hazardous waste
facility4
N N
Chemical Use
Chemical Storage
Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Commercial vehicular storage
or parking; maintenance and
refueling of vehicles and
equipment1
N PB Vehicular Use and Storage
Concrete, asphalt, tar, coal
company
N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Dry cleaner4 N N
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Essential operations of the
Water department
Y Y
Furniture stripper N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical use
- 20 -
Land Use
Zone
1
Zone
2
Applicable Performance
Standards
Golf course N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Graveyard/cemetery N PB Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Herbicide/Pesticide/Fertilizer
application2
N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Herbicide/Pesticide/Fertilizer
dealer
N PB Chemical Storage
Hoop houses and greenhouses N PB
Chemical Use
Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Junk or salvage yard N PB
Wastewater and Solid Waste
Chemical Storage
Laundromat N PB
Chemical Use
Wastewater and Solid Waste
Machine shop N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Medical, dental, veterinarian
office
N PB Wastewater and Solid Waste
Metal finishing or plating4 N N
Chemical Use
Chemical Storage
Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Mining (Sand & Gravel, Rock) N PB Mining
Mortuary/funeral parlor N PB
Chemical Storage
Chemical Use
Multi-unit/family housing N PB Wastewater and Solid Waste
Municipal wastewater
treatment plant
N PB Wastewater and Solid Waste
Nursery or garden shop N PB
Chemical Use
Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Oil pipeline N PB
Chemical Use
Chemical Spreading
/Spraying
Painters, finishers N N Chemical Use
Parking lot N PB
Stormwater
Road maintenance
- 21 -
Land Use
Zone
1
Zone
2
Applicable Performance
Standards
Photo processor N PB
Chemical storage
Chemical use
Printer N PB
Chemical storage
Chemical use
Railroad yard or line N PB
Chemical storage
Chemical use
Recycling or processing center
(other than beverages)
N PB
Chemical storage
Chemical use
Wastewater and Solid Waste
Storm water
Fill
Research laboratory N PB
Chemical storage
Chemical use
Wastewater and Solid Waste
Rust proofer N PB
Chemical storage
Chemical use
Wastewater and solid waste
Salt pile or sand and salt pile
(uncovered)
N PB Chemical storage
Septic system – New or
Replacement < 1,000 gallons
CEO3 PB Wastewater and solid waste
Sewer lines PB PB
Waste water
Solid waste
Small engine repair shop N PB Chemical use
Storm water impoundment or
run-off area
N PB
Storm water
Road maintenance
Underground Oil Storage4 N N
Chemical use
Chemical storage
Utility Transmission Lines PB PB Chemical Spreading/Spraying
Wastewater treatment plant,
discharge
N PB Wastewater and solid waste
Notes
1 – Short-term overnight parking may be
allowed in connection with other activities
receiving a CEO or PB permit. For example,
short-term overnight parking of
construction vehicles on new permitted
construction projects.
2 – Unless a greater public health concern
- 22 -
Land Use
Zone
1
Zone
2
Applicable Performance
Standards
warrants pesticide application. For
example, Browntail Moth control.
3 – With notification made to the Water
Department.
4 – Restrictions within Maine Revised Statute
Title 38, Chapter 13-D: WELLHEAD
PROTECTION
Land use key
Y= permitted
N= not permitted
PB= permitted subject to Planning Board Review and use of Best Management
CEO= permitted subject to CEO Review and use of Best Management Practices
SECTION 3. LOT SPECIFICATIONS
A. Minimum Lot Size
Areas not served by public sewer:
Zone Land Area per Dwelling Unit
1 120,000 sq. ft.
2 80,000 sq. ft.
B. Maximum Lot Coverage
For portions of lots within the Wellhead Protection Area, the
maximum lot coverage that can be covered by impermeable
surfaces including parking areas, shall be limited as follows:
Zone Maximum Lot Coverage
1 30%
2 50%
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Ordinance, lot coverage that
exists as of the date of adoption of this ordinance that equal or exceed
the applicable percentage limitation may be continued and may be
expanded with Planning Board approval. Expansions of lot coverage
shall be limited to no more than ten percent (10%) of the portion of the
- 23 -
lot located in the Wellhead Protection Area. However, the Board shall
not authorize expansion of impermeable surfaces of existing uses if the
total coverage of all lot areas located in the Wellhead Protection Area is
greater than fifty percent (50%) in Zone 1 or greater than sixty-five
percent (65%) in Zone 2.
SECTION 4. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
The Planning Board may modify or waive any of the following submission
requirements if it determines that, because of the size or nature of the
project or circumstances of the site such requirement(s) would not be
applicable or would be an unnecessary burden upon the applicant and
would not affect or conflict with the purposes of this ordinance.
A. All Applications
All applications shall contain the following information.
(1) Written Information
i. Name of development; municipality; tax map and lot
numbers.
ii. Location of Property: book and page ( from Registry
of Deeds)
iii. Location of Property: map and lot (from Assessor’s
Office)
iv. Owner and applicant’s names and addresses; name
and addresses of person who prepared the
application and/or plan.
v. Name and address to which correspondence should
be sent.
vi. If applicant is a corporation, state whether the
corporation is licensed to do business in Maine and
attach a copy of Secretary of State’s Registration.
vii. Copy of recorded deed for property; verification of
ownership of legal interest.
viii. Interest the applicant has in any property abutting
the parcel to be developed.
ix. State whether the development covers the entire or
contiguous holdings of applicant.
x. On-site sewage disposal report from licensed site
evaluator or information from local sewer district
indicating capacity.
xi. Special reports:
a. Soils assessment.
b. Engineering design.
- 24 -
c. Erosion and sediment control plan.
d. Stormwater management plan.
e. Long term maintenance provisions.
f. Traffic and parking assessment.
g. Hydrogeological assessment.
h. Necessary State and/or federal permits and
date of application and approval (please list).
i. List of construction items, cost estimates.
j. Construction schedules.
k. Proposed method of performance guarantee.
l. Restrictions, conditions, covenants and
easements.
(2) Plan Information
i. Existing and proposed streets.
ii. Outline of development and remaining portion of
property scale; written and graphic date; north
point.
iii. Perimeter survey (bearings and distances; surveyor’s
seal; number of acres; existing and proposed
monuments; abutters names).
iv. Lot lines, numbers and sizes; building setback lines.
v. Existing water bodies, watercourses, wetlands, and
other significant natural features.
vi. Public and private rights-of-way and easements.
vii. Zoning boundaries.
viii. Location of test pits keyed to site evaluator’s or soil
scientist’s report.
ix. Base flood elevation, if applicable.
x. Written request for waivers or variances.
xi. Contours of 5 feet or other interval; refer to USGS
bench if within 500 feet.
xii. Location and design of culverts, drains and other
storm water control structures, existing and
proposed.
xiii. Location and design of proposed sewers and water
lines.
xiv. Typical engineering plan, profiles, and crosssections.
xv. Medium intensity or high intensity soils maps.
xvi. Location of parking, open space, conservation and/or
recreation areas.
xvii. Landscaping plan and details.
xviii. Surface drainage plan.
xix. Soil erosion and sedimentation control features.
- 25 -
xx. Locations, dimensions and profiles of underground
utilities.
xxi. Profile and typical cross-sections of streets and other
public works.
xxii. Location/identification of buffers, lots or areas to be
restricted or dedicated for common or public use.
B. Additional Application Requirements for Planning Board Review
for Certain Activities within the Wellhead Protection Area.
The following sections include categories which apply to land uses
which may be potential sources of contamination. More than one
of the categories listed below may apply to a particular use.
Applicant should request assistance from the Planning Board
should there be questions as to which categories apply.
(1) Non-agricultural chemical use, storage and handling,
(including petroleum products, fuels, solvents and
lubricants)
i. Type and volume of chemical compounds handled
and/or stored.
ii. Site plan showing all storage, handling and use areas
for raw materials and wastes.
iii. For outside areas, details to contain spills including:
a. Drainage and contour information to prevent
the flow of runoff from entering the storage
area and which keep leaks or spills from
flowing off site;
b. Provisions to contain and collect chemicals
should they enter the drainage system;
c. Provisions to segregate underground systems
to insure that there are no cross connections;
d. Provisions to prevent accidental containment
breach by collisions;
e. Statement of emergency measures which can
be implemented for surface drainage systems;
iv. For inside areas, details to contain spill including
the:
a. Design of dikes around rooms;
b. The location of floor drains and floor drain
outlets;
c. the location of separators, holding tanks
and/or drain outlets;
d. the specific location and design of
underground storage structures;
- 26 -
e. the location and design of piping systems for
wash waters and other waste liquids are
discharged and that wastes are discharged to
appropriate sewers or treatment systems.
v. A spill prevention and control and countermeasure
(SPCC) plan detailing:
a. materials and equipment to be available;
b. a training plan and schedule;
c. a list of contacts (EPA/DEP/local fire officials)
with phone numbers;
d. the inventory recording method and an
inspection schedule.
vi. A containment system design for the bulk storage
tanks prepared by a Professional Engineer registered
in the State of Maine.
vii. A hydrogeological report. The report will vary in
scope depending on the general nature of the
geology, the size and design of the facility and the
need for groundwater monitoring. At a minimum, the
report should characterize the geology, determine
the groundwater gradients, and analyze the potential
for groundwater depredation from the activity. The
analysis should contain a list of potential threats and
recommend methods of controlling those threats.
viii. A report by an industrial engineer or other
competent professional detailing:
a. Steps which have been taken to reduce the
use of hazardous material;
b. actions which have been taken to control the
amount of wastes generated;
c. any reports to provide information on the
design theory or methodology for the above
features.
(2) Agricultural chemical use, storage and handling, (including
petroleum products, fuels, solvents and lubricants)
i. Type and volume of chemical compounds handled
and/or stored.
ii. Intended use.
iii. An Integrated Pest Management Plan.
iv. An on-site soils evaluation to assess nutrient holding
capacity and leachability of the soils.
v. Plans for control of surface water run-ff and erosion
in areas where chemicals will be applied.
vi. Detailed report on type of chemical applied and rate
- 27 -
of application.
vii. Site plan showing all storage, handling and use areas
for raw materials and wastes.
viii. For outside storage, details to contain spills
including:
a. Drainage and contour information to prevent
the flow of runoff from entering;
b. The storage area and which keep leaks or
spills from flowing off site;
c. Provisions to collect chemicals should they
enter the drainage system;
d. Provisions to segregate underground systems
to insure that there are no cross connections;
e. provisions to prevent accidental containment
breach by collisions;
f. statement of emergency measures which can
be implemented for surface drainage systems.
ix. For inside storage, details to contain spill including
the:
a. Design of dikes around rooms;
b. The location of floor drains and floor drain
outlets;
c. The location of separators, holding tanks
and/or drain outlets;
d. The specific location and design of
underground storage structures;
e. The location and design of piping systems for
wash water and other liquid wastes are
discharged and that wastes are discharged to
appropriate sewers or treatment systems.
x. A spill prevention and control and countermeasure
(SPCC) plan detailing:
a. Materials and equipment to be available;
b. A training plan and schedule;
c. A list of contracts (EPA/DEP/local fire
officials) with phone numbers;
d. An inspection schedule.
xi. A containment system design for the bulk storage
tanks prepared by a Professional Engineer registered
in the State of Maine.
xii. A hydrogeological report. The report will vary in
scope depending on the general nature of the
geology, the size and design of the facility and the
need for groundwater monitoring. At a minimum, the
report should characterize the geology, determine
- 28 -
the groundwater gradients, and analyze the potential
for groundwater degradation from the activity. The
analysis should contain a list of potential threats and
recommend methods of controlling those threats.
xiii. A report by an industrial engineer or other
competent professional detailing:
a. Steps which have been taken to reduce the
use of hazardous material;
b. Actions which have been taken to control the
amount of wastes generated;
c. Any reports to provide information on the
design theory or methodology for the above
features.
(3) Vehicular Use and Storage
i. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing locations and
designs of secondary containment for fuel and
storage and refueling pads.
(4) Mining (Sand, Gravel and Rock)
i. A location map and site plan, drawn to scale,
showing property boundaries, stockpile areas,
existing reclaimed and unreclaimed lands, proposed
maximum acreage of all affected lands, erosion and
sedimentation control all applicable private drinking
water supplies or public drinking water sources and
all existing or proposed solid waste disposal areas.
ii. A detailed report by a Maine Certified Geologist with
experience in hydrogeology attesting to the depth of
the seasonal water table, and plan showing
benchmarked elevations for depth of excavation.
(5) Subsurface Injection
i. Subsurface injection activities are defined as types
of subsurface wastewater disposal, including septic
systems and other on-site wastewater disposal.
Provisions for subsurface injection and sewage
disposal include:
a. Soil evaluator’s report and septic system
design.
b. For sites/uses in Zone 1 producing >1,000
gallons of sewage per day, a hydrogeologic
analysis of nitrate concentrations at the
property line.
c. For sites/uses in Zone 2 producing more
- 29 -
>2,000 gallons of sewage per day, a
hydrogeologic analysis of nitrate
concentrations at the property line
d. Provisions and designs for all floor drains,
grease traps, and holding tanks.
e. Evaluation of public/private sewer system
capacity and integrity of sewer lines serving
the development by a Registered Engineer or
the sewer system superintendent.
(6) Stormwater Management
i. Narrative describing site layout, and on-site and offsite
watershed hydrology, including all new and
existing buildings and facilities, which may be
affected by the site runoff. Provide total amount of
impervious area created by the project.
ii. Drainage plans showing all topographic features,
such as buildings and other facilities, drainage ways,
cover types, roads, drainage easements and
subcatchment boundaries for pre-construction and
post-construction conditions must be shown on the
plan. Show all hydrologic flow lines and hydrologic
soil groups boundaries on a plan and identify each
subcatchment, reach and pond consistent with the
runoff model. For post construction conditions, show
all new stormwater management structures, changes
to the hydrologic conditions, and new post
development drainage areas delineations.
iii. Stormwater runoff calculations designed to meet the
standards listed in Performance Standards for
Stormwater Management.
iv. Designs, construction details and technical
specifications for each stormwater management
measure that will be constructed, installed or
managed on the site, including, but not limited to:
a. Design and capacity of subsurface collection
facilities.
b. Design of dry wells, storage, retention or
detention facilities and other surface water
impoundments.
c. Stormwater system outlets.
d. Ice control, road salt use, and snow removal.
(7) Utility Corridors
- 30 -
i. Type and volume of chemical compounds applied,
handled or stored.
ii. Site plan showing all areas of use for chemical
compounds.
iii. A spill prevention and control and countermeasure
(SPCC) plan detailing:
a. Materials and equipment to be available;
b. A training plan and schedule;
c. A list of contacts (EPA/DEP/local fire officials)
with phone numbers;
d. An inspection schedule.
iv. A report by an industrial engineer or other
competent professional detailing:
a. Steps which have been taken to reduce the
use of hazardous material;
b. Actions which have been taken to control the
amount of wastes generated;
c. Any reports to provide information on the
design theory or methodology for the above
features.
(8) Other Water Supplies
This section pertains to all surface water or groundwater
supplies other than domestic wells. Other water uses, except
domestic, may also be included in this category.
i. Hydrogeologic report identical to that required for
State approval of new water supply.
(9) Monitoring Wells
This section pertains to all monitoring of observation wells.
Other activities may also include monitoring wells.
i. Location and construction specifications.
ii. Intended purpose.
iii. Sampling schedule.
iv. Provisions for informing appropriate Town body of
sampling.
- 31 -
SECTION 5. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. General Provisions
All development located within the Wellhead Protection Area
shall comply with the Performance Standards established in this
section to protect the quality and quantity of the public water
supply. Best Management Practices, as applied in the State of
Maine, are management practices which will mitigate the impacts
of the activity on water quality. In some instances, there may be
more than one management practice which would accomplish the
same result. In other instances, depending on the site location
and on-site conditions, more than one management practice may
be needed to fully mitigate the problem. Therefore, discretion is
needed in determining which management practices to apply.
The Planning Board may adopt, by reference, as part of this
section, additional Best Management Practices which have been
published by or in conjunction with the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection.
In doing so, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing which
shall be posted in the Town Office and advertised in a paper of
general circulation at least twice with the first notice being at
least seven days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Performance Standards for Chemical Use
(1) The use of chemicals or residuals shall not cause or
contribute to the cumulative, calculated or actual levels of
any contaminants in the groundwater at the Water
Department’s property line to exceed 50% of the allowable
Primary Public Drinking Water Standards as defined by the
Federal Safe Drinking Water act, as amended.
(2) Only fertilizers containing predominantly slow release
nitrogen and manure are allowed. Fertilizers shall be
applied at an agronomic rate based on annual soil test
results. Permit applications must be on an annual basis.
Permit applications shall include application materials and
rates.
(3) Only land application of pesticides with low leachability by
Maine licensed applicators is allowed. Provisions shall be
made for control of surface run-off and erosion in areas
where pesticides are being applied. Permit applications
shall be submitted on an annual basis and shall include
- 32 -
copies of the pesticide labels and materials safety data
sheets and the proposed rate of application. In addition to a
comprehensive Integrated Pesticide Management Plan
certified by a groundwater hydrologist as having no
unreasonable adverse effects on groundwater. Annual
reports detailing the type and amount of substance reports
as well as date and specific location of application shall be
submitted to the CEO annually.
C. Performance Standards for Chemical Storage
(1) New installation of underground storage tanks are prohibited
within the Wellhead Protection Area.
(2) All chemicals must be stored under cover and on an
impervious surface, without floor drains.
(3) Secondary containment of liquid chemicals equaling 110% of
the stored product must be provided.
(4) Tanks for liquid chemical storage must be equipped with
automatic shut-off valves and high level alarms.
(5) Any above-ground piping must be designed to prevent line
breakage due to collision.
(6) All containers and piping must be constructed of corrosion
resistant materials.
(7) All containers must be clearly labeled with the chemical
name and date of purchase.
(8) A Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasures Plan (SPCC)
must be submitted to the CEO, Farmington Fire Rescue, and
the Water Department.
D. Performance Standards Chemical Spreading/Spraying
(1) Pesticide and herbicide application should be the option of
last resort. Any activity requiring the use of herbicides or
pesticides must develop an Integrated Pest Management Plan
that details the conditions under which agricultural
chemicals are to be used. All pesticides shall be applied in
accordance with label directions and the regulations of the
Maine Board of Pesticides Control.
(2) Herbicides and pesticides must be applied only by certified
applicators, who must be informed regarding the delineated
area of wellhead protection.
(3) A Nutrient Management Plan must be provided for all
agricultural activities within the WHPA.
(4) All agricultural fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with
label directions, and must be applied in accordance with an
- 33 -
approved Nutrient Management Plan
(5) Fertilizer applications are to be tailored to the specific
needs of the crop, as determined by soil suitability analyses.
Use of slow-release fertilizers is preferred.
(6) Irrigation schedules shall be coordinated with pesticide and
nutrient application to minimize the possibility of leaching.
Do not apply to frozen ground, or immediately before storm
events.
(7) Notice of intent to apply agricultural chemicals shall be
given to the CEO and public water supplier prior to
application.
(8) Only Class “A” composted residuals may be used within
WHPA. These residuals must have an approved Program
License from the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, and must be used in strict accordance with all
license provisions. Any non-composted residual or a residual
not meeting the Class “A” pathogen reduction standard
should not be spread within the WHPA.
(9) Manures must be composted to Class "A" standards. Manure
may be used within the WHPA, and must be applied in
accordance with the nutrient management plan.
(10) Residuals and manures shall not be applied over very shallow
soils (less than 1 foot) or exposed bedrock.
(11) Residuals and manure shall not be applied on frozen ground,
or immediately before storm events.
E. Performance Standards for Vehicular Use and Storage
(1) When draining oils or fluids from vehicles, precautionary
measures such as portable drip pans, must be taken to
ensure that no spills occur.
(2) All fuel oil, waste oil, lubricants, antifreeze, or other
potential contaminant must have secondary containment
equal to 110% of the liquid volume stored.
(3) No vehicle washing may occur.
(4) Refueling vehicles must be equipped with a shovel, an
impermeable container with a volume of no less than 35
gallons and a tight fitting lid, and at least two absorbent
pads or pillows. An absorbent pad or portable drip catch
must be in place beneath the fill tube at all times during the
refueling operation.
(5) Refueling must occur on a concrete pad or other
impermeable surface.
F. Performance Standards for Mining (Sand, Gravel and Rock)
- 34 -
(1) Separation must be maintained between any excavation and
any public drinking water source as follows: (1) For systems
serving a population of 500 persons or less, the minimum
separation must be 300 feet; (2) For systems serving a
population of 501 persons up to 1,000 persons, the
separation must be 500 feet; (3) For systems serving a
population of more than 1,000 persons, the separation must
be 1,000 feet; and (4) For any system that holds a valid
filtration waiver in accordance with the federal Safe Drinking
Water Act, the separation must be 1,000 feet
(2) Excavation may not extend below 5 feet above the seasonal
high water table without the submission of detailed findings
of the depth of the water table.
(3) No equipment debris, junk, or other material is permitted on
an extraction site. Any temporary shelters or buildings
erected for such operations and equipment used in
connection therewith must be removed within 30 days
following completion of active extraction operations.
(4) Within 6 months of the completion of extraction operations
at any extraction site or any one or more locations within
any extraction site, ground levels and grades must be
established in accordance with the approved plans.
(5) All debris, stumps, boulders, and similar materials must be
removed or disposed of in an approved location or buried
and covered with a minimum of two feet of soil.
(6) The extent and type of fill must be appropriate to the use
intended. The applicant must specify the type and amount
of fill to be used.
(7) At least 4 inches of topsoil or loam must be retained or
obtained to cover all disturbed areas, which must be
reseeded and property restored to a stable condition
adequate to meet the provisions of the "Erosion and
Sediment Control, Best Management Practices," published by
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
(8) Disused gravel pits within the Wellhead Protection District
shall be reclaimed according to plans submitted to the
Municipality.
(9) Gravel mining activities in Wellhead Protection District must
have a spill prevention plan that is regularly maintained and
updated as well as emergency spill response plans.
(10) Haul roads shall be watered to control dust. Salting and
oiling of roads is prohibited.
(11) Storage of fuels is prohibited within WHPA’s.
(12) Rock crushers are prohibited within WHPA’s.
- 35 -
(13) There shall be no overnight storage of vehicles within the
WHPA’s, unless parked over a secondary containment area.
G. Performance Standards for Wastewater and Solid Waste
(1) Municipal wastewater disposal facilities, chemical waste
disposal sites of any kind, spreading of biosolids and
incinerator ash except Class “A” residuals as described in
Performance Standards for Chemical Spreading/Spraying of
this document, solid waste landfills, log storage yards and
lumber yards, and other direct discharges shall be prohibited
in WHPA’s.
(2) Waste disposal areas shall be set back 75 feet from wetlands
as defined in the Maine Natural Resources Protection Act
(NRPA). Wastes shall be placed a minimum of 2 feet above
the seasonal high groundwater table. Provide
documentation from a laboratory that wastes are inert.
(3) All new and replacement subsurface wastewater disposal
systems shall submit evidence of site suitability prepared by
a Maine licensed site evaluator in full compliance with the
requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Waste Water
Disposal Rules and for the systems producing > 1,000 gallons
per day of sewage, a hydrogeologic analysis of nitrate/nitrite
impact study, with nitrate/nitrite concentrations limited to
5mg/L at the property line.
(4) Sewer pipes shall be internally lined when buried within
WHPS’s.
(5) Sewers and drainage systems should be designed to insure
that stormwater does not enter sanitary sewers.
(6) Construction of sewers and septic systems shall be carefully
inspected to insure proper installation.
(7) Provide provisions to maintain sewer and septic systems.
H. Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
(1) Stormwater management system must include treatment
measures that will mitigate for the increased frequency and
duration of channel erosive flows due to runoff from smaller
storms, provide for effective treatment of pollutants in
stormwater and mitigate potential temperature impacts.
This shall be achieved by using one or more of the methods
listed in this section to control runoff from no less than 95%
of the impervious area and no less than 80% of the developed
area associated with a project that is impervious or
landscaped. The Planning Board may, on a case-by-case
- 36 -
basis, consider alternate treatment measures to those
described in this section. An alternate treatment measure
must provide at least as much pollutant removal as the
measures described in this section and, unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Board, as much channel protection
and temperature control.
i. Wetpond with detention above the permanent pool. A
stormwater management system using detention to
control runoff must detain, above a wetpond’s
permanent pool, a runoff volume equal to 1.0 inch
times the subcatchment’s impervious area plus 0.4 inch
times the subcatchment’s landscaped area. The
detained runoff must be discharged solely through an
underdrained vegetated gravel filter having a single
outlet having a diameter no greater than eight inches.
A wetpond must have a storage volume below the
permanent pool elevation at least equal to 1.5 inches
times the subcatchment’s impervious area plus 0.6 inch
times the subcatchment’s non-impervious developed
area, a mean depth of at least three feet, and a length
to width ratio of 2:1 or greater.
ii. Filter. A detention structure using filters to control
runoff must detain a runoff volume equal to 1.0 inch
times the subcatchment’s impervious area plus 0.4 inch
times the subcatchment’s developed area that is
landscaped and discharge it solely through an
underlined vegetated soil filter having a single outlet
with a diameter no greater than eight inches, or
through a proprietary filter system approved by the
Planning Board.
iii. Infiltration. A stormwater management system using
infiltration to control runoff must retain a runoff
volume equal to 1.0 inch times the subcatchment’s
impervious area plus 0.4 inch times the subcatchment’s
developed area that is landscaped and infiltrate this
volume into the ground. Pre-treatment of stormwater
must occur prior to discharge to the infiltration area.
The infiltration area must minimize discharge of soluble
pollutants to groundwater, and must be maintained to
assure that its capacity for infiltration and pollutant
removal is unimpaired.
iv. Buffers. A stormwater management system using
buffers to control runoff must meet the design criteria
listed in the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection Stormwater Rules, 06-96 CMR 500, as
- 37 -
amended.
(2) Drainage systems, including detention basins, drainage ways,
and storm sewer systems, shall be maintained in order to
insure they function properly.
(3) Chemicals and wastes shall be stored in such a manner to
prevent rainfall from contacting them.
(4) Runoff and snowmelt from parking lots should be diverted to
stormwater drains where possible.
(5) Parking lot cracks should be repaired on an annual basis.
I. Performance Standards for Road Maintenance
(1) Cover all sand and salt piles.
(2) Minimize use of salt in all cases. Sand/salt mixtures with the
lowest effective proportion of salt should be used.
(3) Prohibit snow dumps or storage in areas of contribution.
J. Performance Standards for Fill
(1) Use only inert material (loam, sand, gravel, clay, rocks,
bricks or concrete).
(2) Use only clean fill (non non-natural odors, no staining, and
not originating at a known spill site).
(3) Implement erosion and sedimentation control measures.
- 38 -
SECTION 6. CONTROL OF EXISTING THREATS
A. Inspections
The CEO shall also have the right to inspect any property located in a
Wellhead Protection Area, except building interior, at reasonable
hours, without landowner permission, as provided in 30-A MRS § 4452,
for the purpose of determining compliance with this Ordinance or any
permit issued hereunder. The CEO may be accompanied by a
representative of the Water Department. In the event the landowner
denies or prevents access for this purpose, the CEO shall be authorized
to apply for an administrative site inspection warrant pursuant to Rule
80E, Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
B. Monitoring
Whenever the CEO finds that a use existing as of the date of adoption
of this Ordinance, including but not limited to uses of the types
identified in Article III, Section 2 of this ordinance, is located within a
Wellhead Protection Area designated by this ordinance and poses an
actual or potential threat to the safety or quality of a public
groundwater supply, the Planning Board may order the property owner
to grant permission for installation, or to install, groundwater
monitoring wells and to conduct testing when the municipality or
district can clearly show that groundwater monitoring in the area will
serve to protect the public water supply from existing or potential
threats as outlined in this Ordinance. Installation of monitoring wells
and testing and monitoring of groundwater in such cases shall be at the
sole cost of the municipality or the Water Department, provided that if
such testing indicates that the use is found to cause or contribute to
reduction of eighty percent (80%) or more of the State Primary or
Secondary Drinking Water standards at the Water Department property
line, the property owner shall reimburse the municipality or Water
Department for all expenses incurred for installation, testing and
monitoring.
C. Enforcement
If any use causes or contributes to a reduction of eighty percent (80%)
or more of the State Primary or Secondary Water standards at the
Water Department property line, the CEO may require the owner of
the property on which the contaminating use occurs to cease activity,
install or construct mechanisms, or enact appropriate procedures to
reduce the contamination.
- 39 -
ARTICLE IV. DEFINITIONS
Agriculture
The cultivation of soil, producing or raising crops, including
gardening, horticulture, and silviculture, as a commercial
operation. The term shall also include greenhouse, orchards,
nurseries, and versions thereof, but shall not include home
gardens.
Airport Fire Fighter Training Area
Area in which airport fire fighting training exercises take place,
and where foams and often fire fighting chemicals are sprayed
during such exercises.
Airport Fueling Area
Area in which aircraft refueling occurs and in which aircraft fuel is
stored.
Aquifer
A permeable geologic formation, either rock or sediment, that is
capable of transporting water through the formation.
Auto Chemical Supplies Wholesaler
A commercial establishment which sells chemicals used for
automobile operation, repair, or maintenance to retailers; an
establishment where such chemicals are stored in bulk quantities.
Auto Repair Shop
A business establishment engaged in general repair, engine
rebuilding, parts replacement. Automotive repair shall not mean
body, frame, or fender straightening and repair of painting and
undercoating, nor the sale of gasoline, other motor fuels or motor
oil.
Best Management Practice
Procedures designed to minimize the impact of certain activities
or land uses on groundwater quality and quantity, and shall
include best management practices relating to groundwater
quality as developed by the State of Maine departments of
Agriculture, Forestry, Transportation and Development pursuant
to 38 M.R.S.A. Section 410-J.
Board
- 40 -
Refers to the Town of Farmington Planning Board.
Body Shop
A business establishment engaged in body, frame, or fender
straightening and repair or painting and undercoating of
automobiles and other vehicles.
Chemical Bulk Storage
Storage of a chemical or chemicals in a container or containers
larger than those intended for normal homeowner or retailer
purposes. Proper, non-commercial, homeowner use of chemicals
is not included.
Chemical Reclamation
Commercial processing or storage of used chemicals intended for
re-use.
Code Enforcement Officer
A person appointed by the municipal officers to administer and
enforce this Ordinance.
Commercial
Any activity carried out for pecuniary gain.
Conforming
A building, structure, activity or land use which complies with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
Construction
Includes building, erecting, moving or any physical operations on
the premises which are required for construction. Excavating,
filling, paving and the like shall be considered part of
construction.
Construction and Commercial Equipment & Vehicle Storage
Storage of construction equipment or other commercial vehicles
in excess of thirty (30) consecutive days in which the equipment is
not used.
Construction/Demolition of Uses Listed in This Table
Construction or demolition of facilities, buildings, etc. associated
with the land uses or activities listed in the Wellhead Protection
Zone Table by a contractor or commercial operation.
Developed Area
- 41 -
“Disturbed area” (see definition below) excluding areas that are
returned to a condition with the same drainage patterns and
vegetative cover type that existed prior to the disturbance. An
area is not considered developed if planting to restore the
previous cover type and restoration of any altered drainage
patterns occur within one calendar year of the disturbance.
Disturbed Area
All land areas that are stripped, graded, grubbed, filled or
excavated at any time during the site preparation or removing
vegetation for, or construction of, a project. Disturbed area does
not include routine maintenance, but does include redevelopment
and new impervious area.
Drinking Water Standards, Primary and Secondary
Standards for drinking water as stated in the State of Maine Rules
Relating to Drinking Water, Maine Department of Human Services.
District
A specified portion of the municipality, delineated on a map,
within which certain regulations and requirements or various
combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Dump (see landfill)
Floor Drain
An opening in the floor that leads to the ground and/or is not
permitted under other State, federal, or local regulations. Work
sinks which lead to such drains are included.
Food Processor
A commercial establishment which processes, treats, bottles, cans
or otherwise modifies food in preparation for wholesale.
Fuel Oil Distributor; Fuel Oil Storage
The storage of fuel for distribution or sale. Storage of fuel oil not
for domestic use, i.e., not in tanks directly connected to burners.
Furniture Stripper
A commercial operation which strips and/or refinishes furniture.
Gas Station, Service Station
Any place of business at which gasoline, other motor fuel or motor
oil are sold to the public for use in a motor vehicle, regardless of
- 42 -
any other business on the premises.
Golf Course
An area developed and maintained specifically for playing golf
including 9-hole and 18-hold laid-out courses and driving ranges,
but excluding miniature golf courses in which no fertilizers,
herbicides, pesticides, or other chemicals are used or stored.
Groundwater
The water contained within the interconnected pores, cracks or
fractures located below the water table or a confined or
unconfined aquifer.
Hazardous Material
Any gaseous, liquid or solid materials, or substances designated as
hazardous by the Environmental Protection Agency and/or the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
Hazardous Waste
Any substance identified under chapter 850, Identification of
Hazardous Wastes, of the rules of the State of Maine, Department
of Environmental Protection, effective date July 1, 1980,
including revisions or amendments thereto, and any radioactive
waste material which means any solid, liquid, or gas residue,
including but not limited to spent fuel assemblies prior to
processing, remaining after the primary usefulness of the
radioactive material has been exhausted and containing nuclides
that spontaneously disintegrate or exhibit ionizing radiations.
Heat Treater, Smelter, Annealer, Descaler
Commercial metal-working establishments involved with these
processes on a regular basis.
Heating Oil Storage (Consumptive Use)
Storage for heating of heating oil in excess of 660 gallons. (Tanks
with capacity between 50 gallons and 660 gallons are regulated by
the Oil and Solid Fuel Board.)
Identified New Well Site
A test well or test well location located in the field and/or on an
map by a qualified geologist, hydrogeologist, or engineer which is
deemed to have high potential for serving as a public water
supply.
Impervious Area
- 43 -
The total area of a parcel that consist of buildings and associate
constructed facilities or areas that will be covered with a low
permeability material, such as asphalt or concrete, and areas
such as gravel roads and unpaved parking areas that will be
compacted through design or use to reduce permeability.
Industrial
Any activity which includes the assembling, fabrication, servicing,
manufacturing, storage, packaging, processing or shipping of
goods, or the extraction of minerals.
Industrial Waste
Wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial
manufacturing, trade, or business establishments.
Inert Fill
Material placed on or into ground as fill that will not react
chemically with soil, geologic material, or groundwater.
Infiltration
Any process specifically used to meet all or part of the
stormwater standard of this chapter by actively directing all or
part of the stormwater into the soil. Infiltration is the process by
which runoff percolates through the unsaturated overburden and
fractured bedrock to the water table. For the purposes of this
ordinance, infiltration does not include:
1. Incidental wetting of soil in ditches, detention basins or the
equivalent;
2. Wetting of underdrained basins, dry swales or similar
filtration systems;
3. Wetting of buffers meeting the performance standards of this
ordinance.
Discharge of runoff to areas of the site where the water will
collect and percolate into the ground is considered infiltration if
the volume, rate or quality of the discharge exceeds the runoff
capacity of the area, such as a stormwater treatment buffer.
Underdrained swales, underdrained ponds and similar practices
that discharge to surface waters or to buffer strips meeting the
requirements of this ordinance are not considered infiltration
systems, although these may be used to treat runoff prior to
discharge to an infiltration area.
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPM)
- 44 -
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is the coordinated use of
physical, biological and cultural controls and least-toxic pest
control products and techniques to prevent unacceptable levels of
pest damage by the most economical means with the least
possible hazard to people, property and the environment.
Integrated Pest Management involves the monitoring of pest
populations, establishment of injury levels, modification of
habitats (to eliminate sources of food, water, harborage and
entry), utilization of least-toxic controls, and keeping of records
and evaluation of performance on an ongoing basis.
Intensive Open Space Uses
Uses of open space which have the potential, because of their
duration, frequency, or nature, to significantly impact the
environment, particularly the groundwater quality and quantity.
Examples of intensive open space uses include, but are not
limited to: automobile or all-terrain vehicle race tracks or ranges,
power lines, golf courses, etc.
Junk, Salvage Yard
A yard, field, or other area used as a place of storage for:
1. Discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating
supplies, household appliances and furniture.
2. Discarded, scrap and junked lumber.
3. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper
trash, rubber or plastic debris, waste and all scrap iron,
steel and other scrap or ferrous or non ferrous material.
4. Used tires, discarded tires, or worn-out tires which may
or may not be usable now or in the future.
5. Town garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary fills will
not be considered junkyards for the purpose of this
Ordinance.
Landfill
An area used for the placement of solid waste, liquid waste or
other discarded material on or in the ground.
Landscaped Area
An area of land that has been disturbed and re-planted or covered
with one or more of the following: Lawn or other herbaceous
plants, shrubs, trees or mulch; but including area that has
reverted to natural, vegetated condition.
Mining or Mineral Extraction
The removal of geologic materials such as soil, topsoil, loam,
- 45 -
sand, gravel, clay, metallic ores, rock, peat or other like material
from its natural location and transportation of the product
removed, away from the extraction site.
Mobile Home Park
An area designed or planned for the placement of two or more
mobile homes or manufactured housing units.
Nonconforming Use
A building, structure, use of land, or portion thereof, existing at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance
which does not conform to all applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
Nursery (horticultural)
Commercial establishment for cultivation of flowering plants,
shrubs, trees, etc.
Open Space
Land that is free of buildings and other permanent structures.
Park
Land area set aside for public recreation, conservation, wildlife,
or other similar purpose.
Pesticide, Herbicide Wholesaler or Retailer
Commercial establishment which sells pesticides and/or
herbicides.
Pesticide, Herbicide Bulk Storage
Storage or herbicides or pesticides intended for sale or intended
for application on commercial premises or intended for
application on cash crops. Homeowner storage or storage by noncommercial
gardeners is not included.
Railroad Yard
Area with multiple railroad tracks intended for transfer or storage
of railroad cars or freight.
Residential Dwelling Unit
A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for
use as permanent, seasonal, temporary living quarters for only
one family. This term shall include mobile homes.
Residential Home (see all Residential Dwelling Unit)
- 46 -
A structure containing one or more residential dwelling units.
Road
A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material constructed for or
created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles.
Salt or Sand/Salt Piles (covered)
Storage of salt or sand/salt mix intended for municipal,
commercial or other use except for homeowner sidewalks, steps,
or driveways beneath a roof or other structure capable of
preventing precipitation from reaching the salt or sand/salt.
Salt or Sand/Salt Piles (uncovered)
Storage of any amount of salt or sand/salt, for any purpose,
without a roof or other structure capable of preventing
precipitation from reaching the salt or sand/salt.
Silviculture
The art of cultivating a forest; forestry.
Site Plan Review
An applicant-prepared document and associated procedure for
certain proposed new or expanded developments.
Sludge
Residual material produced by water or sewer treatment
processes, industrial processes, or domestic septic tanks.
Sludge Utilization
The spreading of sludge on the ground or other use of sludge
which might expose surface or groundwater to the sludge.
Snow Dump
A location to which snow is transported and dumped by
commercial, municipal, or State snow-plowing operations.
Solid Fill
Material placed on or into the ground as fill; the material will not
react chemically with soil, geologic material, or groundwater that
may be present at the site.
Solid Waste
Discarded solid material with insufficient liquid contact to be free
flowing. This includes but is not limited to rubbish, garbage,
- 47 -
scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert fill materials and landscape
refuse.
SPCC Plan
Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure Plan as described in
40CFR, Part 112 of Federal Oil Pollution Prevention Regulations.
Stormwater Drainage
A sewer or other system for conveying surface runoff due to storm
events and unpolluted ground or surface water, including that
collected by cellar drains, but excluding sanitary sewage and
industrial waste.
Stormwater Impoundment
Any structure designed and constructed to contain stormwater
runoff.
Subdivision
A subdivision shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land as
defined in Title 30A, M.R.S., § 4401 and as hereafter amended.
The term subdivision shall also include such developments as
mobile home parks, multiple-family dwelling(s), shopping centers,
condominiums, and industrial parks where there are three or
more units involved, and additional divisions and developments
defined as subdivision in the Farmington Subdivision Ordinance.
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal System (Subsurface Injection)
A collection of treatment tank(s), disposal area(s), holding tank(s)
and pond(s), surface spray system(s), cesspool(s), well(s), surface
ditch(es), alternative toilet(s), or other devices and associated
piping designed to function as a unit for the purpose of disposing
of wastes or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth.
The term shall not include any wastewater discharge system
licensed under 38 M.R.S. § 414, any surface wastewater disposal
system licensed under 38 MRSA section 413, Subsection 1-A, or
any public sewer, sewerage system or wastewater treatment
plant.
Timber Harvesting
The cutting and removal of trees from their growing site, and the
attendant operation of cutting and skidding machinery.
Time of Travel Boundary
A boundary, beyond which, groundwater will take more than a set
48
period of time (i.e., 200 days) to travel to a given point (i.e., a
pumping well). Pumping conditions for defining a time of travel
boundary are defined in the Maine Wellhead Protection Program
Transfer Station; Recycling Facility
Facility designed for temporary storage of discarded material
intended for transfer to another location for disposal, re-use,
and/or processing.
Utility Corridor
Right-of-way, easement, or other corridor for transmission wires,
pipes or other facilities for conveying energy, communication
signals, fuel, water, wastewater, etc. Municipal water supply
distribution mains, operational, or maintenance facilities, are
excluded from restrictions in the Wellhead Protection Table.
Underground Storage Tank
As defined by State of Maine regulations published by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
Variance
A relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance where such variance
would not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the
actions of the applicant, and where literal enforcement of this
Ordinance would result in unnecessary or undue hardship. The
crucial points of variance are undue hardship and unique
circumstances, applying to the property. A variance is not
justified unless both elements are present in the case.
Waste Disposal, Industrial/Commercial - see Industrial Waste
Wastewater
Any combination of water-carried wastes from institutional,
commercial and industrial establishments, and residences,
together with any storm, surface or groundwater as may be
present.
Wastewater Treatment Plant
Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating
wastewater.
Watershed
Land lying adjacent to water courses and surface water bodies
which creates the catchment or drainage area of such water
49
courses and bodies; the watershed boundary is determined by
connecting topographic high points surrounding such catchment or
drainage areas.
Wellhead
The specific location of a well (a hole or shaft dug or drilled to
obtain water) and/or any structure built over or extending from a
well.
Wellhead Protection Area
A zone, consisting or 2 districts, delineated according to Article
III, Section 1 of this Ordinance.
Well, Abandoned
A shaft, casing, tile, hole, or pipe placed, drilled or dug in the
ground for extraction or monitoring of groundwater that has not
been used for a period of two consecutive years.
Well, Existing or New
A shaft, casing, tile, hole, or pipe placed, drilled or dug in the
ground for extraction or monitoring of groundwater.
Well sites, identified - see identified new well site
Zone of Contribution
The area from which groundwater flows to a pumping well.
Town of Farmington
Wellhead Protection Area Map
Well #2
Town Farm
Road
Fairbanks
Road
Well #1

2
Town of Farmington
Chapter 11- Land Use
Table of Contents
Article 11- Wireless Telecommunications Facility Siting Ordinance
11.11.1 Title 3
11-11.2 Authority and Applicability 3
11-11.3 Purpose 3
11-11.4 Conflict with Other Ordinances 3
11-11.5 Effective Date 3
11-11.6 Permits Required 3
11-11.7 Validity and Severability 4
11-11.8 Definitions 4
11-11.9 Exemptions 6
11-11.10 Application Procedures 6
11-11.11 Permit Fees 8
11-11.12 Enforcement/Penalties 8
11-11.13 Appeals 8
11-11.14 Amendments 8
3
TOWN OF FARMINGTON
Wireless Telecommunications Facility Siting Ordinance
Chapter 11
Land Use
11-11.1 Title:
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Town of Farmington Wireless
Telecommunications Facility Siting Ordinance” and will be referred to herein as “this Ordinance”.
This Ordinance limits Wireless Telecommunication Facility Siting to the zoning district(s)
specified under the Zoning Ordinance Table of Uses; prescribes definitions of wireless
telecommunication terminology; provides for permitting and regulation; and provides for
additional miscellaneous standards.
11-11.2 Authority and Applicability:
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of
the Maine Constitution; the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Authority (30-A M.R.S. §3001
et. seq.) and the provisions of the Planning and Land Use Regulation Act, 30-A M.R.S.§4312 et.
seq.
Persons or entities wishing to establish a Wireless Telecommunications Facility Siting within the
Town of Farmington shall first obtain a permit from the CEO or Planning Board and shall be
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
11-11.3 Purpose:
This Ordinance is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the Town of
Farmington, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of
telecommunications facilities within the Town.
11-11.4 Conflict with Other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with other provisions of
this Ordinance, or of any other ordinance, regulation or standard, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
11-11.5 Effective Date:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date this Ordinance is adopted by the voters at
Town Meeting.
11-11.6 Permits Required:
No person shall construct or expand a wireless telecommunication tower without obtaining a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) or the Planning Board as follows:
4
A. Expansion of an Existing Tower, New Towers 75 Feet or Less, and Co-location.
Approval by the CEO is required for any expansion of an existing wireless
telecommunications tower that increases the height of the tower by no more than twenty (20)
feet; accessory use of an alternative tower structure; construction of new towers seventy-five
(75) feet or less in height; or co-location on an existing wireless telecommunications tower.
B. New Construction. Approval of the Planning Board is required for construction of all new
telecommunication towers exceeding seventy-five (75) feet; and any expansion of an
existing wireless telecommunications tower that increases the height of the facility by more
than twenty (20) feet.
C. Approval Authority. In accordance with Article 1, the CEO or Planning Board shall review
applications for wireless telecommunications towers, and make written findings on whether
the proposed facility complies with this Ordinance.
11-11.7 Validity and Severability:
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
11-11.8 Definitions:
As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the
following meanings:
Alternative Tower Structure. “Alternative Tower Structure” means clock towers, bell steeples,
light poles and water towers, and similar alternative-design mounting structures and devices
used in support of antennas and/or concealment of such.
Antenna. “Antenna” means any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic frequency signals.
Antenna Height. “Antenna Height” means the vertical distance measured from the base of the
antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure, even if said highest point
is an antenna. Measurement of tower height shall include antenna, base pad, and other
appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished grade of the facility site. If the support
structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be
used in calculating the antenna height.
Co-location. “Co-location” means the use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more
than one wireless telecommunications provider.
Commercial Mobile Services. “Commercial Mobile Services” means any mobile service that is
provided for profit and makes interconnected service available to the public or to such classes of
eligible users as to be effectively available to a substantial portion of the public, as specified by
regulation by the FCC.
5
Expansion. “Expansion” means the addition of antennas, towers, or other devices to an
existing structure.
FAA. “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its lawful successor.
FCC. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.
Height. “Height” means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point
is an antenna.
Interconnected Service. “Interconnected Service” means service that is interconnected with
the public switched network (as such terms are defined by regulation by the FCC) or service for
which a request for interconnection is pending.
Mobile Service. “Mobile Service” means a radio communication service conducted between
mobile stations or receivers and land stations, and by mobile stations communicating among
themselves, and includes both one-way and two-way radio communication services; a mobile
service which provides a regularly interacting group of base, mobile, portable, and associated
control and relay stations (whether licensed on an individual, cooperative, or multiple basis) for
private one-way or two-way land mobile radio communications by eligible users over designated
areas of operation; and any service for which a license is required in a personal communications
service.
Parabolic Antenna. “Parabolic Antenna” (also known as a satellite dish antenna) means an
antenna which is bowl-shaped, designed for the reception and/or transmission of
electromagnetic radiation signals in a specific directional pattern.
Personal Wireless Service Facilities. “Personal Wireless Service Facilities” means facilities
for the provision of personal wireless services.
Personal Wireless Services. “Personal Wireless Services” means commercial mobile
services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services.
Tower. “Tower” means any structure, whether freestanding or in association with a building or
other permanent structure, that is designed and constructed primarily for the purposes of
supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or
monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers.
Unlicensed Services. “Unlicensed Services” means the offering of telecommunications
services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but does not
mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services.
6
Wireless Telecommunications Facility. “Wireless Telecommunications Facility” means any
structure, antenna, tower, or other device which provides radio/television transmission,
commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone services,
specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), common carrier wireless exchange phone
services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), common carrier wireless exchange
access services, and personal communications service (PCS) or pager services. Excluded from
this definition are individual wireless electronic devices for personal use, either indoors or
outdoors. (Examples: Wireless door and light controls, wireless computers and accessory
equipment, cordless phones, “walkie-talkies”, wireless entertainment systems, wireless security
systems).
11-11.9 Exemptions:
The following are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance:
A. Emergency Wireless Telecommunications Facility. Temporary wireless communication
facilities for emergency communications.
B. Amateur (ham) radio stations. Amateur (ham radio stations licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission [FCC]) if associated tower is seventy-five (75) feet or less in
height.
C. Parabolic & Flat-Panel antennas. Parabolic & flat-panel antennas less than seven (7) feet
in diameter, that are an accessory residential use of the property.
D. Maintenance or repair. Maintenance, repair or reconstruction of a wireless
telecommunications facility and related equipment, provided that there is no change in the
height or any other dimension of the facility.
E. Temporary wireless telecommunications facility. Temporary wireless
telecommunications facility, in operation for a maximum period of one hundred eighty (180)
days.
F. Residential antennas. An antenna that is an accessory to a residential dwelling unit and is
less than twenty (20) feet above roof peak or less than forty-five (45) feet above grade.
G. Pre-existing Facility. This Ordinance does not render illegal any structure, facility or use
which legally existed or was under active construction at the effective date of this Ordinance.
11-11.10 Application Procedure:
A. Application. An application for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility Siting permit must
include the following information:
1. Location of the proposed structure, including map/lot number and street address.
2. Name of owner or operator of the telecommunications facility and owner of property.
7
3. Date the telecommunication facility was initially constructed or is proposed to be
constructed.
4. A description and construction detail of the telecommunication, facility, including: plot
plan identifying location of the tower on the property; dimensions of the tower; and
structural supports, if any. This description shall also identify any accessory structures
that are essential to operation of the telecommunication facility.
5. Certification that construction of the structure meets industry standards and satisfies all
federal, State and local building code requirements.
6. Provide documentation of FCC approval and licensure: This shall include copies of the
carrier’s FCC/ULS license, copies of National Environmental Protection Act
(NEPA)/National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) compliance statements under Section
106 (16 U.S.C. 470f) of the NHPA of 1966, and copies of Maine Historic Preservation
Commission (MHPC) compliance review under Section 106.
B. Notice to Abutters.
Abutting property owners shall be notified by certified mail, by the Town, at least fourteen (14)
days prior to initial Planning Board or CEO consideration. The cost of notification shall be borne
by the applicant. This notice shall indicate the time, date and place of Planning Board
consideration, if applicable. Public hearings may be called at the discretion of the Planning
Board or CEO.
C. Standards for Permit.
1. A new permit shall be granted for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility siting only in a
district or zone in which such a facility is allowed.
2. Setbacks. All telecommunication towers shall be setback from abutting property lines by
a distance equal to 105% of tower height. Towers, guys and accessory facilities shall
meet the minimum zoning district requirements.
3. Building Codes & Safety Standards.
a. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner shall
ensure that it is designed, constructed and maintained in conformance with industry
standards and applicable federal, State and local building, electrical and safety codes.
b. Unless it can be demonstrated that the tower is access secure and not a safety
hazard a security fence or wall not less than eight (8) feet in height from the finished
grade shall be provided around the tower. Access to the tower shall be through a
locked gate.
8
4. Other Requirements.
Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other federal or
State authority. If lighting is required, the Planning Board may review the available
lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance of the
surrounding properties and views.
5. Removal of Abandoned/Unused Facilities.
The owner of a telecommunications facility shall be required to remove the tower should
it not be used for the use or uses approved for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months. Unless the owner of a telecommunication facility and the land owner are one
and the same, the applicant for a permit under this section, shall post a performance
guarantee with the Town prior to obtaining a permit that is equal to one hundred twentyfive
percent (125%) of the cost of removing the structure.
The performance guarantee covering such removal shall be for a minimum term of five
years. Requirement for renewal of the guarantee shall be at the discretion of the CEO or
Planning Board. The guarantee must contain a mechanism, satisfactory to the Town, for
review of the cost of removal of the structure every five years, and a mechanism for
increasing the amount of the guarantee should the revised cost estimate so necessitate.
11-11.11 Permit Fees:
An application for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility Siting shall be accompanied by a fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00).
11-11.12 Enforcement/Penalties:
A. Enforcement. The Board of Selectmen or their designees shall enforce this Ordinance.
B. Penalties. Whoever violates this Ordinance is subject to penalty under 30-A M.R.S. §4452.
Each day that the violation continues constitutes a separate offense with maximum fines of
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per offense. There is a twenty-five thousand
dollar ($25,000.00) maximum fine per offense upon the second conviction within two (2)
years for violations under this Ordinance.
11-11.13 Appeals:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board may
appeal to the Board of Appeals by filing a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after receipt of
the Code Enforcement Officer’s or Planning Board’s notification. Administrative appeals and
variance applications submitted under this Ordinance shall be subject to the standards and
procedures established by the Town of Farmington Board of Appeals Ordinance.
9
11-11.14 Amendments:
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
1. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board of Selectmen has so voted;
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the number
of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial elections.
B. Public Hearing: The Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
amendment. Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
C. Adoption of Amendment: An amendment to this Ordinance shall be adopted by a majority
vote of a Town Meeting.
TOWN OF FARMINGTON
Zoning Ordinance
ENACTED: November 18, 1999
AMENDED: March 12, 2001
June 12, 2001
March 11, 2002
April 9, 2002
August 5, 2002
March 10, 2003
July 19, 2004
March 12, 2007
September 25, 2007
March 10, 2008
March 19, 2012
November 22, 2016
March 26, 2018
March 25, 2019
CERTIFIED BY: ____________________________
Town Clerk Affix Seal
2
Town of Farmington
Chapter 11 – Land Use
Table of Contents
Article 8 – Zoning
11-8.1 Title 3
11-8.2 Authority & Administration 3
11-8.3 Purposes 3
11-8.4 Applicability 3
11-8.5 Conflicts with other Ordinances 4
11-8.6 Effective Date 4
11-8.7 Validity and Severability 4
11-8.8 Definitions 4
11-8.9 Establishment of Districts 20
A. Growth Areas 20
B. Rural Areas 21
C. Overlay Districts 21
D. Table of Uses 21
E. Dimensional Requirements 25
F. Setback Starting Point 27
G. Road Classifications 28
11-8.10 Non-Conformance 32
11-8.11 Performance Standards 36
A. Manufactured Housing 36
B. Home Occupation 42
C. Extractive Industry 43
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading 46
E. Landscaping 55
F. Private Outdoor Lighting 61
G. Transportation: Access Management 63
H. Facades in the Village Business Historic District 75
I. Open Space Residential Development 76
J. Wind Energy Systems 80
K. Solar Energy Systems 86
L. Odor Nuisance Control & Abatement 92
11-8.12 Appeals 94
11-8.13 Amendments 94
11-8.14 Enforcement 95
11-8.15 Zoning Map 97
3
Town of Farmington
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 11
Land Use
11- 8.1 Title:
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance
and will be referred to herein as “this Ordinance”.
11- 8.2 Authority and Administration:
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling of Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1, of the
Maine Constitution and the provisions of 30-A M.R.S. §3001 et. seq. (Home Rule) and
§4312 et. seq. (Planning and Land Use).
This Ordinance is pursuant to and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the
Town of Farmington.
A zoning map indicating each established zone is incorporated in this Ordinance.
The Planning Board of the Town of Farmington, herein after called “the Board”, shall
administer this Ordinance.
11- 8.3 Purposes:
The purposes of this Ordinance are:
1. To implement the provisions of the Town’s Comprehensive Plan;
2. To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town;
3. To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town;
4. To promote traffic safety;
5. To provide safety from fire and other elements;
6. To provide an allotment of land area in new developments sufficient for adequate
enjoyment of community life; and
7. To conserve natural resources.
11- 8.4 Applicability:
The provisions of this Ordinance shall govern all use of land, buildings, or structures, and
all construction of buildings or structures including the erection, relocation, modification,
alteration, or expansion of such within the Town of Farmington. In addition, land, building,
structures, and uses located within Shoreland areas as defined in 38 M.R.S. §435 are
subject to the Town of Farmington Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
4
11- 8.5 Conflicts with Other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
11- 8.6 Effective Date:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date this Ordinance was originally
adopted by the voters at Town Meeting, and is subsequently amended by the voters at
Town Meeting.
11- 8.7 Validity and Severability:
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
11- 8.8 Definitions:
The definitions listed in this section 11-8.8 are an integral part of this Ordinance. Where
the definitions include regulations, restrictions, limitations or prohibitions, the definitions
shall constitute enforceable requirements of this Ordinance.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have
the same meaning as they have in common usage and shall be construed to give this
Ordinance their most reasonable application. Words used in the present tense include the
future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular.
The word “may” is permissive; “shall” is mandatory, not discretionary.
Abutting Property: Any lot which is physically contiguous with the subject lot even if only
at a point and any lot which is located directly across a street or right-of-way.
Acceleration Lane: A speed-change lane for the purpose of enabling a vehicle entering a
roadway to increase its speed to a rate at which it can safely merge with through traffic.
Access: The ability to enter or leave a public street or highway from an adjacent driveway
or another public street.
Access Management: The management of driveways and intersections to maintain
highway safety and traffic carrying capacity of all highways/roads and to maintain the
posted speed limit of arterials.
Accessory Apartment: An apartment created by converting part of an existing single
family detached dwelling or accessory building into a separate dwelling unit containing not
more than one bedroom and not more than five hundred and fifty (550) square feet of total
space.
5
Accessory Structure or Use: A structure or use which is incidental and subordinate to
the principal use or structure, allowed in the district in which it is located, and located on
the same lot with such principal building or use. An accessory building is a structure
detached from the principal building and containing the accessory use. A garage attached
to the principal structure by roof or common wall is considered part of the principal
structure.
Agricultural Products Processing: Establishments engaged in the processing and/or
manufacturing and/or packaging of foods and all other plant and animal products, including
but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy products; meat
products (beef, poultry, pork, lamb, venison, etc.); fruits and vegetables; ornamental and
greenhouse products; maple syrup products; commercial composting and storage of all the
preceding.
Agriculture and Agricultural Management Activities: The production, keeping, or
maintenance, for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals to include ornamental and
greenhouse products; land clearing if the land topography is not altered; tilling, fertilizing,
spreading and disposal of manure, liming, planting, pesticide application, harvesting or
cultivating crops, pasturing of livestock, minor drainage; and other similar or related
activities. Agriculture does not include forest management or timber harvesting activities.
Air Transportation Dependent Use: Facilities and uses associated with the functions
and support of air transport activities, both cargo and passenger, including by way of
example, but not limited to, hangers, terminals, refueling, control towers, repair and
maintenance, and various accommodations for passengers and crews.
Amusement Facility/Park: A commercially operated premises which is maintained or
operated primarily for the amusement, patronage, or recreation of the public. This
includes, but is not limited to, activities for entertainment such as motorized rides, water
slides, miniature golf, batting cages, indoor table sports, and the like.
Animal Breeding and/or Care (Husbandry): The breeding and raising of livestock for
commercial purposes. Does not include a kennel, which is defined separately.
Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT): The annual average two-way daily traffic volume
that represents the total annual traffic on a road for the year, divided by three hundred and
sixty-five (365).
Aquifer: A permeable geologic formation, either rock or sediment, that is capable of
transporting water through the formation.
Arterial: A major/minor public roadway that serves long-distance through-traffic.
Authorized Agent: An individual or firm having written authorization to act on behalf of a
property owner or applicant. The authorization shall be signed by the property owner or
applicant.
Auto Body Shop: A business establishment engaged in body, frame or fender
straightening and repair, or painting and undercoating.
6
Auto Repair Shop: A business establishment engaged in general repair, engine
rebuilding and parts replacement. Auto Repair shall not mean auto body repair or the sale
of gasoline, other motor fuels or motor oil.
Automobile Graveyard: A yard, field or other area used to store three (3) or more
unserviceable vehicles or discarded, worn-out or junked motor vehicles or parts of such
motor vehicles. This does not include any area used for temporary [up to ninety (90) days]
storage by an establishment or place of business that is primarily engaged in doing auto
body repair work or in making repairs to render a motor vehicle serviceable. This does
include an area used for automobile dismantling, salvage and recycling operations.
Automobile Recycling Business: The business premises of a person who purchases or
acquires salvage vehicles for the purpose of reselling the vehicles or component parts of
the vehicles or rebuilding or repairing salvage vehicles for the purpose of resale or for
selling the basic materials in the salvage vehicles, provided that eighty percent (80%) of
the property (or, in the case of multiple uses, eighty percent (80%) of the portion of the
property used for the automobile recycling business) is devoted to recycling activities, as
distinguished from disposal or storage of unserviceable, discarded, worn out or junked
motor vehicles or parts of such motor vehicles.
Automobile Sales: Any site and/or facility where new and/or used vehicles are sold. This
includes, but is not limited to, brand dealerships, used car dealerships, and any other
locations where vehicles may be sold as a primary use or as an adjunct to other activities.
This definition does not include the sale of personally owned registered vehicles.
Backlot: Any lot or parcel of land that does not have frontage (or lacks the minimum
required thereof) on a public road (per the Town Street Ordinance) or on a privately owned
road, or lacks the potential for legal access.
Bed and Breakfast: Any dwelling in which transient lodging or boarding and lodging are
provided and offered to the public for compensation for less than one week. This dwelling
shall also be the full-time, permanent residence of its owner. There shall be no provisions
for cooking in any individual guest room.
Boarding/Lodging: Any residential structure where lodging, with or without meals, are
provided for compensation for a period of at least one week, and where a family residing in
the building acts as proprietor or owner. There shall be no provisions for cooking in any
individual guest room.
Boat Building, Sales and Repair: The commercial construction or fabrication of boats.
Boat building, as an activity, and the place in which boat building takes place, are distinct
from a marina and/or boat storage facility. Wooden boats are those comprised primarily of
wood and have wooden hulls. Non-wooden boats are those primarily comprised of
materials such as fiberglass, ABS, carbon fiber, steel, concrete, etc.
Building Materials: Any and all materials which could be used in the construction of a
building.
7
Building: Any three-dimensional enclosure by any building materials of any space for any
use or occupancy, temporary or permanent, and shall include foundations and air-raid
shelters in the ground, as well as all parts of any kind of structure above ground, except
fences and field or garden walls or embankment retaining walls. “Building” shall include
the phrase “manufactured housing unit”, as defined in this section, and the word
“structure”, unless the context unequivocally indicates otherwise. “Building” shall not
include any recreational trailer or tent that is a structure to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational camping; travel, or other legally permitted use.
Bulk Storage Plant or Terminal: That portion of a property where liquid, semi-solid or
solid materials (chemicals, grains, particulates, etc.) are received by tank vessel, pipelines,
tank car, tank vehicle or container, and are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of
distributing such materials by tank vessel, pipeline, tank car, tank vehicle, portable tank, or
container.
Campground: A plot of ground upon which two (2) or more campsites are located,
established, or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the general public for
recreational use as transient living quarters.
Cemetery: Land used for the internment of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
Chemical Dependency Treatment Facility: A state-licensed facility for the treatment of
chemical dependency.
Church: A place of worship, regardless of denomination. (See also synagogue)
Civic, Convention Center: A facility, either publicly or privately owned, designed and
equipped to provide mass accommodation to the public for events such as, but not limited
to; sports games, concerts, lectures, circuses, stunt shows, expositions (garden, home,
auto, construction, trade etc.), large group meetings (business, government, special
interest, etc.).
Clinic, Medical, or Dental: An establishment providing outpatient examination, treatment,
or other care by a physician or dentist, excluding chemical dependency treatment facilities.
Club: Any volunteer association of persons organized for recreational, social, religious,
benevolent, literary, scientific or political purposes, whose facilities, especially a clubhouse,
are open to members and guests only and not the general public and not engaged in
activities customarily carried on by a business for pecuniary gain.
Code Enforcement Officer: A person appointed by the municipal officers to administer
and enforce the Town’s land use ordinances.
Collector Road: A roadway that connects local streets to arterials.
8
Commercial School: A place or institution for teaching and learning, which place or
institution is established for commercial or profit-making purposes, including, by way of
example only, schools for dance, music, riding, gymnastics, photography, driving,
business, etc.
Communication Facility: See Telecommunication Facility.
Community Center: A building owned and operated by the Town of Farmington for the
benefit of the community, which provides a meeting place for activities such as Town
Meetings, voting, recreational and institutional programs.
Compact Zone: The most recent designation by MDOT of the built-up urban area of
Town known as the “Compact Zone”.
Conference Center: A facility designed for gatherings of groups of people for formal or
informal meetings. It may also include a dining hall and overnight accommodation
facilities.
Congregate Housing: A type of dwelling which is occupied by elderly and/or disabled
persons and that provides shared community space and shared dining facilities and
normally also provides its residents with housekeeping services, personal care and
assistance, transportation assistance, recreational activities, and/or specialized shared
services such as medical support services.
“Shared community space” is space designed to be used in common for the enjoyment
and leisure of residents of the facility, such as, by way of example only, reading rooms,
sitting rooms, recreational rooms, rooms for entertaining guests, and exercise rooms.
“Shared dining facilities” are a room or rooms designed for the serving of meals to
residents sitting together, plus the kitchen and ancillary facilities required to prepare the
meals.
A congregate housing development shall include either or both the following types of
residential units: 1) Dwelling units, as defined by this ordinance, that is, single
housekeeping units with living, sanitary, sleeping and permanent cooking facilities. 2)
Residential care units, which do not meet the definition of dwelling unit because they have
no cooking facilities within the units, but which normally consist of rooms with single or
shared sleeping and sanitary facilities.
Additionally, the term congregate housing includes specialized facilities that provide longterm
residential care, such as those designed specifically for persons with Alzheimer’s
disease or other afflictions of the elderly for which specialized care outside of a nursing
home may be appropriate. Congregate housing is distinct from “group home, hospice,
nursing home, convalescent home, rest home or residential care facility”.
Conservation Easement: A non-possessory interest in real property imposing limitations
or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural,
scenic or open space use, protection of natural resources, or maintaining air or water
quality.
9
Corner Clearance: The minimum dimension, measured parallel to a highway, between
the curb, pavement or shoulder lines of an intersecting highway and the nearest edge of a
driveway.
Corner Lot: A single lot with continuous frontage abutting two (2) intersecting roads.
Cul-de-sac: A dead-end road with a circular or T-shaped turnaround at the end, usually
built to serve a small subdivision.
Day Care Center: A facility registered with or licensed by the State that provides care
and/or instruction during the day to three (3) or more children, exclusive of children who
may be living in the home that is serving as the day care center.
Deceleration Lane: A speed-change lane for the purpose of enabling a vehicle to leave
the through traffic lane at a speed equal to or slightly less than the speed of traffic in the
through lane and to decelerate to a stop or make a slow speed turn.
Demolition Disposal: See Waste Disposal.
Design Hourly Volume: The hourly traffic volume used to evaluate or design a roadway
or driveway.
Development: Any alteration of existing land or structures.
Driveway: A vehicular access way serving one (1) or more land uses on a parcel or a lot
of land. The design of a driveway may involve a single vehicular access point along the
parcel or lot frontage providing two-way travel or may involve up to two (2) well
marked/signed access points, one providing ingress to, and the other providing egress
from, the roadway.
Driveway/Entrance: A vehicular access way serving one (1) or more land uses on a
parcel or a lot of land. The design may involve a single vehicular access point along the
parcel or lot frontage providing two-way or may involve up to two (2) well marked/signed
access points, one providing ingress to, and the other providing egress from, the roadway.
Driveway/ Entrance Volume:
a. Low volume driveway: A driveway with a traffic volume of less than one
hundred (100) vehicle trips per day, or less than twenty-five (25) vehicle trips per
peak hour.
b. Medium volume entrance: An entrance with a traffic volume of one hundred (100) to
less than fifteen hundred (1500) vehicle trips per day, or twenty five (25) to less than
one hundred (100) vehicle trips per peak hour.
c. High volume entrance: An entrance with a traffic volume of fifteen hundred (1500)
or more vehicle trips per day, or one hundred (100) or more vehicle trips per peak
hour.
10
Driveway Width: The narrowest width of the driveway, measured perpendicular to the
highway right-of-way.
Duplex: A building containing only two (2) dwelling units for occupation by not more than
two (2) families.
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms within a dwelling designed and equipped as
living quarters for a person or for a family, including provisions for living, sleeping, cooking,
bathing, and eating.
Dwelling: Any building or structure or portion thereof designed or used for residential
purposes. The following types of dwellings are herein defined:
Single Family Detached Dwelling: A freestanding building exclusively for
residential use by not more than one (1) family. The term shall include
manufactured housing, as defined in this section. Where accessory apartments are
listed as allowable uses, they shall not be deemed to turn a single family detached
dwelling into a two (2) family dwelling. See also the definition of accessory
apartment.
Two Family Dwelling: A building used for residential occupancy by two (2)
families living independently of each other. See also the definition of duplex.
Multi Family Dwelling: A building used for residential occupancy by three (3) or
more families, each living independently of each other.
Enlargement or Expansion of a Structure: An increase of the building footprint and/or
increase in the volume and/or increase in the height of the structure including all
extensions such as, but not limited to, attached decks, garages, porches, and
greenhouses. Alterations of existing buildings which are required in order to meet the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and/or the State Fire Code are
not considered to be enlargements or expansions of a structure and are not required to
meet otherwise applicable setback requirements, provided the alterations are the minimum
necessary to satisfy the ADA and/or State Fire Code as determined by the Planning Board
pursuant to section 11-8.10 (B) (5).
Enlargement or Expansion of Use: Any intensification of use in time, volume, or
function, whether or not resulting from an increase in the footprint, height, floor area, land
area or cubic volume occupied by a particular use.
Essential Services: Essential Services include the following facilities, provided they
primarily serve populations within the Town of Farmington or a neighborhood or structure
within the Town: steam, fuel, gas, communication, emergency service, transportation,
electric power, or water transmission, or distribution lines and related equipment;
telephone cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry, or other
similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems and associated
storage tanks.
11
Such systems may include poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms,
and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, pumping stations, and similar accessories,
but shall not include telecommunications facilities, or buildings which are necessary for the
furnishing of such services.
Extractive Industry: Any extraction of water, sand, gravel, rock, topsoil, limestone, slate,
granite, coal, gems, metallic or non-metallic ores, or other minerals or other like material
which is removed from its natural location and transported from the extraction site.
Family: One (1) or more persons occupying a premise and living as a single
housekeeping unit.
Farm and Forest: Areas that have been traditionally used for farming and forestry as
rural areas, and areas of open space with limited amounts of residential development and
appropriate businesses.
Farm Stands: A structure designed, arranged or used for the display and sale of
agricultural products primarily grown or produced on the premises upon which such stand
is located. A farm stand may be located on the premises that the products are not grown
upon provided such premise is owned by the grower.
Firewood Processing: The cutting, splitting, handling and temporary storage of firewood
for other than personal use.
Forestry Activities: Forest activities include timber cruising and other forest resource
evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer application, timber and stand improvement,
pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, but not the
construction, creation or maintenance of land management roads.
Frontage: The width of a single lot, measured parallel to the roadway right-of-way.
Full Cut-Off Type Fixture: A luminaire or light fixture that, by design of the housing, does
not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above a ninety degree (90º),
horizontal plane from the base of the fixture. Full cut-off fixtures must be installed as
designed.
Gasoline Service Station: Any place of business at which gasoline or other motor fuels
are sold to the public for use in a motor vehicle, regardless of any other business on the
premises.
Gross Floor Area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building or structure from the exterior face of the exterior walls, or from the center line of a
wall separating two buildings, but excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is
less than six (6) feet.
12
Group Home, Hospice, Nursing Home, Convalescent Home, Rest Home, Residential
Care Facility: A housing facility which is approved, authorized, certified or licensed by the
State. This includes community living facilities, foster homes, intermediate care facilities,
halfway correctional facilities, mentally handicapped facilities, adult daycare facilities, and
facilities for the developmentally disabled.
Heavy Equipment Sales & Service: The sales and service of heavy equipment used in
agriculture, construction and logging.
Highway Capacity: The maximum number of vehicles that a highway can handle during
a specific unit of time at a given level of service.
Home Occupation: An occupation or profession which is customarily carried on in a
dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and
secondary to residential use and employs no more than one full-time equivalent outside
employee. The home occupation must be carried on by the resident of the dwelling.
Hospital/Medical Center: An institution providing, but not limited to, overnight health
services, primarily for inpatients, and medical or surgical care for the sick or injured
including, as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices.
Hotel/Motel: A commercial building or group of buildings built to accommodate, for a fee,
travelers and other transient guests who are staying for a limited duration with sleeping
rooms, with or without cooking facilities, each rental unit having its own private bathroom
and its own separate entrance leading either to the outdoors or to a common corridor or
hallway. May include restaurant facilities where food is prepared and meals served to its
guests and other customers.
Indoor Theater: A facility operated for the showing of motion pictures or for dramatic or
musical performances.
Industrial Park or Development: A subdivision developed for industrial uses, or a
subdivision planned for industrial uses and managed as a unit, usually with provision for
common services for the users.
Industrial Uses:
Heavy: The use of real estate, building or structure, or any portion thereof, for
assembling, fabricating, manufacturing, packaging or processing operations which are
not defined as light industrial uses below.
Light: The use of real estate, building or structure, or any portion thereof, which will
not create a nuisance by noise, smoke, vibration, odor or appearance. Industrial
activity involving the manufacturing, packaging, assembly, or distribution of finished
products from previously prepared material, including, by way of example only, and not
limited to the following: bakeries, bottling, printing, publishing, pharmaceuticals,
machine shops, precision instruments, watchmakers, musical instruments, toys,
sporting goods, pottery/ceramics using only pulverized clay, wood products, jewelry,
assembly of electrical components, canteen services, tool and die shops, and food
packaging. Light industrial uses do not include the processing of raw materials or
salvage operations.
13
Junkyard: Junkyard means a yard, field or other outdoor area of which eighty percent
(80%) of the property used (or in the case of multiple uses, eighty percent (80%) of the
portion of the property used) to store any and all of the materials listed below which may
also be referred to as “junk”:
1. Discarded/worn-out plumbing, heating supplies, household appliances, furniture,
machinery, equipment and trailers;
2. Discarded scrap and junked lumber and building materials;
3. Old/scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, waste
and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or non-ferrous metallic material;
4. Garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary fills;
5. Any discarded/scrap conveyance originally designed to operate on land, water or
air.
Kennel: An establishment to house dogs or other domesticated animals and where such
animals are groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold.
Lane: The portion of a roadway for the movement of a single line of vehicles, which does
not include the gutter or shoulder of the roadway.
Larger vehicle: A vehicle that has a larger length, width, or turning radius and/or lesser
acceleration capability than standard passenger vehicles or pickup trucks including
busses, commercial trucks, and recreational vehicles.
Level of Service: A description of traffic conditions along a given roadway or at a
particular intersection. The level of service ranges from “A”, which is the best, to “F”, which
is the worst. It reflects factors such as speed, travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic
interruptions, and delay.
Library: A building in which is housed literary and artistic materials, such as books,
periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets and prints, kept for reading or reference. The building
is maintained by an institution, foundation, or corporation which lends the contained
materials for free or for a fee.
Loading Facilities: A principal-use loading site and/or facility where either short or long
haul trucks are unloaded and/or loaded for local, regional or distant delivery. Examples of
sites where these facilities are often located include, but are not limited to: trucking
terminals, wholesale beverage distributors, bakery and other food distributors, etc.,
grain/feed distributors, bulk fertilizer plants, bulk cement plants (incl. concrete batch
plants), paving batch plants, log/woodchip/biomass processing/production sites, milk
processors, distribution warehouses, etc.
Local Street: A roadway that directly serves abutting properties.
14
Manufactured Homes or Housing Units: This category is inclusive of all transportable,
factory-built single-family structures: “modular” (no permanent hitch or wheels/axles) which
can be single or multi-section; and “mobile” (with permanent hitch and wheels/axles) which
are single section (commonly known as “trailers”).
These structures are designed to be transported to a building site and used as dwellings
when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, electrical and air
conditioning systems contained therein.
Mobile Homes: See Manufactured Homes or Housing Units.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership designed and/or used to
accommodate three or more mobile homes.
Mobile Home Park Lot: An area of land on which an individual manufactured housing
unit is situated within a mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the occupants
of that unit. The Planning Board shall require that all mobile home park lots are delineated
on a mobile home park plan.
Modular Homes: See Manufactured Homes or Housing Units.
Museum: A place or building in which works of artistic, historical, or scientific value are
cared for and exhibited.
Nursery: The site of a commercial operation which grows young plants or trees for
subsequent sale and transplanting.
Offices: Business, Professional, Medical, Government: The place, such as a building,
room or suite, in which services, clerical work, professional duties of a business, medical
practice, governmental body or professional service are carried out, including but not
limited to finance, real estate, accounting, data processing, legal, insurance, counseling,
design, engineering, and architecture, but expressly excluding any repair services, retail
sales, chemical dependency treatment facility, or clinics.
Open Space Residential Development or Open Space Subdivision: An alternative
form of residential development to the conventional residential subdivision, in which the
buildings are clustered or grouped on a portion or portions of the site with remaining
portions of the site permanently preserved as open space. All open space residential
developments shall be subject to subdivision regulations and approvals. Dwelling units
may be located on individual lots, may be leased, or may be in a condominium form of
ownership.
Parish House or Facility: An independent structure or accessory space owned by a
religious organization and used for various religious and secular functions.
Parking, Commercial Facility: A facility or lot, which provides parking for vehicles for a
fee.
15
Passenger Car Equivalents (at peak hour): The number of passenger cars (or, in the
case of non-passenger vehicles, the number of passenger cars that would be displaced by
non-passenger vehicles) at the hour of the day during which the traffic volume generated
by the development is higher than the volume during any other hour of the day. For
purposes of this definition, one (1) tractor-trailer combination is the equivalent of two (2)
passenger cars.
Peak Hour Traffic: The highest number of vehicles found to be passing over a section of
a lane or roadway during any sixty (60) consecutive minutes. Typically, there is a peak
hour condition in the A.M. and a peak hour condition in the P.M. for which the roadway or
intersection is analyzed for capacity and level of service.
Primarily: Greater than fifty-one percent (51%).
Principal Structure: A building other than one which is used for purposes incidental or
accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises.
Principal Use: A use other than the one which is wholly incidental or accessory to
another use on the same premises.
Printing, Publishing: An establishment engaged in producing and distributing printed
products and materials for sale.
Public Roadway: Either a Town or State maintained roadway or highway with the
appropriately designated right-of-way delineation defining its location and limits.
Public Utility: Facilities for the delivery of such public services as water, electricity,
telephone, gas, and transportation, whether publicly or privately owned, which are
regulated by such agencies as the Maine Public Utilities Commission, the Maine
Department of Transportation, the Federal Communications Commission, or the Federal
Aviation Administration, and which are intended to serve primarily populations or activities
outside of the Town of Farmington. This term also includes buildings, other than those
housing pumping stations, which are necessary for the furnishing of essential services,
whether local or greater in scope.
Recreation: An activity pursued for leisure in order to refresh mind or body. A facility
designed or equipped for such pursuit and/or the conduct of leisure time activities and
other customary and usual recreational activities. Facilities like theaters are not included
in this definition but those like video arcades are included.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and
designed for the temporary sleeping or living quarters for one (1) or more persons, and
which may include a pickup camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor
home.
16
Recycling Operations: Any site where any materials, components, parts, remnants,
containers, etc. are collected and/or sorted and/or processed for reuse. Examples include,
but are not limited to: food, beverage and product container recycling; animal and
vegetable fat rendering; auto recycling; etc. This does not include any bottle redemption
accessory to a retail store.
Residential: Areas that are predominately residential, with very limited commercial use
such as “home occupation” businesses located therein as regulated by performance
standards. The Residential District is predominantly comprised of residential areas
developed through subdivision or other similar historic development patterns. Generally
these areas are less suitable for agricultural or forestry production.
Residential/Light Commercial: Areas that are predominantly rural and residential,
primarily located along the arterial highways north and west of the town center, the Strong
and Town Farm (Rte. 4) Roads, and the Fairbanks and New Vineyard (Rte. 27) Roads.
Light commercial activities are allowed to intermix in this rural/residential area on a limited
basis in a manner that will conserve the essential character of this district.
Restaurant:
Fast Food: An establishment which serves meals which are prepackaged or
presented in a manner that can readily be eaten on or off the premises where sold and
which may serve food and beverages directly to occupants of motor vehicles, or directly
to pedestrian traffic.
Family: An establishment where meals are prepared and served to the public for
consumption on the premises entirely within a completely enclosed building; and where
no food or beverages are served directly to occupants of motor vehicles or directly to
pedestrian traffic from an exterior service opening or counter, or any combination of the
foregoing; and where customers are not encouraged by the design of the physical
facilities, by advertising, or by the servicing or packaging procedures, to take-out food
or beverage for consumption outside the enclosed building.
Retail: A business primarily engaged in the sale of goods to the consumer for direct use
or consumption and not for resale including, but not limited to: basic foods and beverages,
motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, equipment, specialty items, gift items, tools, lumber,
books, pharmaceutical/health products, jewelry, clothing, florists, photo studios, and similar
retail businesses.
Safe Sight Distances: Minimum safe sight distances are specified by MDOT as a
function of driveway traffic volumes and posted highway (roadway) speed.
Sawmill: An establishment which machine cuts wood logs into lumber.
School, Public, Private: A place or institution for teaching and learning, at which courses
of study are taught sufficient to qualify attendance there as being in compliance with State
compulsory education requirements.
17
Service: A business primarily engaged in providing services (useful labor that does not
produce a commodity) for individuals and businesses including, but not limited to:
laundries, beauty salons/nail techs, barber shops, advertising, equipment leasing, funeral
parlors, auto washes, dry cleaners, furniture stripper, travel service, tradesmen’s shops
(see definition), well drilling, boat storage, self-storage, taxidermy, insurance agencies,
attorneys, financial advisors, tattoo/piercing, bird sanctuaries, and similar service
businesses.
Service Road/Frontage Road: A local street or road located parallel to an arterial for
service to abutting properties for the purpose of controlling access to the arterial.
Shared Driveway: A single driveway serving two (2) or more lots. A shared driveway
may cross a lot line or be on the lot line, and the owners may have an easement for the
shared use.
Shopping Center: Any concentration of two (2) or more retail stores or service
establishments under one (1) ownership or management containing fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet or more of gross floor space.
Small Animal Veterinary Clinic: A facility used for the diagnosis, care and medical
and/or surgical treatment of small animals and the short-term boarding of such animals
when incidental to care. The overnight boarding of healthy animals is defined as a kennel.
Small animals refer to house pets such as dogs, cats, ferrets, rabbits, birds, etc. and
excludes farm animals such as cows, horses, pigs, sheep and goats.
Sports Activity Center: A place enclosed by walls, roof, and floor, designed and
equipped for the conduct of indoor sports, and operated by an entity other than a unit of
government. These include, by way of example only, skating rinks, gymnasiums, bowling
alleys, racquetball and tennis courts, swimming pools and the like. Facilities like fitness
studios, martial arts centers, and video arcades are not included in this definition.
Stable: An establishment to house horses and other domesticated animals, where such
animals are groomed, bred, boarded, pastured, trained, or sold.
Storage Length: Additional lane footage added to a turning lane to hold the maximum
number of vehicles likely to accumulate during a peak period so as not to interfere with the
through travel lanes.
Store, Neighborhood Convenience: A store intended to service the convenience of a
residential neighborhood primarily with the sale of merchandise including such items as,
but not limited to, basic foods, snacks, beverages, novelty ice cream items, sandwiches,
newspapers and magazines.
Strip Development: A linear pattern of roadside development. Most commonly, it
includes residential or commercial development, or mixed patterns of both.
18
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, goods,
or property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location
on or in the ground. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such
as decks and swimming pools. “Structure” shall not include any recreational tent or trailer
that is designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or
other legally permitted use.
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots as defined
in the “Town of Farmington Subdivision Ordinance” and applicable State statutes.
Synagogue: A place of worship.
Telecommunications Facility: Any structure, antenna, tower, or other device which
provides radio/television transmission, commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed
wireless services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile radio communications
(SMR), common carrier wireless exchange access services, and personal communications
service (PCS) or pager services. Telecommunications Facility shall be considered a
principal use. Pre-existing accessory use towers/antennas shall be exempt from this
definition.
Throat: A portion of a driveway used to store queued vehicles without impeding vehicular
circulation.
Tower (Radio, Television, Communication): Tower means any structure, whether
freestanding or in association with a building or other permanent structure, that is designed
and constructed primarily for the purposes of supporting one or more antennas, including
self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and similar structures.
Tradesman’s Shop: An establishment occupied by a craftsperson or a person in a skilled
trade, including, by way of example only, and not limited to plumbing, carpentry, or
electrical work. The term also shall include establishments engaged in the repair of
electrical goods and appliances, watches, jewelry, equipment, furniture, or other goods,
exclusive of motor vehicles, where such services are the primary use and not accessory to
another use, such as retail sales. The shop may include workspace, storage space, and
office space, but may not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet of total floor area.
Traffic Impact Study: A report initiated in response to a proposed development that
analyzes the anticipated roadway conditions with and without the development. The report
may include an analysis of mitigation measures. Elements of the Study are specified in
§11-5.11.E.3.c of the Site Review Ordinance.
Transportation Facility: A site and/or facility, either publicly or privately owned and
operated, which provides access to the public for embarking and debarking from mass
transit vehicles or infrastructure such as busses and trains. Air transportation is not
included in this definition - see Air Transportation Dependent Use.
Trip Generation: The estimated volume of traffic going to and from a particular location.
19
Truck: Any vehicle with a GVW registered in excess of 18,000 lbs., such vehicles would
include SU-30 (straight units), B-40 (most buses), WB-50’s (semis) and larger tractor
trailers.
Trucking, Distribution Terminal: See Loading Facilities.
Turn Radius: The radius of an arc that approximates the turning path of a vehicle.
Uncontrolled Access: The unlimited number, spacing and/or unstandardized design of
driveways onto a street or road.
Urban Compact Zone: The most recent designation by MDOT of the built-up urban area
of Town known as the “Urban Compact Zone”.
Variance: A relaxation of terms as defined in 30-A M.R.S. §4353, and requiring
satisfaction of the test for undue hardship, granted by the Board of Appeals.
Vehicle Trip: The vehicle moving from an origination point to a destination point.
Veterinary Hospital or Clinic: A facility used for the diagnosis, care, medical and/or
surgical treatment of ailing or injured animals, and the short-term boarding of such animals
when incidental to care. The overnight boarding of healthy animals is defined as a kennel.
Village/Business (includes Historic Village/Business): A compact, predominantly
business area, mainly in and around the downtown “village” section of town, with a distinct
historic character – both architectural and cultural. Future growth within and in addition to
this district shall be compatible with this character.
Village/Commercial: A compact, predominantly commercial area, near the downtown
“village” section of town, but distinct from both “village” districts. This is a transition district
between the less restrictive General Purpose district and the more restrictive “village”
districts.
Village/Residential: A compact, predominantly residential area, mainly in and around the
downtown “village” section of town, with a distinct historic character – both architectural
and cultural. Future growth within and in addition to this district shall be compatible with
this character.
Volume Warrants: The conditions under which a traffic management technique, such as
a left-turn or a right-turn lane, is justified. For example, the need for a left-turn lane will
vary according to the volumes of advancing and opposing traffic, and the percentages of
traffic turning left.
Waiver: A relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance, granted by the Planning Board.
Warehousing/Storage: The storage of goods, wares and merchandise in a warehouse.
20
Waste Disposal: A facility, including a landfill operated by a public, quasi-public or private
entity, which purpose is to dispose of useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with
insufficient liquid content to be free flowing, including by way of example, and not limited
to, rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material, landscape refuse, and
demolition debris. This definition does not, however, include commercial hazardous waste
disposal facilities, recycling of products or composting for home use.
Wholesale: A business that primarily involves the sale of merchandise, in bulk or large
quantities, to retailers for resale, or to industrial, commercial, or institutional users
including, but not limited to, foods and beverages, building supplies, chemical supplies,
plumbing supplies, electrical and heating supplies, and similar wholesale businesses.
11- 8.9 Establishment of Districts: To implement the provisions of this Ordinance, the
Town of Farmington is hereby divided into the following districts:
A. Growth Areas:
1. Village Districts:
a. Village/Residential
b. Village/Business (Includes the Historic Village Business)
c. Village/Commercial
The purpose of the Village/Residential and Village/Business Districts is to preserve and
build upon the existing village-like character of the downtown areas of Farmington,
West Farmington, and Farmington Falls and to allow for growth that is compatible with
the architectural/historic and cultural character of these areas by promoting the reuse of
buildings therein and prohibiting incompatible uses such as heavy industrial uses.
The purpose of the Village/Commercial District is to provide a district to accommodate
certain uses which are often found near Village/Business and Village/Residential
Districts, but which would be detrimental to architectural, historic and cultural character
if not prohibited from being within these districts.
The Village/Commercial District differs from the General Purpose District in that it is
more restrictive than the latter, while at the same time being less restrictive than either
the Village/Business or Village/Residential Districts.
By making the above distinction, the character of each of the town’s economic trading
areas – Village/Business, General Purpose, Village/Commercial, and Residential/Light
Commercial – is kept in tact.
2. General Purpose Districts:
The purpose of the General Purpose Districts is to accommodate a variety of local and
regional commercial, industrial, office, restaurant, motel, residential, and other uses in
well-planned areas that are easily accessible. As commercial growth areas, General
Purpose Districts will provide planned areas in which to concentrate highway
dependent uses in order to limit sprawl as well as provide parking and service roads
that result in the creation of attractive, efficient and marketable locations for
businesses.
21
3. Residential/Light Commercial:
The purpose of the Residential/Light Commercial District is for these areas to remain
essentially as a rural, residential area with occasional light commercial operations
intermixed. It is the intent that this district will not include heavy industry or commercial
activities that are noisy or polluting or are unsightly in nature, or that cause undue traffic
congestion.
4. Residential:
The purpose of the Residential District is to accommodate residential growth in and
around the village areas and adjacent neighborhoods and along with the primary roads
near the village areas, to encourage residential growth in areas, which are less suitable
for agricultural production and forestry. This district will permit uses compatible with the
residential nature of the district, prohibit commercial uses, which are incompatible with
residential uses, and prohibit strip commercial development.
B. Rural Areas: Farm and Forest District
Farm and Forest District:
The purpose of the Farm and Forest District is to maintain those areas that have
traditionally been used for farming and forestry as rural areas, to preserve large areas
of open space with limited amounts of residential development, and to allow
appropriate businesses.
C. Overlay Districts: (Natural Resource Areas)
In certain limited locations the Town’s Natural Resource Areas may overlay, and
compliment (or override if more stringent) the provisions of the Growth and Rural Areas.
1. Wellhead Protection District: Areas regulated by the Town of Farmington
Wellhead Protection Ordinance and accompanying map.
2. Shoreland Zoning District: Areas regulated by the Town of Farmington Shoreland
Zoning Ordinance and accompanying map.
3. Floodplain Management District: Areas regulated by the Town of Farmington
Floodplain Management Ordinance and accompanying map.
4. Conservation Areas: Areas voluntarily placed into conservation land trusts,
conservation easements or other vehicles for the purpose of the preservation of
certain unique natural qualities as determined by criteria administered by the
Planning Board.
22
D. Table of Uses:
1. The Table below establishes the appropriateness of specific land uses in the seven (7)
districts defined in Sections 11-8.9 (A)(B) and 11-8.8. Proposed uses in certain categories
may only require reporting to the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO). Proposed uses in
certain categories may be approved by the CEO if properly documented to prove
minimal or no impact on abutting properties or resources. All other proposed uses must be
approved by the Planning Board. The review process is defined in the Site Review
Ordinance.
2. Proposed commercial or industrial uses not specifically listed in the Table or that would
not be generally recognized by the Planning board as a subset of an existing use shall be
referred to the Zoning Board for recommendations concerning the inclusion of the use in
the Table.
3. Table: The uses allowed in each zoning district are set forth in the following Table:
Key: Y = Permitted, subject to land uses standards.
Y* = Permitted, subject to land use standards and Planning Board approval.
* = Permitted on a site-specific basis, subject to land use standards and
Planning Board approval.
N = Not permitted.
NOTE: Village Business Historic District (VBH) is a sub-district within the Village Business District (VB).
General Residential Village Village Village Residential Farm &
Purpose Light Comm. Business Residential District Forest
District Comm. Dist. District District District
District including
Village
Business
Hist. Dist.
Use/Structure
RESIDENTIAL
Accessory Use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Open Space Residential Development Y* Y* N N Y* Y* Y*
Congregate Housing Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y*
Duplex Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Home Occupation Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Manufactured Housing (except modular units) Y Y N N N Y Y
Mobile Home Park Y Y N N N Y* Y*
Multi-family Dwelling Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y*
Single-family Dwelling (incl. modular units) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wind Energy System Y* Y* Y* N N N Y*
Solar Energy System - (PRSES only) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
COMMERCIAL
Accessory Use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Alternative Tower Structure Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y*
Amusement Facility Y* * Y* N N N Y*
Auto Graveyard, Junkyard & Auto Recycling Y N N N N N *
Auto Repair & Sales; Small Engine Repair Y* Y* Y* N N N Y*
Bed & Breakfast Y Y Y Y Y* Y Y
23
General Residential Village Village Village Residential Farm &
Purpose Light Comm. Business Residential District Forest
District Comm. Dist. District District District
District including
Village
Business
Hist. Dist.
Use/Structure
COMMERCIAL (Continued)
Boarding, Lodging Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Boat Building, Repair (Non-wood) Y Y* Y* N N N *
Boat Building, Repair (Wood) Y Y Y* N N N Y*
Building Materials, Retail Sales Y* Y* Y* N N N *
Commercial School Y Y* Y* Y* N N Y*
Conference Center Y* Y* Y* Y* N N Y*
Firewood Processing Y Y* N N N N Y
Gasoline Service Station Y * * N N N *
Hotel/Motel: Multi-story Y * Y* Y* N N Y*
Hotel/Motel: Single-story Y Y* Y* Y* N N Y*
Indoor Theater Y Y* Y* Y* N N *
Kennel, Stable, Veterinary Hospital Y Y* N N N N Y
Neighborhood Convenience Store Y Y* Y Y N * *
Commercial Parking Facility Y N Y Y N N N
Loading Facilities Y * Y Y N N Y*
Marijuana Stores Y* Y* N Y*(VB)
N(VBH)
N N N
Marijuana Cultivation Facilities Y* N N N N N Y*
Marijuana Manufacturing Facilities Y* Y* N Y*(VB)
N(VBH)
N N Y*
Marijuana Testing Facilities Y* Y* N Y*(VB)
N(VBH)
N N Y*
Offices: Business, Professional, Medical, Gov’t Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y*
Publishing, Printing Y Y* Y* Y* N N *
Radio, T.V. Communication Tower Y * N N N N Y*
Recreation Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y*
Restaurant (fast food) Y* * * N N N N
Restaurant (family) Y Y* Y Y N N Y*
Retail Business (not mentioned herein) Y Y Y Y N N *
Sexually Oriented Business Y* N N N N N N
Service Business (not mentioned herein) Y Y Y Y * * *
Small Animal Veterinary Hospital Y Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* *
Shopping Center Y* * N N N N *
Sports Activity Center Y* Y* Y* Y* N N Y*
Wholesale Business (not mentioned herein) Y* * Y* Y* N N *
Wind Energy System Y* N N N N N Y*
Solar Energy Systems (CSES only) Y* Y* Y* Y* N N Y*
INDUSTRIAL
Accessory Use Y Y* Y* Y* N N Y*
Air Transportation Dependent Use Y* * N N N N *
Bulk Storage Plant or Terminal Y* N N N N N N
Demolition, Waste Disposal Y N N N N N *
Heavy Industrial Y* N N N N N N
Industrial Park Y* Y* N N N N N
Light Industrial Y Y* N N N N N
Recycling Operations Y* Y* N N N N Y*
Sawmill Y* Y* N N N N Y*
Transportation, Communication Facility Y* Y* Y* Y* N N *
24
General Residential Village Village Village Residential Farm &
Purpose Light Comm. Business Residential District Forest
District Comm. Dist. District District District
District including
Village
Business
Hist. Dist.
Use/Structure
INDUSTRIAL (Continued)
Trucking, Distribution Terminal Y* * N N N N *
Warehousing and Storage Y* Y* N N N N *
Solar Energy Systems (ISES only) Y* N N N N N Y*
EDUCATIONAL, INSTITUTIONAL, PUBLIC
Accessory Use Y Y Y Y Y N *
Chemical Dependency Treatment Facility * N N N N N N
Church, Synagogue, Parish House, Mosque etc Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y*
Civic, Convention Center Y N N N N N *
Community Center Y Y Y Y Y N *
Clubs Y Y Y Y N N Y*
Day Care, Home Y Y Y Y Y Y* Y
Day Care, Center Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Fire, Police, E.R. Service Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Group Home, Hospice, Nursing Home, Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y*
Residential Care Facility
Hospital/Medical Center Y* Y* Y* Y* N N *
Museum, Library Y Y Y Y * * Y*
Public, Private School Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y* Y*
Public Utility Buildings Y Y Y N N Y Y
OUTDOOR, RESOURCE BASED USES
Accessory Structure Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Agriculture Y Y N N N Y* Y
Agricultural Products Processing Y* Y* N N N N Y*
Animal Breeding or Care Y Y N N N Y Y
Campground Y* Y* N N N N Y*
Cemetery Y Y N N N Y* Y
Extractive Industry * * N N N N Y*
Farm Stands Y Y Y N N N Y
Forestry Activities Y Y * * * Y* Y
Golf Course (excluding miniature golf) Y Y N N N N Y
Nursery Y Y Y Y N N Y
Parks and Recreation (non-commercial) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
25
E. Dimensional Requirements:

Measure R1 RN1 C-1 C-2 C-3 RN2 R3 AG
Minimum lot area (public sewer) 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 - 15,000 40,000 40,000
Minimum lot area (no public sewer) 60,000 60,000 50,000 50,000 N/A 25,000 50,000 50,000
Maximum density 
4 units 4 units N/A N/A N/A 4 units 4 units 4 units
Minimum frontage
(feet)
150 (D) 100 (D) 100 100 20 75 100 (D) 150 (D)
Minimum frontage on
internal road serving
OSRD (E)
75 75 N/A N/A N/A 75 75 75
Minimum setback (feet)
Front 50 50 35 35 (F) 20 35 35
Side 25 15 15 15 0 10 15 15
Rear 25 15 15 15 15 15 20 20
Minimum front setback
from edge of pavement
for internal roads
serving OSRD
20 20 N/A N/A N/A 20 20 20
Maximum lot coverage 75% 60% 70% 70% 99% 50% 40% 50%
Building height limits 56’ 56’ 56’ 56’ (G) 56’ 56’ 56’
26

NOTES:
Lots in all Zoning Districts outside the Shoreland Zoning District shall meet or exceed the
following requirements:
Height limits do not apply to towers, antennas, or agricultural silos. Side and rear setbacks
shall be measured from property boundary lines. Front setbacks established above shall be
measured from the Setback Starting Point as described below in the section entitled Setback
Starting Point, except with regard to the front setback from internal roads serving an OSRD.
Setbacks apply to all structures except signs, landscaping, fences, and parking lots. The
minimum setback from property lines for driveways in all Districts shall be ten feet (10). Where
abutters elect to share a single driveway on or near their common boundary line there shall be
no setback required.

The performance standards, dimensional requirements, and definition specific to Open Space
Residential Development (OSRD) are only applicable to those individuals or entities
voluntarily choosing to submit and OSRD project application and plan to the Town of
Farmington Planning Board per 11-8.11.I.4 (a) in the Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance
for OSRD approval and permit and, as such, said OSRD standards and requirements are
entirely elective and self-imposed by said individuals or entities. The OSRD performance
standards, dimensional requirements, and definition apply to no other types of land-use
development or projects in Farmington, whether before the Planning Board or not.
(A) The Village Business Historic District is a sub-classification within the Village Business
District. Dimensional requirements in this category apply to properties with frontage in
these areas: Main Street from Anson Street to Academy Street; Broadway from High
Street to the100-year floodplain boundary of the Sandy River; and Front Street from Park
Street to Depot Street.
(B) Minimum lot area does not apply in an Open Space Residential Development. See
maximum residential density in OSRD.
(C) A density bonus may be applied as provided in the Performance Standards, Section 11-
8.11. I (8).
(D) Backlots with frontages between fifty feet (50) and these minimums may be built on if
structures are set back a minimum of two hundred fifty feet (250).
(E) Minimum frontage in OSRD applies only where individual lots are created.
(F) No closer to the street than side-abutting buildings, except when a sidewalk exists, the
setback shall be no closer than the building edge of said sidewalk (the edge of the
sidewalk which lies farthest from the traveled way).
(G) No taller than the highest existing building in this district as of enactment of these
requirements.
27
SETBACK STARTING POINT:
The appropriate front setback distance set forth in the Dimensional Requirements shall be
measured perpendicularly from the Setback Starting Point. The Setback Starting Point
shall be the greater of either the distance from the “Center Point” or the “Outer Edge of the
Traveled Way” as listed in the Setback Starting Point Chart below:
___________________________________________________
Front Setback Starting Point Chart
From From
“Center “Outer Edge
Point” of Traveled Way”
Category 1 55’ 22’
Category 2 40’ 16’
Category 3 25’ 15’
Category 4 20’ 15’
Category 5 N/A See Note 1
____________________________________________________
SEE ROAD CLASSIFICATIONS AND SETBACK STARTING POINT DIAGRAMS
BELOW. In the event there is any discrepancy between the diagrams below and the
Setback Starting Point Chart above, the requirements set forth in the Chart shall
prevail.
For paved roads, the term traveled way shall mean the edge of the pavement, regardless
of whether or not the shoulder is paved. The existence of a sidewalk shall not affect the
distances established in the chart above (see exception for Village Business Historic
District below). For gravel roads, the term traveled way shall mean the outside edge of the
gravel shoulder, not including vegetated areas or ditches.
Note 1: The front setback for any structure within the Village Business Historic District
shall be no closer to the existing street than side-abutting buildings, except where a
sidewalk exists the front setback shall be no closer than the outer edge of said sidewalk.
The Town of Farmington makes no representation regarding the setback standards or
requirements which may be deeded restrictions or which may be mandated by any other
governmental instrumentality.
28
ROAD CLASSIFICATIONS:
Category 5 Roads: All roads within the Village Business Historic District which lie in the
following area: Main Street from Anson Street to Academy Street; Broadway from High
Street to the 100 year floodplain boundary of the Sandy River; Front Street from Park
Street to Depot Street.
Category 4 Roads: Any private right of way or easement granted for the purpose of
vehicular ingress and egress to two (2) or more dwellings on separate tax parcels. This
category shall not apply to public roads or driveways to one dwelling or multiple dwellings
on the same tax parcel.
Category 3 Roads: North Chesterville Road (Route 156), South Strong Road (Route
149), High Street, Anson Street and all other public roads not otherwise listed in a more
restrictive Category. Any portion of High or Anson Street, which lie in the Village Business
Historic District shall fall under Category 5.
Category 2 Roads: New Vineyard Road (Route 27), except any portion which lies within
the Village Business Historic District (see Category 5)
Temple Road (Route 43 W) and Industry Road (Route 43 E), except any portion which lies
within the Village Business Historic District (see Category 5)
Livermore Falls Road (Route 133)
Town Farm Road
Seamon Road
The portions of Wilton Road, Intervale Road and Main Street which begin at the
intersection of Wilton Road and Oakes Street and extends northerly over Intervale Road
and continues northerly over Main Street to the intersection of Belcher Road, except for
the portions of Main Street which lie in the Village Business Historic District.
Category 1 Roads:
The portion of the Wilton Road (Routes 2 & 4) which begins at the Oakes Street
intersection and extends southerly to the Wilton town line.
The portion of Fairbanks Road (Route 4) which begins at the Belcher Road intersection
and extends northerly to the Strong town line.
The portion of Farmington Falls Road (Route 2) which begins at the Intervale Road
intersection and extends easterly to the New Sharon line.
29
30
31
32
11- 8.10 Non-conformance:
Non-conforming structures, lots and uses that existed before the effective date of this
Ordinance or any applicable ordinance shall be allowed to continue, subject to the
requirements set forth in this article. Nonconforming structures, lots and uses subject to
the Town of Farmington Shoreland Zoning Ordinance and made nonconforming by the
provisions of that Ordinance are governed by the provisions on nonconformance set forth
in that Ordinance.
A. General:
1. Transfer of Ownership: Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be
transferred, and the new owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to
use the non-conforming structure or lot.
Existing permits which are strictly land use permits, including but not limited to site
plan approval, zoning approval, special exceptions and variances (except certain
disability variances granted pursuant to 5 M.R.S. §4553), are transferable. Existing
permits which are an approval of person and place, including but not limited to
liquor licenses, special amusement permits, automobile graveyard permits,
automobile recycling permits and junkyard permits, are not transferable.
2. Repair and Maintenance: This Ordinance shall allow, without permit, the normal
upkeep and maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures including repairs
or renovations which do not involve expansion of the non-conforming use or
structure.
B. Non-conforming Structures:
1. Expansions: A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded after
obtaining a permit from the Planning Board if such addition or expansion has no
greater impact than the existing structure.
Further Limitations:
a. If any portion of a structure is less than the required setback from the property
line, that portion of the structure shall not be expanded in floor area or volume,
by thirty percent (30%) or more, during the lifetime of the structure.
b. Construction or enlargement of a foundation beneath the existing structure shall
not be considered an expansion of the structure provided: that the structure and
new foundation are placed such that the setback requirement is met to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board, basing its
decision on the criteria specified below in subsection 2, Relocation; that the
completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the
structure; and that the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by
more than three (3) additional feet.
33
c. No structure, which is less than the required setback from the property line, shall
be expanded toward the property line.
2. Relocation: A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of
the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation
conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined
by the Planning Board, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the
present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of State law
and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, or that a new
system can be installed in compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall
a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming
or have any greater adverse impact than the existing location.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of
the land, the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation, the location of other
structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic
system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount
of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
3. Reconstruction or Replacement: Any non-conforming structure, which is
removed, or damaged or destroyed by more than fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be
reconstructed or replaced provided that a permit is obtained within two (2) years of
the date of said damage, destruction or removal. In no case shall a structure be
reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its non-conformity or have any greater
adverse impact than the existing structure.
Upon application within the above two (2) year period, the Planning Board may
grant an additional extension of any permit issued for such reconstruction or
replacement so long as good faith progress has been demonstrated and a realistic
plan for completion of construction is presented to and accepted by the Board. The
Board may also require evidence of ability to complete the project in the allotted
extension time, such as, but not limited to, bank letters of credit and/or written
agreements with suppliers or contractors for goods and services required to
complete reconstruction or replacement.
Any non-conforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by fifty percent (50%)
or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and
repair, may be reconstructed in place with a permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer.
4. Change of use of a Non-conforming Structure: The use of a non-conforming
structure may not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after
receiving a written application, determines that the new use will have no greater
adverse impact on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than that of the
existing use. The determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made
according to, but not limited to, the criteria listed in subsection C3 below.
34
5. Changes mandated by federal, State, and local Laws or Regulations: Any
expansion, relocation, reconstruction or replacement of any portion of a nonconforming
structure which is mandated by federal, State or local building and
safety codes, including, but not limited to the Americans with Disabilities Act and
State Fire Code, shall require review and approval by the Planning Board
regardless of whether the required changes are to be performed at the same time
as other expansions, relocations, reconstruction or replacement of the nonconforming
structure. The Planning Board shall not withhold approval for the
mandated changes unless the contemplated changes create a health or safety
hazard which is likely to affect the occupants and/or the public.
6. Written documentation required for no greater adverse impact: In determining
that no greater adverse impact will occur as a result of the expansion, relocation,
reconstruction or replacement, or change of use of a non-conforming structure, the
Planning Board shall also require written documentation from the applicant
regarding the probable effects on public health and safety, if applicable, water
quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public
access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and
historic resources, and functionally water-dependent uses.
C. Non-conforming Uses:
1. Expansions: Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that the
non-conforming use of a residential dwelling unit may, after obtaining a permit from
the Planning Board, be expanded within existing residential structures or within
expansions of such structures as permitted in Section B1 as above.
2. Resumption Prohibited: A lot, building or structure in or on which a nonconforming
use is discontinued for a period exceeding one (1) year, or which is
superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a non-conforming
use except that the Planning Board may, for good cause shown by the applicant,
grant up to a one (1) year extension to that time period. This provision shall not
apply to the resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the structure
has been used or maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five (5)
year period unless conditions outlined in B3 exist.
3. Change of Use: An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on
the subject and adjacent properties and resources than the former use, as
determined by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall require written
documentation from the applicant regarding the probable effects. The determination
of no greater adverse impact shall be made according to, but not limited to, the
criteria listed below:
a. That the proposed use is of the same character or less noxious than the current
nonconforming use;
b. That the proposed use will not create a traffic hazard nor increase an existing
traffic hazard;
35
c. That the amount of parking required to meet the minimum requirements for the
use that exists on the site or will be otherwise provided in accordance with the
Town of Farmington Traffic Ordinance, Site Review Ordinance, and the Off-
Street Parking and Loading Performance Standard in this Ordinance;
d. That the extent of noise, odors, vibrations, smoke, dust and air discharges of the
proposed use shall be equal to or less than the present use;
e. That the rate of surface water run-off from the site will not be increased;
f. That the hours of operation of the proposed use will be compatible with the
existing, surrounding land uses;
g. That the proposed use will have no greater adverse impact on surrounding
properties; and
h. That the proposed use will not create adverse effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, and if applicable, water quality, fish and
wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access to
waters, natural beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and historic
resources, and functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Non-conforming Lots of Record:
1. Non-conforming Lots of Record: A non-conforming lot of record as of the
effective date of this Ordinance or applicable amendment thereto may be built upon,
without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is in compliance with State
Minimum Lot Size Law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules and that all provisions of this Ordinance, except lot size and frontage, can be
met. Variance relating to setbacks, or other dimensional requirements not involving
lot size or frontage may only be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
2. Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or
joint ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of the
lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal
use or structure exists on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed
separately or together, provided that the lots are in conformance with the State
Minimum Lot Size Law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on the
effective date of this Ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot upon issuance
of a written determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that each resulting lot is
in compliance with the State Minimum Lot Size Law and the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and conforms to the greatest extent
possible with the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
36
11- 8.11. Performance Standards:
A. Manufactured Housing:
1. Purpose: It is the purpose of these performance standards to allow for and to
regulate the use of manufactured housing in the Town of Farmington. Manufactured
housing is important in the provision of moderate cost housing. Therefore,
standards in this section are provided both to recognize the valid place of
manufactured housing and to set forth necessary criteria on location and use of
such housing.
It is also the purpose of the standards to establish a condition of safety that will
allow the home to perform in a manner that will greatly reduce hazards that present
an imminent and unreasonable risk of death or serious personal injury.
2. Non-conformance: See Article 11 – 8.10.
3. Classifications of Manufactured Housing are defined as follows for purposes
of these standards:
Type A: A modular unit that is a new, factory-built, single-family structure that is
manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. 5401 et. seq. (the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974), is
transportable in one (1) or more sections, and is built on a permanent chassis; but
that is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of
the unit other than for the purposes of delivery to a permanent site, and that does
not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame.
Type B: New mobile homes certified as meeting US Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards, per
42 U.S.C. 3535(d).
Type C: Used mobile homes, whether or not certified as meeting HUD current or
prior codes.
4. Allowable Locations for Manufactured Housing:
a. Type A - Modular Homes: Type A modular homes are an allowable dwelling
unit type in those Zoning Districts where designated residential land uses are
permitted. Such housing is subject to all standards in the Zoning Ordinance
which apply to residential land uses, as well as the Subdivision Ordinance of the
Town of Farmington.
b. Type B - Mobile Homes: Type B mobile homes are allowed in any mobile
home development or park, or on their own individual lots in any district where
allowed in the zoning Table of Uses.
37
c. Type C - Mobile Homes: Type C mobile homes are allowed in any mobile
home development or park, or on their own individual lots in any district where
allowed in the zoning Table of Uses. A Type C mobile home to be moved to a
new location must meet the following standards, and this applies to units being
moved within the Town or being moved into Town:
1) An application for approval to relocate shall be obtained from the Building
Inspector prior to relocation.
2) Upon inspection, the Type C mobile home shall be found to be in compliance
with all standards listed below under 4.E. prior to the move. After moving or
relocation of the Type C mobile home, a second inspection shall be required
to verify that the mobile home remains in compliance with all standards listed
below under 4.E. The unit shall not be occupied until such conditions are
met and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building
Inspector.
5. Requirements for All Manufactured Housing Units – either being moved within
Farmington or being moved into Farmington:
a. All new and used units must be installed by an installer licensed by the State in
accordance with standards adopted by the State Manufactured Housing Board
on March 1, 1993 or the most recent version thereof.
b. All new units must meet construction and safety standards for manufactured
homes adopted by the State Manufactured Housing Board in October 1991 or
the most recent version thereof.
c. All new units must meet the rules for State certification of manufactured housing
adopted by the State Manufactured Housing Board on April 1, 1991 or the most
recent version thereof.
d. All new and used units must meet any applicable building code adopted by the
Town of Farmington subsequent to the adoption of this section.
e. All used units must meet the following minimum standards:
1) Chapter 21 of the NFPA 101 Life-Safety Code, 1997 Edition.
2) HUD Section 8 Standards – the most recent version available at the time of
adoption of this section.
3) Exterior Siding:
Exterior wall coverings shall be of moisture and weather resistant materials to
resist wind, snow and rain, and shall be residential in appearance.
38
4) Insulation:
The minimum requirements for a home shall be as follows:
a) Walls – R-11 b) Roof – R-14 c) Floor – R-11
5) Plumbing:
The Town’s Licensed Plumbing Inspector (LPI) shall inspect and verify that
the following conditions are met:
a) The plumbing is of a durable material, free from defective workmanship
that would cause a safety hazard.
b) All plumbing, fixtures, drains, appurtenances, and appliances designed or
used to receive or discharge liquid waste or sewage are connected to the
drain system in a manner that is consistent with the State Plumbing Code.
c) All piping and fixtures subject to freezing temperatures shall be insulated
or protected with UL approved heat tape to prevent freezing under normal
occupancy.
d) All dishwashing machines shall not be directly connected to any waste
piping, but shall discharge its waste through a fixed air gap above the
machine.
e) Clothes washing machines shall drain either into a properly vented trap,
into a laundry tub tailpiece with watertight connections, into an open
standpipe receptor, or over the rim of a laundry tub.
f) Toilets shall be designed and manufactured according to approved or
listed standards and shall be equipped with a water flushing device
capable of adequately flushing and cleaning the bowl, aid device to be
adjusted to use a minimum quantity of water consistent with proper
performance and cleaning.
g) Each shower stall shall be provided with an approved watertight receptor
with sides and back at least 1 inch above the finished dam or threshold.
h) Water supply pumping systems shall be sized to provide an adequate
amount of water to each plumbing fixture at a flow rate sufficient to keep
the fixture in a clean and sanitary condition without any danger of
backflow or siphonage.
i) Each home shall be equipped with a kitchen sink and bathtub and/or
shower and be provided with a hot water supply system including a listed
water heater.
39
j) No part of a water system shall be connected to any drainage or vent
piping.
k) Any new copper plumbing shall be lead free with solder and flux
containing not more than 0.2% percent lead and pipes and pipe fittings
containing not more than 8.0% percent lead.
6) Heating and Fuel Burning Systems:
a) Heating and fuel systems must meet NFPA-31 (Installation of Oil Burning
Equipment). A person holding a master license issued by the State of
Maine Oil and Solid Fuel Examining Board shall inspect and certify that
the heating and fuel system is in a safe condition and meets the
requirements of NFPA-31.
b) Heat-producing appliances and vents, roof jacks and chimneys necessary
for installation in manufactured homes shall be listed or certified by a
nationally recognized testing agency for use in manufactured home.
7) Electrical System:
A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Electrician’s
Examining Board shall inspect and certify that the electrical system is safe
and meets the National Electrical Code.
8) Light and Ventilation:
Each habitable room shall be provided with exterior windows and/or doors
having a total glazed area of not less than eight percent (8%) of the gross
floor area.
Each bathroom and toilet compartment shall be provided with artificial light
and, in addition, be provided with external windows or doors having not less
that one and one-half (1 ½) square feet of fully operable glazed area, except
where a mechanical ventilation system is provided capable of producing a
change of air every twelve (12) minutes. Any mechanical ventilation system
shall exhaust directly to the outside of the home.
9) Ceiling Height:
Every habitable room shall have a minimum ceiling height of six (6) feet and
six (6) inches.
10) Exit Facilities – Exterior Doors:
Home shall have a minimum of two exterior doors located remote from each
other:
40
a) Required egress doors shall not be located where a lockable interior door
must be used in order to exit.
b) Doors may not be less than twelve (12) feet from each other as measured
in any straight line direction regardless of the length of the travel between
doors.
c) One of the required exit doors must be accessible from the doorway of
each bedroom without traveling more than thirty-five (35) feet.
d) All exterior swinging doors shall provide a minimum twenty-eight (28)
inches wide by seventy-four (74) inches high clear opening. All exterior
sliding glass doors shall provide a minimum twenty-eight (28) inches wide
by seventy-two (72) inches high clear opening. Locks shall not require
the use of a key for operation from the inside.
11) Exit Facilities – Egress Windows and Devices:
Homes shall have the following second means of escape or alternate
emergency egress facilities:
a) Every room designed expressly for sleeping purposes, unless it has an
exterior exit door, shall have at least one outside window operable from
the inside without the use of tools and providing a clear opening of not
less than twenty (20) inches in width, twenty-four (24) inches in height
and 5.7 square feet in area. The bottom of the opening shall not be more
than thirty-six (36) inches off the floor.
b) Locks, latches, operating handles, tabs and any other window, screen or
storm or storm window devices, which need to be operated in order to
permit exiting, shall not be located in excess of fifty-four (54) inches from
the finished floor.
12) Interior Doors:
Each interior door, when provided with a privacy lock, shall have a privacy
lock that has an emergency release on the outside to permit entry when the
lock has been locked by a locking knob, lever, button or other locking devices
on the inside.
13) Room Requirements:
Every home shall have sufficient space and functional arrangements to
accommodate the normal activities of living in a manufactured home.
a) Every home shall have a least one common area with no less than one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area.
b) All bedrooms shall have at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area.
41
c) Bedrooms designed for two or more people shall have seventy (70)
square feet of floor area plus fifty (50) square feet for each person in
excess of two (2).
d) Every room designed for sleeping purposes shall have accessible clothes
hanging space with a minimum inside depth of twenty-two (22) inches
and shall be equipped with rod and shelf. Each such room shall have an
operable door with a latch to separate the room from the common area.
e) Each toilet compartment shall have a minimum of twenty-one (21) inches
of clear space in front of each toilet.
f) Hallways shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of twenty-eight (28)
inches measured from interior finished surface to the opposite finished
surface. Minor protrusions by doorknobs, trim, smoke detectors or light
fixtures are permitted.
14) Fire Detection Equipment:
All manufactured homes, regardless of the date of manufacture, shall meet
the following requirements:
At least one smoke detector (which may be a single station or alarm device)
shall be installed in the home in the following locations:
a) A smoke detector shall be installed on any wall in the hallway or space
communicating with each bedroom area between the living area and the
first bedroom door unless a door separates the living area from that
bedroom area, in which case the smoke detector shall be installed on the
living area side as close to the door as practical. Homes having bedroom
area separated by any one or combination of communication areas such
as kitchen, dining room, living room, or family room (but not a bathroom
or utility room) shall have at least one smoke detector protecting each
bedroom area.
b) When located in hallways, the smoke detector shall be between the
return air intake and the living area.
c) The smoke detector shall not be placed in a location which impairs its
effectiveness.
d) Smoke detectors shall be labeled as conforming to the requirements or
Underwriters Laboratory Standards No. 217, Third Edition, 1985, as
amended through October 8, 1985, for single and multiple station smoke
detectors.
42
e) Each smoke detector shall be installed in accordance with its listing on a
wall or ceiling. If installed on a wall, the top of a smoke detector shall be
located four (4) inches to twelve (12) inches below the ceiling. However,
when a smoke detector is mounted on an interior wall below a sloping
ceiling, it shall be located four (4) inches to twelve (12) inches below the
intersection on the connecting exterior wall and the sloping ceiling
(cathedral ceiling).
Rental units only: The required smoke detector(s) shall be attached to an
electrical outlet box and the smoke detector connected by permanent
wiring method into a general electrical circuit. There shall be no switches
in the circuit to the smoke detector between the over-current protection
device protecting the branch circuit and the smoke detector.
The smoke detector shall not be placed on any circuit protected by a
ground fault circuit interrupter.
15) Kitchen Cabinet Protectors:
All manufactured homes, regardless of the date of manufacture, will meet the
following requirements:
a) The bottom and sides of combustible kitchen cabinets over cooking
ranges to a horizontal distance of six (6) inches from the outside edge of
the cooking range shall be protected with at least 5/16-inch thick gypsum
board or equivalent limited combustible material.
One-inch nominal framing members and trim are exempted from this
requirement. The cabinet area over the cooking range or cooktops shall
be protected by a metal hood with not less than a three (3) inch eyebrow
projecting horizontally from the front cabinet face. The 5/16th inch thick
gypsum board or equivalent material which is above the top of the hood
may be supported by the hood. A 3/8th inch enclosed air space shall be
provided between the bottom surface of the cabinet and the gypsum
board or equivalent material. The hood shall be at least as wide as the
cooking range.
b) The metal hood will not be required if there is an oven installed between
the cabinet and the range.
c) Ranges shall have a vertical clearance above the cooking top of not less
than twenty-four (24) inches to the bottom of combustible cabinets.
16) Roof/Wind Loads:
All homes with a roof added after construction must be inspected by a
registered professional engineer to determine that the home can withstand a
30 #/SF roof load and a 15 #/SF wind load.
43
B. Home Occupation:
1. Purpose: It is the purpose of these performance standards to allow for and to
regulate the establishment of a home occupation in a residential neighborhood.
It is also the intent in this section to regulate the operation of a home occupation so
that residential neighbors will not be adversely impacted by its existence.
2. Non-conformance: See Article 11-8.10.
3. Standards: A home occupation is allowable as an accessory use in a bona fide
dwelling unit in any zone. All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance pertaining to the
applicable zone shall be met. In addition, all of the following standards shall apply:
a. The appearance of the structure or accessory structure may not be altered,
except as provided under subsection B, below. The occupation within the
residence must be conducted in a manner that would not cause the residence to
differ from its residential character by means of colors, lights, sounds or odors;
b. Additions to the residence or accessory structure for the express purpose of a
home occupation shall be constructed and finished such that the character and
appearance of the principal structure is maintained;
c. There must be adequate off-street parking on the premises for customers’ or
clients’ use. The total number of vehicles including the vehicles associated with
the dwelling must continue to give an appearance in keeping with the character
of the zone;
d. For home occupations located in residential or village district zones, the home
occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic in greater volume than would
normally be expected in those zones;
e. The home occupation shall not generate any nuisance, waste discharge,
offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, radiation, fumes or
electro-magnetic disturbance. All waste material from the home occupation shall
be removed promptly from the premises, according to State laws and local
ordinances; and
f. There shall be no exterior storage or display of materials or products related to
the home occupation, no display of products visible and in any manner from the
outside of the dwelling nor any visible evidence of the conduct of a home
occupation except for signage which shall comply with the Town of Farmington
Sign Ordinance.
44
C. Extractive Industry:
1. Purpose: It is the purpose of these performance standards to allow for and
regulate the commercial extraction of certain natural materials within the Town of
Farmington. These materials are utilized in many land use activities and these
standards are established for the general benefit, safety and welfare of the public.
2. Non-conformance: See Article 11-8.10.
3. Permit required: Topsoil, soil, loam, rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt, mineral
deposits or fill and similar earth materials may be removed from locations where
permitted under the Zoning Ordinance Table of Uses, and site plan review for such
operations is required from the Planning Board except as exempted below.
4. Extraction not requiring site plan review:
a. The following extraction activities shall be allowed without a site plan review
from the Planning Board:
1) The removal or transfer of less than fifty (50) cubic yards of material from or
onto any lot in any twelve (12) month period.
2) The removal or transfer of material on site incidental to construction,
alteration or repair of a building or in the grading and landscaping
incidental thereto.
3) The removal or transfer of material on site incidental to construction,
alteration or repair of a public or private way or essential service.
4) Extraction activities requiring review and approval under the Town’s
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
5) Extraction activities requiring review and approval by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection under the Natural Resource
Protection Act.
b. All other extraction, processing and storage shall require site plan review
from the Planning Board.
5. Application Procedure:
a. Applications to the Planning Board for a site plan review for the excavation,
screening, removal or storage of topsoil, soil, loam, rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt,
mineral deposits or fill and similar earth materials shall be accompanied by a
plan conforming to performance standards herein and in compliance with
applicable State laws and accompanied by all required State permits or licenses.
b. The applicant shall submit a site review permit application to the Planning
Board on a form provided by the Code Enforcement Office and all applicable
requirements and standards of the Site Review Ordinance shall apply. A fifty
($50.00) application filing fee shall be submitted with the completed application.
45
c. Submitted plans of the proposed extraction site shall show the property lines and
names of abutting owners and ways, indicating by not greater than five-foot
contour intervals, related to United States Geodetic Survey date, the location
and slope of the grades, existing and as proposed upon completion of the
extraction operation; and detailing proposed fencing, buffer strips, signs, lighting,
parking and loading areas, entrances and exits; together with a written
statement of the proposed method, regularity, working hours and total proposed
rehabilitation and restoration of the site upon completion of the operation.
6. General Requirements:
a. No part of any extraction operation shall be permitted within seventy-five (75)
feet of any property or street line or within one hundred and fifty (150) of any
established dwelling, except that drainage ways to reduce runoff into or from the
extraction area may be allowed up to one hundred (100) feet of such line.
Natural vegetation shall be left and maintained on the undisturbed land.
(Note: Exception to this allowed if and only if an abutter’s release form is
executed and recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds).
b. No slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) shall be permitted at
any extraction site.
c. Any topsoil and subsoil suitable for purposes of re-vegetation shall, to the extent
required for restoration, be stripped from the location of extraction operations
and stockpiled for use in restoring the location after extraction operations have
ceased. Such stockpiles shall be protected from erosion, according to the
erosion prevention performance standards of this section.
d. Sediment shall be trapped by diversions, silting basins, terraces and other
appropriate measures.
e. The sides and bottom of cuts, fills, channels, and artificial watercourses shall be
constructed and stabilized to prevent erosion or failure. All such structures are
to be designed and built according to the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook on Construction – Best Management Practices (BMP’s).
f. The hours of operation at any extraction site may be limited as the Planning
Board deems advisable to ensure operational compatibility with residents of the
Town.
g. Where loads may be prone to blowing or spills, loaded vehicles shall comply
with State law regarding covered loads.
h. All access/egress roads leading to/from the extraction site to public ways shall
be treated with suitable materials to reduce dust and mud.
i. No equipment debris, junk or other material shall be permitted on an extraction
site except those directly related to active extraction operations, and any
temporary shelters or buildings erected for such operations and equipment used
in connection therewith shall be removed within thirty (30) days following
completion of active extraction operations.
46
j. Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely to arise, physical
screening sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises shall be
provided and maintained in good condition.
k. Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction operations at
any extraction site (or any one (1) or more locations within any extraction site),
which operations shall be deemed complete when less than one hundred (100)
cubic yards of materials are removed in any consecutive twelve (12) month
period, ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with the
approved plans filed with the Planning Board so that:
1) All debris, stumps, and similar on-site organic materials shall be removed
and disposed of in an approved location. Only inorganic natural on-site
materials (boulders, etc.) may be buried (cover with a minimum of two (2)
feet of soil).
2) The extent and type of fill shall be appropriate to the use intended. The
applicant shall specify the type and amount of fill to be used.
3) Storm drainage and watercourses shall leave the location at the original
natural drainage points and in a manner such that the amount of drainage at
any point is not significantly increased.
4) The final slope shall be two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) slope or flatter.
Sufficient topsoil or loam shall be retained or obtained to cover all disturbed
areas, which shall be re-seeded and properly restored to a stable condition
adequate to meet the provisions of the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook on Construction – Best Management Practices (BMP’s).
7. Permit approval: All plans and supporting material shall be submitted with respect
to the above standards and the standards and requirements in the Town’s Site
Review Ordinance in order for an application to be considered for permit approval.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading:
1. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to require that off-street parking areas are
provided for all new uses of land so that all uses will have adequate parking for the
occupants, employees, visitors, customers, and/or patrons and they will not have to
rely on the public rights-of-way for this function. Off-street loading areas are
required for all uses (except residential) to provide adequate space off the Town’s
right-of-way for the temporary parking of motor vehicles (primarily trucks) while
loading or unloading.
2. Non-conformance: See Article 11–8.10.
3. General Requirement: No building or structure in any district shall be subdivided,
erected or enlarged, nor shall any building, structure or land be used, designed or
arranged for any purpose without provisions for such off- street parking and/or
loading facilities as required by this Ordinance nor shall any off-street parking or
loading area, whether required by the this Ordinance or voluntarily provided, be
developed other than in the manner set forth in this Ordinance.
47
a. For the purpose of these standards, one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet of
area, shall be deemed a parking space for one (1) vehicle. The minimum
dimensions for each parking space shall be nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18)
feet long. The maximum permitted dimensions for each parking space (except
for designated handicapped spaces) shall be ten (10) feet wide by twenty (20)
feet long. In no case shall any off-street parking space be allowed to back out
directly onto any public right-of-way.
b. The access aisles within any off-street parking area shall be a minimum of
twenty-four (24) feet wide.
c. All parking spaces and access driveway shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or upon such area. No
surface water from any parking area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining
property.
d. Required loading spaces shall not be construed as supplying off-street parking
space.
4. Timing of the Provision of Required Off-Street Parking and Off-Street
Loading Spaces: Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided at the
time any use of land is established; or at the time any building, structure, or land is
altered or enlarged in any manner to increase the amount off-street parking or
loading spaces as required by this Ordinance. However, when the use of any
building or land existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance is changed to a
use in which the parking requirements are calculated differently from the method of
calculation for the former use, only such additional parking as may result by reason
of the different calculation need be provided for the changed use.
5. Requirement to Retain Off-Street Parking and Loading Space: The
requirements for off-street parking and loading shall be a continuing obligation of
the owner or any assignee of the real estate on which any use is located as long as
the use continues, and is a use that requires off-street parking or loading. It shall be
unlawful for an owner of any building or land use activity affected by the off-street
parking and loading requirements to discontinue, change, reduce or dispense with,
or cause the discontinuance, change, or reduction of the required off-street parking
or loading space. It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, or corporation to use
such building or land without acquiring such area as is required and permitted to
fulfill the off-street parking and loading requirements.
6. Permitted Reduction in Off-Street Parking Requirements: Off-street parking
space required under these standards may be reduced at the time the capacity or
use of a building is changed in such a manner that the new use or capacity would
require less space than before the change. Such reduction may not be below the
requirements set forth in these standards.
7. Location of Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas: The required off-street
parking and loading areas shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land they are
intended to serve, except as provided in subsection 10 below.
48
8. Limitations on Vehicular Storage: Except as otherwise provided in this Section,
off-street parking spaces required herein may be occupied by the occupants,
employees, or patrons of the property or by visitors, or by delivery vehicles
incidental to the principal use, but not by vehicles being repaired, stored or
displayed for sale or hire.
9. Determination of Seating Capacity at Places of Assembly: In stadiums, sport
arenas, houses of worship and other places of assembly in which patrons or
spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each twenty
(20) inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the
purpose of determining requirements for off-street parking facilities.
10. Collective Off-Street Parking Provisions: Nothing in these standards shall be
construed to prevent the collective provision of off-street parking facilities for two (2)
or more structures or uses, provided that the total of such off-street parking spaces
supplied collectively shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the
various uses computed separately; provided also that the requirements set forth
hereinbefore as to maximum distances between parking facilities and principal
structures or uses served shall apply to each structure or use participating in the
collective provisions for parking.
11. Development and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas: For every parcel
subject to these requirements, off-street parking shall be developed and maintained
by the owner in accordance with the following requirements:
a. Minimum Distances and Setbacks: No part of any parking area, for five (5) or
more vehicles, shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any dwelling, school, hospital,
or other institution for human care. If on the same lot with a principal structure,
the parking area shall not be located within the front yard or side yard setback
area required for such structure.
b. Bumper Guard and/or Bollard Requirements: There shall be provided a bumper
guard and/or bollard of either wood, metal or concrete not more than two (2) feet
in height and securely anchored into the ground on all sides of the parking area
where there is required a protective fence or wall. Any required bumper guard
and/or bollard shall be located at such distance so that automobiles will not
strike the protective fence or wall. As an alternative, a concrete beam serving
the same purpose may be provided.
c. Off-Street Parking Area and Driveway Surfacing Requirements:
1) The Planning Board (or CEO when applicable) shall determine off-street
parking area and driveway surfacing requirements on a case-by-case basis.
Factors such as, but not limited to, location, topography of the site, drainage
issues, extent of use, and soil stability shall be evaluated when making this
determination. Cross sections and profiles of the site may be required.
49
2) When it has been determined that area surfacing is required, the off-street
parking area or driveway shall be surfaced with an asphaltic, bituminous,
cement, or other properly bound pavement, or a combination of stone or
brick pavers so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, and shall be
graded and drained so that no surface water will accumulate within the offstreet
parking or driveway area.
d. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises used for residential
purposes in any district.
e. Entrance, Exit, and Maneuvering Space: Vehicular drives providing entrance
and exit to the street system from the off-street parking area shall have a
minimum width of twelve (12) feet or a greater width specified by the Planning
Board if project is subject to site review. This requirement shall not apply to
single family detached residences. The width of high-volume entrances is
determined by the Access Management Performance Standards. The radii on
the sides of the driveway exposed to entry or exit shall be a minimum of
seventeen (17) feet. Maneuvering areas shall be sufficient to permit vehicles to
enter and leave the parking lot in a forward motion except for single family
detached dwelling units.
f. Other Design Requirements:
1) Off-street parking areas for all developments shall be designed so that
sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can serve such
developments without the necessity of backing up unreasonable distances,
or making other dangerous or hazardous turning movements.
2) Circulation areas for off-street parking lots shall be designed so that vehicles
can proceed safely without posing a danger to pedestrians or other vehicles,
and without adversely interfering with the normal functioning of the parking
lot.
3) The parking spaces shall be appropriately demarcated with painted lines or
other markings.
4) Off-street parking areas shall be properly maintained in all respects and kept
in good condition.
5) Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with federal
and State laws.
6) No speed-bumps shall be installed within one hundred (100) feet of the point
of access from the off-street parking lot to the street.
50
12. Plan Requirement: A plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board with every site
review or subdivision application for any building or use that is required to provide
off-street parking and loading. The plan shall accurately depict the required number
and location of parking spaces, other spaces in designated for trash collection, offstreet
loading spaces (if required), the distance of the off-street parking facilities to
the structure or uses they are intended to serve, as well as the relationship of the
parking lot to the street system into which the motor vehicles utilizing the parking
areas will discharge.
13. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking Spaces: The minimum number of
required off-street parking spaces are specified in Section 16 “Off Street Parking
Requirements”, below. Requirements for any use not specifically mentioned shall
be the same as the most similar to the one sought. When units of measurement
determining the required off-street parking spaces result in a fractional space, then
such fraction equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall be interpreted as one (1)
off-street parking space.
14. Off-Street Loading Space Requirements:
a. On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof erected and
occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, goods display, department
store, wholesale store, retail sales outlet, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry
cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt and distribution of vehicles,
materials, or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot
adequate space for standing, turning, loading and unloading services to avoid
interference with the public use of the streets and alleys.
Each such loading and unloading space shall be an area at least twelve (12) by
fifty (50) feet within a fifteen (15) foot height clearance, and shall be provided as
specified below for gross non-residential (motel rooms shall be defined as
residential floor area for the purpose of this requirement) floor area, except that:
1) No spaces are required for structures with less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of gross floor area, or less;
2) One (1) space is required for structures with more than ten thousand
(10,000) but less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or increment
thereof;
3) Additional off-street loading spaces shall be provided at a rate of one (1)
space for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or major
fraction thereof; and
4) No more than seven (7) loading spaces shall be required, except for
warehouse and industrial buildings.
b. Loading and unloading areas shall be so located and designed that the
vehicles intended to use them can maneuver safely and conveniently to and
from the roadway serving the property, and the loading/unloading operations can
be completed without obstructing or interfering with any roadway traffic or any
off-street parking space or parking lot aisle.
51
c. No area allocated to loading/unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area
requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking
area be used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street loading/unloading
facilities.
15. Exempt Areas: This Ordinance shall not apply to the exempt areas bordered by
the Streets of High, Church, Broadway, Academy, Main, Exchange, Pleasant,
Depot, and Front. (See map below).
52
16. Off-Street Parking Requirements:
a. Residential Development:
1) Single Family Dwelling - two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
2) Two-Family Dwelling - two (2) spaces per dwelling unit, except that one
bedroom units shall require one (1) space per unit.
3) Attached Housing – two (2) spaces per dwelling unit, except that one
bedroom units shall require 1 space per unit.
4) Multiple-Family Dwelling - one (1) space per one bedroom unit, or two (2)
spaces for each two (2) to four (4) bedroom unit.
5) Residential Facilities – three (3) spaces for each five (5) beds, except for
uses exclusively serving children under sixteen (16) years of age, in which
case one (1) space for every three (3) beds shall be required.
6) Boarding/Rooming Houses – one (1) space per bedroom.
7) Dormitories – one (1) space for each four (4) beds.
b. Motels/Hotels and Similar Uses Providing Overnight Accommodation:
1) One space for each room available for rent, plus one (1) space for each two
(2) employees working at any one time.
c. Retail Commercial Establishment:
1) Convenience Stores – one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of
gross floor Area.
2) Grocery Stores/Super Market Drug Store/General Merchandise – one (1)
space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area (Amended
6-12-01).
3) Other Retail Sales Establishment - one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of gross floor area (Amended 6-12-01).
4) Eating and Drinking Places (no Drive-In or Fast Food) – one (1) space per
two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
5) Drive In or Fast Food Restaurant - one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of gross floor area.
6) Auto Service Station – one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of
gross floor area, plus sufficient space to accommodate vehicles at pumps
without interfering with other parking spaces.
53
7) Auto Repair/Maintenance/Tire Replacement – one (1) space per two hundred
(200) square feet of gross floor area.
8) Auto Sales (Display/Showroom Area Only) – one (1) space per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
d. Business/Professional Offices/Banks:
1) One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
e. Educational Facilities:
1) Pre-Schools/Day Care – one (1) space per classroom, plus one (1) space for
each ten (10) students (based on the rated capacity of the facility).
2) Primary and Middle Schools – one and three quarters (1.75) spaces per
classroom, plus one (1) space for each eight (8) students (based on the rated
capacity of the facility).
3) Secondary Schools – five (5) spaces per classroom, plus one (1) space for
each (5) students (based on the rated capacity of the facility).
4) Colleges/Universities – one (1) space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet
of schools gross floor area Business/Trade/Vocational – one (1) space per
two hundred (200) square feet of schools gross floor area.
f. Public and Institutional Facilities:
1) Hospitals – one (1) space per bed, or one (1) space per two hundred fifty
(250) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
2) Nursing, Resting, Convalescent Homes – one (1) space for every one (1)
bed.
3) Penal/Correctional Facilities - one (1) space for every four (4) inmates, based
on the rated capacity of the facility.
4) Post Offices - one (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area.
5) Government Offices/Court – one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square
feet of gross floor area.
6) Public Safety Facilities - one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of
gross floor area.
7) Houses of Worship/Places of Assembly – one (1) space for every four (4)
seats (fixed), one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet gross
floor area (non-fixed).
54
8) Libraries - one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor
area.
g. Recreational Facilities:
1) Parks, Trails, and Conservation Areas - The Planning Board shall determine
the parking space requirements on a case-by-case basis. Factors such as,
but not limited to, planned use of property, size of property in relation to
intended use, and specific use restrictions and limitations imposed upon a
given property shall be evaluated when making this determination.
2) Recreational Areas – one (1) space per five thousand (5,000) square feet of
land area, plus one (1) bus parking space for any facility over two (2) acres
that contains active recreation elements including public swimming pools,
ball fields, basketball courts and play equipment.
3) Golf Course – four (4) spaces per hole, plus one (1) space for each two
hundred (200) square feet for office/lobby/pro-shop/health
club/clubhouse/lounge/snack bar/dining/meeting room areas, and fifty
percent (50%) of maximum occupancy for exterior recreation uses including
swimming pools, golf driving ranges, and tennis courts.
4) Sports Stadiums - one (1) space for every three (3) seats, plus ten (10) bus
parking spaces.
h. Other Facilities/Development:
1) Veterinarians/Kennels/Animal Hospitals – one (1) space per three hundred
(300) square feet of gross floor area.
2) Health Care Facilities – one (1) spaces for each two hundred (200) square
feet of gross floor area.
3) Museums/Art Galleries – one (1) space for each three hundred (300) square
feet of floor area open to the general public.
4) Dry Cleaners/Laundromat – one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet
of gross floor area.
5) Manufacturing/Assembling/Fabrication Operation – one (1) space for every
two (2) employees on maximum shift, or one (1) space per four hundred
(400) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
6) Greenhouse/Nursery Operations – one (1) space per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of lot area used for storage, display, or sales, plus one (1) space
per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area.
55
7) Warehousing/Storage/Wholesale – one (1) space for every two (2)
employees on maximum shift, but not less than one (1) space per two
thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area.
17. Planning Board Review:
a. Applicable only to projects and properties that have previously received
Site Review by the Planning Board and have previously developed parking
according to the performance standards herein as part of Site Review
approval(s):
1) In conducting Site Review of subsequent expansions of such projects or
additional development of such properties, the Planning Board may
determine that a lesser number of parking spaces is warranted rather
than that nominally required under the parking performance standards,
based on existing sufficiency (or oversupply) of parking, alternative parking
options, or other mitigating factors for subject property or project.
E. Landscaping:
Districts: General Purpose, Residential/Light Commercial, Farm and Forest
1. Purpose: It is the purpose of these performance standards to improve the
appearance of certain set-back and yard areas, including off-street parking and
open-lot sales and service areas and to protect and preserve the appearance,
character, and value of the surrounding neighborhoods; and to thereby promote the
general welfare by providing for installation and maintenance of landscaping for
screening and aesthetic qualities, since the Town of Farmington finds that the
characteristics and qualities of Farmington justify such requirements to perpetuate
its aesthetic appeal.
2. Non-conformance: See Article 11-8.10.
3. Landscaping Requirements for Certain Commercial Yard Areas and Off-Street
Parking and Other Vehicular Use Areas: These standards apply to all
commercial areas used for the display or parking of any and all types of vehicles,
boats, or heavy construction equipment, whether such vehicles, boats, or
equipment are self-propelled or not; and all land upon which vehicles traverse the
property as a function of the primary use (drive-thru), including but not limited to
activities of a drive-in nature, such as gasoline filling and/or service stations, grocery
stores, banks, restaurants, and the like. The development of these and other
commercial activities shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements
hereinafter provided.
While it is the intention of these performance standards to encourage appropriate
landscaping on all developed parcels, these performance standards are not
mandatory for parcels which engage in the following for their primary activities:
Agriculture, Agricultural Management, Agricultural Products Processing, Animal
56
Breeding and/or Care, Churches or Synagogues, except that any retail or wholesale
business on such property which offers for sale any products not produced or
manufactured through the activities conducted on the parcel or other property under
the same ownership within the Town of Farmington, shall be subject to these
performance standards.
a. Installation: All landscaping shall be installed in a sound, professional manner
with the quality of plant materials as hereinafter described. All elements of
landscaping shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable code
requirements.
b. Maintenance: The owner, tenant, and/or manager or agent of any property that
is required to be developed in accordance with these standards shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping which shall be
maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly
appearance, and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Dead or diseased
plants shall be replaced as soon as climatically possible with plants which meet
the minimum size requirements established herein.
c. Plant Material:
1) Quality: Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of these
standards shall be in good condition at the time of planting. All plant
materials shall be examined yearly from the date of their installation and any
ground cover, shrubs, or trees found to be in less than acceptable condition
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be replaced by the owner, developer,
or their agent. Plants used in landscape design pursuant to this section shall,
to the greatest extent possible be:
a) Appropriate to the conditions/climate in which they are to be planted;
b) Have non-invasive growth habits;
c) Encourage low maintenance, high quality design;
d) If landscaping is utilized for screening of mechanical or electrical
equipment, or service areas including those which contain such items as
trash dumpsters and propane tanks, vegetation used shall be equally
effective at all times of the year, but should not be planted in such a way
as to obstruct or inhibit emergency access;
e) Landscaping shall be designed so that it will not obstruct sightlines
necessary for the safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and will not
interfere with public utilities;
f) Landscaping plans shall consider the full growth of the vegetation;
g) Parking lots shall contain plantings and walkways that help direct
pedestrians safely and comfortably to their destinations;
57
h) All landscaped areas must incorporate use of ground cover. Use of
vegetative ground cover is expected and use of gravel, rock, or bark, may
be allowed if determined appropriate based upon the proposed
landscape theme, and present a finished appearance; and
i) Be otherwise consistent with the intent of these standards.
2) Trees: Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet measured from
the top of the root collar at the time of planting. Evergreen trees shall be a
minimum of six (6) feet measured from the top of the root collar at the time of
planting. Dwarf trees or unique specimens or species are exempted from
this requirement when used as accents. Trees of species whose roots are
known to cause damage to roadways and other public works shall not be
planted closer than twelve (12) feet to any roadway, water line or sewer line.
a) Tree Species Mix: When more than ten (10) trees are required to be
planted, a mix of species shall be provided. The number of species to be
planted shall vary according to the total number of trees required. The
minimum number of species to be planted are indicated in the following
Table. Species shall be planted in proportion to the required mix.
Required Species Mix for New Site Development
Required Number of Trees Minimum of Species
11 – 20 2
21 – 30 3
31 – 40 4
41 or more 5
(1) Shrubs: Shrubs shall be a minimum of twelve to eighteen (12–18) inches
in height when measured at the time of planting.
(2) Ground Covers: Ground covers used in lieu of grass shall be planted in
such a manner as to present a finished appearance.
(3) Lawn Grass: Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as
permanent lawns. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, or seeded,
except that solid sod, hydro-seeding or commercially available erosion
control methods shall be used in areas subject to erosion. Lawn grass
should be kept regularly mowed during the summer growing season.
(4) Prohibition of Pre-Cleared Lots: Clearing land of trees, vegetation,
and/or soil prior to submission of a Site Review Application is prohibited.
(See Town of Farmington Site Review Ordinance, and Soil Erosion
Control and Storm Water Management Ordinance).
58
d. Landscaping Design Standards:
The following standards shall be considered the minimum requirements for the
installation of all plant materials in the Town of Farmington.
1) Minimum Tree and Shrub Planting or Preservation Requirements:
a) General: Trees shall not be placed so as to interfere with site drainage,
or where they shall require frequent pruning to avoid interference with
overhead power and utility lines. Unless otherwise provided in these
standards, a minimum number of trees shall be planted or preserved on
each site, as follows:
b) One (1) tree shall be planted or preserved for every two thousand
(2,000) square feet of lot area or fraction thereof. Square footage shall
include the total area of the tax parcel to be developed minus the square
footage of the cumulative area of all existing buildings and any permanent
buildings to be constructed within one (1) year following the landscaping.
c) Trees required to be planted or preserved by these standards may be
used to satisfy requirements of other sections of this Ordinance including
interior parking or other vehicular use areas, perimeter of parking or other
vehicular use areas, and perimeter buffers.
d) Planning Board may determine that a lesser number of trees is required
based on adjacent development, lot design, topography or any other
mitigating factors. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all required trees
shall be shade trees.
e. Required Landscape Plan:
1) General: Prior to the review of a Site Review application for development, a
landscape plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review. Clearing
of land prior to submission of a Site Review Application to the Planning
Board is prohibited.
2) Contents of Landscape Plans: Landscape plans shall:
a) Be drawn to scale and include dimensions and distances;
b) Delineate existing and proposed parking spaces and/or other vehicular
use areas;
c) Designate by name, including common names, and location all plant
material to be installed or preserved in accordance with these or any
other applicable standards;
d) Identify and describe all other landscape material and elements proposed
to be used;
59
e) Show all landscape features, including areas of vegetation to be
preserved in relationship to all existing or proposed building and/or any
other improvements to the site; and
f) Include a tabular summary clearly indicating the relevant statistical
information necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of
these standards. This information shall include gross acreage, square
footage of vegetation preservation areas, the number of trees to be
planted or preserved, square footage of paved areas, and other such
information.
3) Required Landscaping:
a) Adjacent to Public Right-of-Way: On the site of a building providing an
off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, where such area will
not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure
from any abutting right-of-way, there shall be provided landscaping
between such area and such right-of-way, as follows:
A strip of land at least fifteen (15) feet in width, located between the
abutting right-of-way and the off-street parking areas or other vehicular
use area, which is exposed to an abutting right-of-way, shall be
landscaped. This requirement shall apply to all frontage which borders a
public right-of-way. Such landscaping shall include one (1) tree for every
thirty (30) lineal feet or fraction thereof with one dimension being at least
five (5) feet. Such trees shall be set back at least twelve (12) lineal feet
from the edge of the pavement of the public road. Any landscaping of a
mature height of up to three (3) feet shall be set back a minimum of eight
(8) feet from the edge of the pavement of the public road. Mature
vegetation which does not exceed two (2) feet in height may be planted
within eight (8) feet but no closer than three (3) feet from the pavement.
The portion of the planted area extending three (3) feet from the
pavement may only be vegetated with grass, ground cover or other
minimal height landscape treatment.
Roadside tree plantings should consider the following criteria:
(1) Cast moderate to dense shade in summer;
(2) Be long-lived, i.e., over sixty (60) years;
(3) Be tolerant of pollution and direct or reflected heat;
(4) Require little maintenance, be mechanically strong and insect and
disease resistant; and
(5) Be of native origin, provided that they meet the above criteria.
60
All property abutting a right-of-way, other than the required landscaped
strip lying between the right-of-way and off-street parking or other
vehicular use areas, shall be landscaped with, at a minimum, grass or
other ground cover.
Necessary access ways from the public right-of-way through all such
landscaping shall be permitted to service the parking or other vehicular
use area. Such access ways, however, may not be subtracted from the
lineal dimension used to determine the number of trees required.
Where stone walls exist, care should be taken to disturb these as little as
possible, since they also act to retain the character of country roads.
b) Parking Area Interior Landscaping: Trees and landscaping shall be
included in all parking lot designs. A differentiation between perimeter
landscaping and interior landscaping is made in these requirements. The
purpose of perimeter landscaping is to screen parking areas from the
street and/or adjacent residential uses. The purpose of interior
landscaping is to provide shade within the parking area, reduce heat
generated by paved parking spaces in the summer months, assist in onsite
circulation and improve the general appearance of the site.
Planting areas for interior landscaping shall be designed so as to
maximize provision of shade throughout the parking area during the
summer months. For new construction or expansion of existing parking
lots by fifty percent (50%) or more, the minimum area for interior
landscaping shall be calculated as follows:
Ten percent (10%) of the total parking area, including drive aisles shall be
landscaped. Generally a minimum of one (1) tree shall be provided in the
interior landscaping areas for every five (5) parking spaces.
Developments requiring less than five (5) parking spaces are exempt
from the interior landscaping standard. Perimeter landscaping may count
for up to fifty percent (50%) of required interior landscaping if site
conditions dictate.
Planting areas for perimeter landscaping shall be designed so as to
maximize effectiveness of the landscaping as a visual screen. Planting
areas for perimeter landscaping shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide.
Shrub materials used in perimeter landscaping areas shall be a
minimum of four (4) feet high at the time of planting. Perimeter planting
areas shall be required when screening of parking areas from the street
or adjacent residential use is required.
c) Sight Distance for Landscaping Adjacent to Public Rights-of-Way and
Points of Access: When an access way intersects a public right-of- way,
or when a subject property abuts the intersection of at least two (2) or
more public right-of-ways, all landscaping shall provide unobstructed
cross-visibility at a level between two (2) and ten (10) feet, provided
however, that trees shall have their limbs and/or foliage trimmed in such a
61
manner that no visual impediment exists within the cross-visibility area.
Trees shall not be located in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard.
Landscaping, except required grass or ground cover, shall not be located
closer than three (3) feet from the edge of any access way pavement or
impervious material.
d) Credit for Existing Plant Material: In instances where healthy plant
material exists on a site prior to its development, the Planning Board may
adjust the application of these standards to allow credit for such plant
material if such an adjustment is in keeping with and will preserve the
intent of these standards.
4) Other Applicable Requirements:
a) The provisions of these standards shall apply to new off-street parking or
other vehicular uses areas and to expansion of existing parking lots by
fifty (50%) or more (based on the parking lot size on the date of the
adoption of this standard) in the General Purpose and Residential/Light
Commercial districts.
b) The provisions of these standards shall be subject to other applicable
codes and regulations where such regulations are more restrictive and
are not otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of these standards.
F. Private Outdoor Lighting:
1. Purpose: It is the purpose of these performance standards to assure that in all
zoning districts, all outdoor lighting shall be located, shielded and directed in a
manner which prevents excessive illumination levels, prevents glare on nearby
streets and sidewalks, and prevents light trespass beyond the property lines. In
furtherance of this standard, the following requirements shall apply:
a. All freestanding and façade mounted lighting shall utilize full cut-off type fixtures
or equivalent shielding to prevent excessive lighting levels, minimize glare and
shall be installed in a manner that does not direct light beyond the lot lines of the
premises on which the light fixture(s) is located.
b. All parking area lighting shall be full cut off type fixtures.
c. The IESNA (Illuminating Engineering Society of North America) “Maintained
Horizontal Illuminance Recommendations” shall be followed for a multifamily
and/or non-residential project site. (See Table A) The minimum light level
specified in Table A shall not be exceeded by more than .2 foot candles.
d. Maximum height of freestanding lights shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
e. Canopy lighting. Light fixtures mounted on/in canopies shall be recessed so that
the lens cover is recessed or flush with the ceiling surface. Lights shall not be
mounted on the top, sides or front face of the canopy nor shall any such side or
face of the canopy be illuminated.
62
f. Lighting plan. When compliance to these standards is in question, the Code
Enforcement Officer may require the submission of a detailed lighting plan
showing type of fixtures, shielding, and level of wattage and fixture height.
2. Non-conformance: See Article 11-8.10.
TABLE A
IES Maintained Horizontal Illuminance
Levels of Activity & Foot-candle Recommendations
Vehicle Travel Area Parking & Pedestrian
High
Avg. Min. U.Ratio Avg. Min. U.Ratio
2.0 .67 3:1 3.6 .9 4:1
Major League Athletic Events
Major Cultural or Civic Events
Regional Shopping Centers
Fast Food Restaurants with drive-thru facilities
Convenience Stores with Gas Pumps
Other facilities with drive-thru
Medium
Avg. Min. U.Ratio Avg. Min. U.Ratio
1.0 .33 3:1 2.4 .6 4:1
Community Shopping Centers
Cultural, Civic or Recreational Events
Office Parks/Building
Hospital Parking
Transportation Parking (Airports, Commuter Lots, etc.)
Residential Complex Parking (Multi-Family)
Low
Avg. Min. U.Ratio Avg. Min. U.Ratio
.5 .13 4:1 .8 .2 4:1
Neighborhood Shopping
Industrial Employee Parking
Educational Facility Parking
Church Parking
Level of Activity
Regional shopping center containing retail High
63
space of three hundred thousand (300,000)
square feet or greater.
Community shopping centers containing retail Medium
space of five thousand (5,000) to two hundred
ninety-nine thousand and nine hundred ninety-nine
(299,999) square feet.
Neighborhood shopping containing retail space Low
of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
Automotive dealerships High
Entertainment theaters, sports arenas High
Convenience stores with gas pumps/canopies High
Gas Stations High
G. Transportation: Access Management
1. Purpose: It is the purpose of these performance standards to:
a. Keep traffic flowing smoothly and safely on the roads, including arterials, within
the Town of Farmington; and
b. Minimize traffic problems associated with uncontrolled strip development.
Access management, in the context of these standards, is the management of
driveways/entrances and intersections to maintain highway safety and traffic
carrying capacity of all highways/roads and to maintain the posted speed limit of
arterials.
2. Applicability:
a. These standards shall apply to all development proposals requiring review under
the “Town of Farmington Site Review Ordinance”, adopted March 11, 2002, as
said Ordinance may be subsequently revised or updated, and the “Town of
Farmington Subdivision Regulations,” adopted April 3, 1978, and any
subsequently adopted Town of Farmington Subdivision Ordinance.
b. For these standards, Routes 2, 4, 27, and the Town Farm Road are defined as
Arterials, all within the Urban Compact Zone.
For these standards, Routes 133, 149, 156, and 41 are defined as Major
Collectors, and Route 43 is defined as a Major Collector to Industry and a Minor
Collector to Temple, all within the Urban Compact Zone.
For these standards, Knowlton Corner Road, Whittier Road, and Seamon Road
are defined as Minor Collectors, all within the Urban Compact Zone.
The segments of these roadways that lie outside of the Urban Compact Zone
are under State jurisdiction, and therefore classifications and standards may
vary for these.
64
c. Grandfathered Access: All lots are presumed to have at least one (1)
driveway/entrance. Driveways/entrances in existence at the time of adoption of
these standards are grandfathered. Farming and forestry access points in
existence at the time of adoption of these standards are grandfathered.
3. Non-conformance: See Article 11-8.10.
4. General Access Management Standards for Local Roads:
This subsection pertains to access management relative to all public roadways
within the Town of Farmington. If planned access is to a State highway arterial or
collector route within the Urban Compact Zone, also see subsection 5.
The proposed site layout shall take into account existing traffic flow and safe
vehicular access to and from public collectors and local roadways within the Town
of Farmington.
a. Road capacity:
Vehicular access to the site shall be on roads that have the capacity to
accommodate the additional traffic generated by the project. The applicant shall
assume financial responsibility for the off-site roadway improvements, if
necessary, to accommodate the additional traffic.
Road improvements shall be completed before the project is operational or, in
the case of a subdivision, before any lot is sold.
b. Classification of driveways/entrances by traffic volume:
Driveways are classified as low volume; entrances are classified as either
medium, or high volume. See Definitions.
c. Minimum sight distance:
1) Sight distance is the length of unobstructed sight line of motor vehicle drivers
in normal daylight conditions. Sight distance shall be measured from the
perspective of a hypothetical person seated in a vehicle from three vantage
points: 1) sitting in the access viewing vehicles traveling on the highway
(both left and right), 2) traveling on the highway viewing a vehicle sitting in an
access, and 3) traveling on the highway viewing a vehicle turning into the
access (both ahead and behind). In case of discrepancy between these
measurements, the lesser measurement shall be used to determine whether
the sight distance standard is met. Sight distance shall be measured to and
from the point on the centerline of the proposed access that is located ten
(10) feet from the edge of traveled way. The height of the hypothetical
person’s view shall be three and one-half (3½) feet above the pavement and
the height of the object being viewed shall be four and one-half (4½) feet
above the pavement.
2) Any exit driveway/entrance or driveway/entrance lane shall be so designed in
profile and grading, and so located as to provide a minimum sight distance in
each direction. Minimum sight distances depend on the speed of traffic on
the road (posted speed limit or a traffic speed study) and the volume of traffic
entering and leaving the driveway/entrance.
65
Tables 1 and 2 specify minimum sight distances for non-arterials and noncollectors
as a function of posted highway speed for low volume driveways,
medium volume entrances, and high volume entrances respectively. See
subsection 5.a.1, for minimum sight distances for arterials.
3) This section shall not apply to driveways serving residential lots in residential
zones that will be served by a newly constructed street, or residential areas
served by an existing public street, when such street has a posted speed
limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less. The Planning Board shall in
the review of subdivision proposals ascertain that sight distances at
individual driveways ensure safe conditions.
Table 1. Minimum sight distances for low volume driveways
and medium volume entrances
Posted Speed (MPH) Low Volume Driveways
Minimum Sight Distance
(Feet)
Medium Volume Entrances
Minimum Sight Distance
(Feet)
20 125 125
25 150 150
30 200 200
35 225 250
40 275 325
45 325 400
50 400 475
55 450 550
Maine Highway Design Guide – MDOT 1994
Table 2. Minimum safe sight distances for high volume entrances
Posted Speed (MPH) Minimum Sight Distance (Feet)
20 155
25 200
30 250
35 305
40 360
45 425
50 495
55 570
AASHTO – Green Book
d. Exceptions and other conditions for minimum sight distances:
1) Where larger vehicle traffic from the development is expected to be thirty
percent (30%) or more of the daily peak traffic, the sight distance shall be
increased as specified in Tables 3 and 4.
Table 3. Minimum sight distances for low volume driveways and
66
medium volume entrances with large vehicle traffic of
thirty percent (30%) or more of daily peak traffic
Posted Speed (MPH) Low Volume Driveways
Minimum Sight Distance
(Feet)
Medium Volume Entrances
Minimum Sight Distance
(Feet)
20 160 160
25 190 190
30 250 250
35 280 300
40 340 400
45 400 500
50 500 600
55 560 690
Based on Maine Highway Design Guide – MDOT 1994
Table 4. Minimum safe sight distances for high volume entrances with
large vehicle traffic of thirty percent (30%) or more of daily peak traffic
Posted Speed (MPH) Minimum Sight Distance (Feet)
20 190
25 250
30 300
35 380
40 450
45 530
50 620
55 710
Based on AASHTO – Green Book
2) Where more than one business or structure is located on a single parcel, all
vehicular access to and from a public or private road shall be via a common
access or entranceway serving all businesses and structures.
3) If the intersection of any access driveway/entrance or proposed street in the
development is expected to have an increase of one hundred (100) or more
passenger car equivalents per hour to the roadway, the Planning Board may
require that the intersection be designed by a Professional Engineer licensed
by the State of Maine.
4) For lots with shared access, the driveway/entrance may be located along the
property line. The minimum spacing to property line may be varied, if:
a) The safest point of access to the site is closer to the property line; and
b) There is at least fifty (50) feet of separation between driveways/entrances
serving adjacent properties.
67
5) When the proposed project is to be located on the opposite side of the road
from an existing development, the driveway/entrance shall be directly
opposite the existing driveway/entrance, or else separated from it by a
minimum of seventy-five (75) feet whenever possible.
e. Driveway/Entrance characteristics:
1) Low volume driveways and medium volume entrances shall have the
following characteristics:
a) A single two-way operation for low volume driveways only;
b) Intersect the road at an angle as close to ninety (90) degrees as site
conditions permit, but at no less than forty-five (45) degrees;
c) For medium volume entrances, all angles between forty-five (45) degrees
and ninety (90) degrees shall be channelized;
d) No median; and
e) Slope upward from the gutter line or shoulder break on a straight slope of
no more than three percent (3%) for the first fifty (50) feet.
2) High volume entrances shall have the following characteristics:
a) Have two-way operations separated by a raised median of at least six (6)
feet in width and fifty (50) feet to one hundred (100) feet in length
depending upon necessary storage length for queued vehicles;
b) Intersect the road at an angle as close to ninety (90) degrees as site
conditions permit, but at no less than forty-five (45) degrees. All angles
between forty-five (45) degrees and ninety (90) degrees shall be
channelized;
c) Be striped for two (2) to four (4) lanes, each lane twelve (12) feet wide;
d) Slope upward from gutter line on a straight line of no more than three
percent (3%) for the first seventy-five (75) feet; and
e) Signalization and appropriate sign controls may be required depending on
traffic conditions.
3) All driveways and entrances shall adhere to the following drainage
standards:
a) Culvert Size: The Town Public Works Director shall determine the length
and diameter of culverts within the highway right-of-way depending on
local conditions; and
68
b) Construction and Maintenance Standards: Driveways, entrances, on-site
ditches, swales, pipes and other structures that direct runoff toward public
highway ditches or drainage systems shall be constructed, crowned,
stabilized and maintained with stable materials and appropriate erosion
control measures such as permanent vegetation or stone, as approved by
the Town Public Works Director.
4) All driveways and entrances shall adhere to the following turnaround/parking
standard:
Driveways and entrances shall be designed such that all maneuvering and
parking of any vehicles shall take place outside of the highway right-of-way
and such that vehicles may exit the premises without backing onto the
highway traveled way or shoulder. The Planning Board may require a
turnaround area to accommodate larger vehicles that are expected to use the
driveway/entrance on a regular basis.
5. Arterial/Collector Access Management Standards:
Vehicular access to State highway arterial and collector routes within the Urban
Compact Zone shall comply with the following performance standards, in addition to
those specified in subsection 4. Where conflicts exist between this subsection and
subsection 4, this subsection shall apply. For these standards, Routes 2, 4, 27, and
the Town Farm Road are defined as Arterials, all within the Urban Compact Zone.
For these standards, Routes 133, 149, 156, and 41 are defined as Major Collectors,
and Route 43 is defined as a Major Collector to Industry and a Minor Collector to
Temple, all within the Urban Compact Zone.
For these standards, Knowlton Corner Road, Whittier Road, and Seamon Road are
defined as Minor Collectors, all within the Urban Compact Zone.
The segments of these roadways that lie outside of the Urban Compact Zone are
under State jurisdiction, and therefore classifications and standards may vary for
these.
The Planning Board shall review the Site Review application in light of the following
provisions, giving precedence to minimum sight distance, minimum
driveway/entrance spacing, and maximum number of driveways/entrances per lot,
in that order.
a. Sight Distance:
Driveways/entrances, intersecting roads, and other accesses shall be located to
achieve the required sight distance measured in each direction along the
arterial, while maintaining adequate distances from adjacent driveways,
entrances and intersections as specified in subparagraph 1) and 2) below.
In the event that there is a conflict between sight distance and minimum
driveway and entrance spacing standards, the sight distance standard should
take precedence. Sight distance shall be in accordance with the following
standards:
69
1) Low volume driveways, and medium and high volume entrances –
driveway/entrance and intersection road placement shall be such that a
driver of an exiting vehicle has an unobstructed sight distance in each
direction as specified in Table 5.
Table 5. Minimum sight distances for low volume driveways
and medium and high volume entrances
Posted Speed (MPH) Minimum Sight Distance
(Feet)
20 155
25 200
30 250
35 305
40 360
45 425
50 495
55 570
AASHTO – Green Book
2) If more than thirty percent (30%) of the traffic projected to use the proposed
driveway/entrance will be large vehicles, the minimum sight distances shall
be increased as specified in Table 6.
Table 6. Minimum sight distances for large vehicles
Posted Speed (MPH) Minimum Sight Distance (Feet)
25 300
30 370
35 455
40 540
45 635
50 740
55 855
b. Minimum driveway spacing:
1) New lots - The minimum distance between nonresidential
driveways/entrances served by an arterial shall be a function of posted
highway speed according to Table 7. The minimum distances shall apply to
nonresidential driveways/entrances on the same lot or on adjoining lots.
Measurement of minimum distance between driveways/entrances shall be
from the centerline of the driveways at the right-of-way line.
Any new nonresidential lot created after the effective date of these standards
shall contain a minimum frontage equal to the minimum spacing requirement
as stated in Table 7, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Planning
Board that:
70
a) The access to the property will be provided by a frontage road, service
road or local road;
b) The placement of a driveway/entrance on a lot with a smaller frontage will
not prohibit abutting property owners from meeting the minimum spacing
requirements contained in Table 7; or
c) The lot will be accessed by a shared driveway/entrance with an abutter.
Table 7. Minimum distance between driveways/entrances
Posted Speed (mph) Minimum Spacing (feet)
25 or less 90
30 105
35 130
40 175
45 265
50 350
2) Access to lots with nonconforming frontages - Lots which are served by an
arterial and which are nonconforming with respect to required frontage as of
the effective date of these standards are prohibited from developing more
than a total of one (1) access point. Nonconforming nonresidential frontage
lots that, as of the effective date of these standards are improved with
structures, are prohibited from expanding or converting such structures,
where such activity will result in:
a) The need for new access points; or
b) A significant increase in the anticipated peak hour traffic such that the
driveway/entrance volume moves from one category to another, e.g.,
from low volume driveway to medium volume entrance.
Where adjoining lots are owned in common and do not meet the frontage
requirements specified in Table 7, an access permit may be granted
provided that access is shared by adjoining lots.
3) Maximum number of driveways/entrances per lot - The maximum number of
driveways from the roadway to the site to be developed shall be governed by
the following:
a) No low volume traffic generator shall have more than one (1) two-way
access onto a single roadway;
b) No medium or high volume traffic generator shall have more than two (2)
two-way accesses, or three (3) accesses in total, onto a single roadway;
and
c) All driveways/entrances shall comply with the spacing requirements in
Table 7.
71
4) Entrances and exits - Where a proposed development is to be located at the
intersection of an arterial and a collector or local road, entrance(s) to and
exit(s) from the site shall be located only on the collector or local road. This
requirement may be waived where the applicant demonstrates that existing
site conditions preclude the location of a driveway/entrance on the collector
or local road, or that the location of the driveway/entrance on a collector or
local road would create safety-related problems within a predominantly
residential neighborhood.
5) Corner clearances – Minimum distance from the nearest edge of
driveway/entrance corner (point of tangency) to edge of intersection corner
(point of tangency) for all types of driveways/entrances shall be one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet for signalized intersections and seventy-five (75) feet
for non-signalized intersections.
6) Curb opening widths and design shall conform to the following standards:
a) Low volume driveways
1) Have a two-way operation;
2) Intersect the road at an angle as close to ninety degrees (90°) as site
conditions permit, but at no less than sixty degrees (60°);
3) Not require a median; and
4) Comply with the geometric standards specified in Table 8.
b) Medium volume entrances
(1) Have either two-way or one-way operation;
(2) Intersect the road at an angle as close to ninety degrees (90°) as site
conditions permit, but at no less than sixty degrees (60°);
(3) Not require a median; and
(4) Comply with the geometric standards specified in Table 8.
Table 8. Curb opening design for low-volume driveways and mediumvolume
entrances:
Dimension Desired Value (ft.) Minimum Value (ft.) Maximum Value (ft.)
ONE-WAY
R1 (radius)
R2 (radius)
W (driveway width)
30
5
20
25
5
20
40
10
24
72
TWO-WAY
R1 (radius)
WD (driveway width)
30
26*
25
24
40
30*
*Where separate left and right exit lanes are desirable.
c) High volume entrances:
(1) Have two-way operations separated by a raised median of six (6) feet
to ten (10) feet in width and fifty (50) to one hundred (100) feet in
length, depending upon necessary storage length for queued
vehicles;
(2) Intersect with the road at an angle as close to ninety degrees (90°)
possible, but at not less than sixty degrees (60°);
(3) Be striped for two (2) lanes to four (4) lanes with each lane twelve (12)
feet wide; and
(4) Signalization and appropriate sign controls may be required
depending on traffic conditions. Level of service and traffic signal
warrants should be conducted for all high volume driveways, and
comply with the geometric standards specified in Table 9.
Table 9. Curb opening design for high-volume entrances:
Dimension Desired Value (ft.) Minimum Value (ft.) Maximum Value (ft.)*
Without Channelization
R (radius)
WD (drive width)
M (median width)
50
24
4
30
20
4
50
26
10
73
With
Channelization
R (radius)
WD (drive width)
M (median width)
WR
100
24
4
20
75
20
4
16
100
26
10
20
*For industrial developments with a high percentage of larger vehicle traffic, maximum
values are required.
6. Subdivision:
The performance standards specified in this subsection are applicable to
subdivisions specified in 30-A M.R.S. §4452, as administrated through the “Town of
Farmington Subdivision Ordinance”. These standards complement all preceding
standards. Where conflicts exist between this subsection and any preceding
standard, this subsection shall supersede.
a. Access to frontage road/service road. Where such project abuts an existing
arterial or a proposed arterial, the following provisions shall apply:
1) Direct Arterial Access to Individual Lots Prohibited - Direct access to any
individual lot, or to a single place of business, shall be prohibited unless the
Planning Board determines that physical conditions particular to the parcel
justify the granting of a waiver from this requirement. A waiver shall be
granted only if there will be no further division of the parcel and one of the
following conditions is met:
a) There is too little road frontage to reasonably allow creation of a new way;
b) The shape or physical condition of the parcel does not permit access to,
or creation of, a street other than the arterial; or
c) Common access will be utilized which will allow all proposed lots to be
serviced by one (1) new curb opening.
2) Permitted access:
Access to the development may include one of the following:
a) A common frontage road running parallel to the arterial provided that such
frontage road shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way
74
of the arterial. As an alternative to constructing the service road, the
Town and the developer, acting through a formal agreement, may agree
that small sites may be served by individual, temporary driveways and
entrances until adjacent lots are developed, provided that a service road
shall be constructed by a mutually agreed upon date, after which the
temporary driveways and entrances shall be closed and consolidated into
one (1) or two (2) access points;
b) A common driveway/entrance, which may intersect the arterial, and which
serves the individual lots or businesses or a common parking lot adjacent
to the individual lots or businesses; or
c) One (1) or more local roads, to be constructed by the developer
according to the standards, which shall serve the development.
b. Corner lot access - Where a proposed development is to be located at the
intersection of an arterial and a collector or the local road, driveways to the site
shall be located only on the collector or local road. This requirement may be
waived where the applicant demonstrates that existing site conditions, e.g.,
inadequate frontage along the collector or local road, preclude the location of a
driveway on the collector or local road, or that the location of the driveway on the
collector or local road would create safety-related problems within a
predominantly residential neighborhood.
c. Shared driveways - Shared driveways shall be encouraged for adjacent sites, in
order to minimize the number of driveways along the arterial. The lot size and
road frontage requirements may be reduced for shared driveways as follows:
1) A total of ten percent (10%), when the developer agrees to provide shared
driveways to the entire site; and
2) A total of fifteen percent (15%), when the shared driveways are on a road
other than the arterial.
7. Waiver of Standards:
Standards may be waived only to the extent that existing lots of record as of the
effective date of these standards that do not have access to another public way and
that do not meet these standards may be allowed one (1) driveway if the applicant
meets the standards for granting a waiver set below:
The Board shall review the request and determine whether to grant the request,
deny the request, or grant the request with any reasonable condition(s). The
request shall be granted only if the applicant demonstrates, to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board, that:
a. The waiver will not significantly impact public safety;
b. The proposed driveway/entrance meets the standards to the maximum extent
practicable;
75
c. There is no feasible alternative; and
d. In determining practicability and feasibility, the Board shall consider the nature
and extent of negotiation for a shared driveway/entrance and the availability and
cost of alternative driveway/entrance locations and designs in relation to the
proposed use.
H. Facades in the Village Business Historic District:
All new facades and any renovated facades in the Village Business Historic District shall
be designed and built in a manner that compliments the predominant visual character and
quality exhibited by the existing buildings in this district.
The aim is to have all such façade work done in a manner that does not detract from its
immediate neighbors or from the overall historic impression of the Village Business Historic
District. While individual facades can and will possess their own distinct appearances, the
goal is for the collective impact of these appearances to be harmonious and not conflicting.
I. Open Space Residential Development:
1. Purpose: This section is intended to promote integrated, creatively-designed
residential development that results in the preservation of open space and natural
resources, the reduction of infrastructure and site development costs, and the
promotion of attractive standards of appearance consistent with town and
neighborhood project character.
2. Permit Authority: The Board shall have the authority to approve an Open Space
Residential Development (“OSRD”) in the Residential, Village Residential,
Residential Light Commercial, and Farm and Forest Districts where the applicant
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this section.
3. OSRD Permit Applications:
a. Any proposed development that would create ten (10) or more single-family,
duplex, or multi-family dwelling units on a parcel of land or a set of contiguous
parcels of land, containing at least ten (10) acres, may submit an application or
an OSRD permit. Parcels separated by roadways shall be considered
contiguous.
b. Any application submitted under this section that involves a subdivision of
land shall also be subject to the approval of the Planning Board under the
Town of Farmington Subdivision Ordinance.
4. Submittal Requirements: All applicants for an OSRD permit shall submit the
following to the Planning Board:
76
a. An application supplied by the Code Enforcement Office, and the appropriate fee
set by the Board of Selectmen;
b. An OSRD plan addressing the general features of the land, configurations
of lots and roadways, and all information required by the Planning Board
under Section 8; and
c. The plans required by this Section 4 shall be prepared by a licensed civil
engineer, a land surveyor, or other licensed professional approved by the
Planning Board.
5. Procedures for Approval: Applicants seeking an OSRD permit are encouraged to
arrange for a pre-application meeting with the Code Enforcement Officer to discuss
the proposed OSRD.
6. Open Space Requirements:
a. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the OSRD shall be dedicated as
permanent open space. Qualifying open space under this section is all nonimpervious
common area in the development which is devoid of structures, and
shall either be left in its undisturbed, natural condition, or developed to assure its
use as an area for recreation, or a visual amenity, landscaped, or managed for
forestry or used for agriculture in accordance with Best Management Practices.
A utility corridor that is permitted to be used for recreational trail purposes shall
be deemed to qualify as open space within an OSRD despite the existence of
utility structures, provided that no other structures shall be permitted within such
corridors.
b. The open space shall be subject to a recorded deed restriction. The restriction
shall provide that the open space will remain in an open state, will be used solely
for the purposes allowed by this section, and will be maintained in a manner that
will ensure its suitability for its intended purpose.
7. Density Bonus: The applicant shall be entitled to a twenty percent (20%) density
bonus (i.e. 20% more dwelling units) if the applicant proposes to preserve at least
seventy percent (70%) of the land in the OSRD as open space.
8. OSRD Design Requirements: An applicant shall determine the layout of streets,
open space, and lots or building areas in the proposed OSRD in compliance with
the following:
a. Identify open space area(s);
b. Identify the developable area of the site. The developable area must consist
only of land outside the open space area(s);
c. Identify dwelling sites within the developable area(s) and delineate any private
yards and shared amenities;
77
d. Delineate the streets that will provide access to the house sites, and any
desirable trails or walkways; and
e. Delineate lot lines, except where condominium ownership is used.
9. OSRD Development Standards:
a. Underground utilities shall be located so as to not interfere with the Town’s
highway drainage facilities, including but not limited to, culverts, catch basins,
underdrainage, interceptors, swales, etc. and the maintenance thereof by the
Town.
b. Where multi-dwelling units are proposed, individual buildings shall contain no
more than eight (8) dwelling units.
c. There shall be no unbroken building facades longer than sixty (60) feet. For
purposes of this standard, an “unbroken façade” means a façade that is lacking
in such features as irregularities, recessed entries, “bump outs,” and the like that
serve to create visual interest along its length.
d. Where townhouse dwellings are proposed, the development shall provide for
varied roofline articulation that stresses New England village-style architecture,
and the use of building materials and colors that are compatible with other
quality buildings of similar scale in the vicinity.
e. Individual building lots or building locations must be laid out to achieve the
following objectives, as applicable. Where the Planning Board finds that
objectives conflict, the objectives shall be achieved in the order listed:
1) On soils suitable for subsurface wastewater disposal where on-site
wastewater disposal is to be used;
2) In a manner that preserves, as part of the required open space,
environmentally sensitive areas, such as wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains,
wildlife habitat rated by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife as high value, and unique natural features;
3) In a manner that preserves or allows the establishment of a vegetated buffer
to serve as an effective visual screen from adjacent properties;
4) In a manner that maximizes the amount of contiguous, usable area for
agriculture or forest production or outdoor recreation included as part of the
required open space; and
5) In a manner that each dwelling unit has as direct access as possible to the
open space, as appropriate based on the nature and use of the open space.
78
10. Common Open Space:
a. The open space should be capable of being used and enjoyed by residents of
the development for the purpose of informal and unstructured recreation and
relaxation, or a visual amenity, or managed for forestry or used for agriculture in
accordance with Best Management Practices.
b. The applicant shall propose that the common open space shall be controlled by
one (1) or more of the following methods:
1) Common ownership by the owners of the units within the project through a
corporation or trust comprising a homeowners’ association with the additional
option of a conservation easement granted to a recognized conservation
organization. The developer shall include in the deed to such owners
beneficial rights in the open space, and shall grant a perpetual open space
deed restriction to insure that it will remain in an open state in accordance
with these performance standards. Such restriction shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board.
2) Transfer, with permanent restrictions, to a land trust or other recognized
conservation organization; or
3) Ownership or lease by a private party for agricultural or other natural
resource use provided that permanent restrictions are in place to provide for
its continued use for this purpose.
c. Any and all conveyances, transfers, easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
and instruments executed in the process of effectuating 10.b.1-3 above shall
contain the following:
1) Assurance(s) that the open space will be protected from all forms of
development except as shown on an approved OSRD site plan and
described in the recorded deed restriction, and shall never be changed to
another use.
2) Identification(s) of the proposed allowable use(s) of the dedicated open
space.
3) Requirement(s) that the dedicated open space be maintained by parties who
have an ownership or lease interest in the open space.
4) Provision(s) of standards for scheduled maintenance by parties who have an
ownership or lease interest in the open space.
11. Professional Review:
a. Professional Services:
The Board may require that a fully qualified consultant(s) review one or more
submissions of an application and report as to compliance or noncompliance
with this Ordinance and recommend, if possible, procedures which will result in
compliance. The consultant(s) shall be determined by the Board to be
competent in a field relevant to the issue under consideration and shall be
79
mutually acceptable to the Board and the applicant. The consultant shall
estimate the cost of such review and the applicant shall deposit with the Town
the full estimated cost which the Town shall place in an escrow account.
The Town shall pay the consultant from the escrow account and reimburse the
applicant if funds remain after payments are completed. If escrowed funds are
insufficient, the applicant shall deposit additional funds with the Town, based on
the consultant’s estimate, sufficient for completion (if said completion is still
desired).
b. Additional Studies:
The Board may require the applicant to undertake any study which the Board
deems necessary to insure that the requirements of the Ordinance are met. The
costs of all such studies shall be borne by the applicant.
J. Wind Energy Systems
1. Purpose: It is the purpose of these performance standards to enable the Town to:
regulate the permitting of commercial and residential wind energy systems; be
informed of the placement of residential and commercial wind energy systems;
preserve and protect public health and safety; allow for the orderly development of
land; and protect property values in the Town of Farmington.
2. Permits Required: No person shall construct a wind energy system without
obtaining a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) or the Board as
follows:
a. For residential use, approval by the CEO is required for the construction
and/or expansion of all such wind energy systems.
b. For commercial use, approval by the Board is required for the
construction and/or expansion of all such wind energy systems.
3. Application Procedure: Applications for residential and commercial wind energy
system permits shall be filed on forms provided by the Code Enforcement Office
and must include the following information:
a. Name of owner and operator of the wind energy system, and owner of property.
b. Location of proposed wind energy system, including map/lot number, and street
address. Plot plan identifying location of wind energy system on the property
and physical dimensions of the property.
c. Location of any public road or right-of-way that is contiguous with the property.
d. Any overhead utility lines, commercial wind energy system permits will also
require the following information:
e. Wind system specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor
dimension, tower height, and tower type (freestanding or guyed).
f. Tower and tower foundation blueprints or drawings.
80
Commercial wind energy system permits will also require the following information:
g. Certification that construction of the tower complies with all industry standards,
all applicable State construction and electrical codes, the National Electrical
Code, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and any other standards
applicable to commercial wind generators at the time of permit application.
4. Notice to Abutters: Abutting property owners shall be notified by certified mail, by
the Town, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the initial Board or CEO consideration.
The cost of notification shall be borne by the applicant. The notice shall indicate
the time, date and place of the Board or CEO consideration, if applicable. Public
hearings may be called at the discretion of the Board or CEO. If a public hearing
is scheduled, a notice of such shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and shall
include the date, time and place of the hearing. The cost of advertising shall be
borne by the applicant.
5. Onsite Visit: All applications shall have an onsite visit by the CEO. An additional
site visit(s) may be scheduled by the Board.
6. Standards for Residential Wind Energy System Permit:
a. For residential use, a permit for a new wind energy system, including all
components that comprise the system, shall be granted only in a zoning district
in which such a facility is allowed [See Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance –
Section 11-8.9(D) Table of Uses].
b. All wind energy systems shall be setback from abutting property lines, utility
lines, and/or public roads or right-of-way by a distance equal to 105% of the
tower height including all components. This distance from property lines may be
reduced by a written, recorded mutual agreement of the property abutter(s)
whose property line(s) is within said distance of the tower base. In no case may
the setback be less than the standard setback distance for the zone in which the
wind energy system is constructed. Best Engineering Practices should be
utilized in determining the optimal placement.
c. Access: All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled or
secured to prevent unauthorized access. The tower shall be designed and
installed so as not to provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to
unauthorized persons.
d. Wind energy systems shall not exceed 60 dB(A), as measured at the closest
property line. The level, however, may be exceeded during short-time events
such as utility outages and/or severe weather events.
e. The wind energy system generators and alternators shall be constructed so as to
prevent the emission of radio and television signals. The applicant shall correct
any signal disturbance problem that is identified within ninety (90) days.
Upon identification of a signal disturbance problem, the wind energy system
81
shall not be operated until corrected. If the problem is not corrected within
ninety (90) days, the applicant shall be in violation and subject to the
enforcement provisions in the Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance, which
may result in wind energy system removal.
f. The supporting tower shall also be enclosed with a six (6) foot tall fence or the
base of the tower shall not be climbable for a distance of ten (10) feet.
g. The owner of a wind energy system shall be required to remove the tower if it
hasn’t produced power for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months unless
otherwise waived by the CEO or the Planning Board.
7. Standards for Commercial Wind Energy System Permit:
a. Location: For commercial use, a permit for a new wind energy system, including
all components that comprise the system, shall be granted only in a zoning
district in which such a facility is allowed (see Town of Farmington Zoning
Ordinance – Section 11-8.9 (D) (Table of Uses), and only upon proof of
ownership, easement or purchase option, for the location under consideration.
A location map shall be provided which describes the boundaries of the
proposed facility site, all property boundary lines, and all contiguous properties
under the total or partial control of the applicant, any scenic resource or historic
site within ½ mile of the proposed development site and any significant wildlife
habitat which may be impacted.
There shall be written evidence that the Environmental Coordinator of the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and the Maine Natural Resources Program have
both been notified of the pending application and the location and tower height
of all components covered by the application.
b. Setbacks: All wind energy systems shall be setback from abutting property
lines, utility lines, overhead utility lines (not associated with the facility), and/or
public roads or right-of-way by a distance equal to one hundred five percent
(105%) of the tower height including all components. This distance from
property lines may be reduced by a written, recorded mutual agreement of the
property abutter(s) whose property line(s) is within said distance of the tower
base. In no case may the setback be less than the standard setback distance
for the zone in which the wind energy system is constructed. Best Engineering
Practices shall be utilized in determining the optimal placement within the above
requirements.
The application shall include a description of the proposed facility to include the
manufacturer’s specifications for each wind turbine including make, model,
tower height, maximum generating capacity, sound emission levels, over speed
controls, normal and emergency shutdown procedures, and the number and
aggregate generating capacity of the total system. A description of all
associated facilities shall also be included.
c. Visual Appearance: Wind energy systems shall maintain a finish appropriate to
and compatible with the surroundings unless Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) standards require otherwise, or if the owner is attempting to conform the
82
tower to the surrounding environment and architecture, in which case it may be
painted to reduce visual obtrusiveness. The Board may require photos
of the existing proposed site from various locations and similar photos from the
same locations with the wind energy system superimposed to aid in evaluating
the visual appearance.
d. Access: All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be fenced
and labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access. The tower shall be
designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder readily
accessible to the public. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate.
e. Wiring: All electrical wires associated with a wind energy system, other than
wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower
wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires, shall be located
to meet the National Electrical Code (NEC), also known as NFPA 70.
f. Lighting: Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted unless required by
the FAA or other federal or State authority. If lighting is required, the Planning
Board may review available lighting alternatives and approve the design that
would cause the least disturbance of the surrounding properties and view
g. Signage: All signs, other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s identification,
appropriate warning signs, or owner identification on a wind generator, tower,
building, or other structure associated with a wind energy system shall be
prohibited. No wind tower should have any signage, or writing or pictures that
may be construed as advertising placed on it at any time. In addition, no flags,
streamers or decorative items may be attached to the wind energy system
tower or turbine.
h. Sound Pressure: Wind energy systems shall not exceed 60 dB(A), as
measured at the closest property line. The level, however, may be exceeded
during short- time events such as utility outages and/or severe weather events.
i. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed height of the wind
energy system tower does not exceed the height recommended by the
manufacturer or distributor of the system.
j. The applicant shall certify that they will comply with the utility notification
requirements contained in the Maine net metering law and accompanying
regulations through the Maine Public Utility Commission, unless the applicant
intends, and so states on the application, that the system will not be connected
to the electricity grid.
k. Tower construction of a commercial wind energy system shall be appropriate
to the surroundings and shall be located according to Best Engineering
Practice. The application shall include site line, photographic and, if applicable,
screening information to aid the Planning Board in evaluation of the
environmental and visual impact of the construction and operation of the wind
energy system. The supporting tower shall also be enclosed with a six (6) foot
tall fence or the base of the tower shall not be climbable for a distance of ten
(10) feet.
83
l. The wind energy system generators and alternators shall be constructed so as to
prevent the emission of radio and television signals. The applicant shall correct
any signal disturbance problem that is identified within ninety (90) days. Upon
identification of a signal disturbance problem, the wind energy system shall not
be operated until corrected. If the problem is not corrected within ninety (90)
days, the applicant shall be in violation and subject to the enforcement
provisions in the Town of Farmington Zoning Ordinance, which may result in
wind energy system removal.
m. The owner of a wind energy system shall be required to remove the tower
and other system components if it hasn’t produced power for a period of twelve
(12) consecutive months. Unless the owner of a tower and the landowner are
one and the same, the applicant for a permit under this Section shall post a
performance guarantee with the Town prior to obtaining a permit that is equal to
one hundred twenty-five (125%) of the cost of removing the tower and other
system components. The performance guarantee covering such removal shall
be for a minimum term of five (5) years. Requirement for renewal of the
guarantee must contain a mechanism, satisfactory to the Town, for review of the
cost removal of the structure and other system components every five (5) years,
and a mechanism for increasing the amount of the guarantee should the revised
cost estimates so necessitate.
n. Shadow Flicker – Computer modeling tools, such as WindPro, or any other
such tool, shall be used to generate the predictions of shadow flicker. The
application shall include evidence the system will avoid unreasonable adverse
effects of shadow flicker at any occupied building located on a near by
property.
o. Visual Screening – The Planning Board shall have the authority to require
applicants to consider visual screening if appropriate to minimize visual impact.
p. Tower/Turbine Color and Finish – Tower /turbine and turbine blades shall be
painted a non-obtrusive, non-reflective color such as white or gray to minimize
negative visual impacts.
8. Permit Fees: Application for a Residential Wind Energy System Permit shall be
accompanied by a fee of fifty ($50.00) dollars. An application for a Commercial
Wind Energy System Permit shall be accompanied by a fee of five-hundred
($500.00) dollars for each wind tower.
9. Expiration: A permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall expire if:
a. The wind energy system is not installed and functioning within twenty-four (24)
months from the date the permit was issued; or
b. The wind energy system is out of service or not producing power for a
continuous twelve (12) month period.
10. Exemptions: All wind energy systems preexisting to the enactment of these
84
standards will be considered exempt. Wind energy systems used for pumping
water or air or used for operating equipment will be exempt from all requirements
for a residential wind energy system.
11. Definitions:
Best Engineering Practice: Best Engineering Practice – Equipment specifications,
site preparation, construction materials, turbines, blades, and support structures will
be of sufficient quality that when completed the existing windmill structure will meet
all applicable mechanical, electrical, and industrial engineering standards appropriate
for said windmill, as well as any and all codes, standards, requirements, and
regulations applicable to said windmill in the State of Maine. In domestic
construction, the standards set by the manufacturers of the windmill components will
suffice with regard to health and safety requirements.
In commercial applications the windmills must meet all standards as determined by a
licensed professional, industrial, or mechanical engineer who is hired by the Town at
the developer’s expense. A mutually agreeable time-table of quality control and quality
assurance will be developed and adhered to prior to and during construction/placement
of the commercial windmills as applicable in Maine.
Commercial: Commercial means the use of tower structures, the intent and result
of which activity is the production of income from the buying/or selling of tower
generated energy, with the exception of residential energy contracts with local
electrical energy supply companies such as Central Maine Power. “Commercial”
shall not include agricultural, educational, institutional, and governmental facilities.
dB(A): dB(A) means the sound pressure level in decibels. Refers to the “a” weighted
scale defined by American national Standards Institute (ASNSI). A method for
weighting the frequency spectrum to mimic the human ear.
Decibel: Decibel means the unit of measure used to express the magnitude of sound
pressure and sound intensity.
Historic Site: Historic site means any site, structure, or archaeological site which has
been officially included in the National Registry of Historic Places and/or Maine Historic
Resource Inventory, or which has been established by qualified testimony as being of
historic significance.
Rotor: Rotor means an element of a wind energy system that acts as a multi-bladed
airfoil assembly, thereby extracting through rotation, kinetic energy directly from the
wind.
Rotor diameter: Rotor diameter means the cross sectional dimension of the circle
swept by the rotating blades.
Scenic Resource: Scenic resource means either a scenic resource of state or
national significance, as defined in 35 M.R.S. §3451(9) or a scenic resource of local
significance located within the town and identified as such in a Comprehensive Plan,
Open Space Plan, or Scenic Inventory adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
85
Shadow Flicker: Shadow flicker means the alternating changes in light intensity
caused by the movement of wind turbine blades casting shadows on the ground or a
stationary object. Shadow Flicker is not the sun seen through a spinning wind turbine
blade, nor what an individual might view moving through the shadows of a wind farm.
Sight Line: Sight line means a line of sight extending from the observer’s eye to the
lowest point visible on the proposed tower as depicted in a profile drawing showing
prominent features including, but not limited to, topography, buildings, and trees.
Significant Wildlife Habitat: Significant wildlife habitat means Significant Wildlife
Habitat as defined in 38 M.R.S. §480-B (10).
Tower height: Tower height means the height above grade of the fixed portion of the
tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
Turbine: Turbine means the parts of a wind system including the blades, generator,
and tail.
Wind energy system: Wind energy system means equipment that converts and then
stores or transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy. This equipment
includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer,
vane, wore, inverter, batteries or other component used in the system. This does not
include wiring to connect the wind energy system to the grid.
Wind generator: Wind generator means blades and associated mechanical and
electrical conversion components mounted on top of the tower.
Wind tower: Wind tower means the monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that
supports a wind turbine generator.
K. Solar Energy Systems
1. Purpose: It is the purpose of these performance standards to enable the Town to:
regulate the permitting of residential, commercial, and industrial solar energy
systems; be informed of the placement of residential and commercial solar energy
systems; preserve and protect public health and safety; allow for the orderly
development of land; and protect property values in the Town of Farmington.
2. Classification:
a. Private Residential Solar Energy Systems (PRSES): An area of land or other
area used for a solar collection system principally used to capture solar energy,
convert it to electrical energy or thermal power, and supply electrical or thermal
power, primarily or solely for on-site residential use, and consisting of one or
more free-standing, ground mounted, solar arrays or modules, or solar related
equipment, intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power
and/or fuels. Solar arrays or modules that are flush-mounted on the roofs or
walls of private residences shall not be subject to PRSES performance
standards or permit requirements for same. PRSES can be up to two thousand
(2,000) square feet in surface area, with a rated nameplate capacity of up to
20kW.
86
b. Commercial Solar Energy Systems (CSES): An area of land or other area used
by a business for a solar collection system principally used to capture solar
energy, convert it to electrical energy or thermal power, and supply electrical or
thermal power, primarily or solely for on-site commercial use, and consisting of
one or more free-standing, ground or roof mounted, solar arrays or modules, or
solar related equipment, intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of
utility power and/or fuels. CSES can be up to twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet in surface area, with a rated nameplate capacity of up to 250 kW.
c. Industrial Solar Energy Systems (ISES): An area of land or other area used
by a property owner and/or corporate entity for a solar collection system
principally used to capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy or thermal
power, and supply electrical or thermal power, primarily or solely for off-site utility
grid use, and consisting of one or more free-standing, ground-mounted, solar
arrays or modules, or solar related equipment, intended to primarily reduce offsite
consumption of utility power and/or fuels. ISES are a minimum of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in surface area, and can be up to eight hundred
(800) acres in surface area, and there is no limit on the rated nameplate capacity
of an ISES.
3. Permits Required:
a. No person shall construct a PRSES, CSES, or ISES without obtaining a permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) or Planning Board as follows:
1) For PRSES, approval by the CEO is required for the construction and/or
expansion of all such solar energy systems.
2) For CSES and ISES, approval by the Planning Board is required for the
construction and/or expansion of all such solar energy systems.
4. Application Procedure:
a. Applications for PRSES, CSES, and ISES permits shall be filed on forms
provided by the Code Enforcement Office and must include the following
information:
1) Name of owner and operator of the solar energy system, and owner of
property.
2) Location of proposed solar energy system, including map/lot number, and
street address. Plot plan identifying location of the solar energy system on
the property and physical dimensions of the property.
3) Location of any public road or right-of-way that is contiguous with the
property.
4) Location of overhead utility lines.
b. CSES and ISES permit applications will also require the following supplemental
information:
1) Solar system specifications, including manufacturer and model.
87
2) Array/module design and site plans.
3) Certification that layout, design, and installation conform to and comply
with all applicable industry standards, such as the National Electrical Code
(NEC)(NFPA-70), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the
Underwriter's Laboratories (UL), the American Society for Testing &
Materials (ASTM), the Institute of Electric & Electronic Engineers (IEEE),
the Solar Rating & Certification Corporation (SRCC), the Electrical Testing
Laboratory (ETL), and other similar certifying organizations, the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), the Maine Uniform Building & Energy Code
(MUBEC), fire and life-safety codes (NFPA 1 & 101), and any other
standards applicable to solar energy systems. The manufacturer
specifications for the key components of the solar energy system shall be
submitted the application.
4. Notice to Abutters: Abutting property owners shall be notified by certified mail, by
the Town, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the initial Board or CEO consideration.
The cost of notification shall be borne by the applicant. The notice shall indicate
the time, date and place of the Board or CEO consideration, if applicable. Public
hearings may be called at the discretion of the Board or CEO. If a public hearing
is scheduled, a notice of such shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and shall
include the date, time and place of the hearing. The cost of advertising shall be
borne by the applicant.
5. Onsite Visit: All applicants shall facilitate onsite visits by the CEO and/or the
Board as requested.
6. Standards for PRSES Permits
a. A permit for a new PRSES, including all components that comprise the system,
shall be granted only in a zoning district in which such a facility is allowed (per
§11-8.9.D - Table of Uses).
b. All PRSES shall be setback from abutting property lines, utility lines, and/or
public roads or right-of-way by a distance no less than the standard structural
setback distance applicable in the zoning district where the system is to be
installed. Best Engineering Practices shall be utilized in determining the optimal
placement within the above requirements.
c. All PRSES, whether ground or building mounted, shall comply with the structural
height restrictions applicable in the zoning district where the system is to be
installed. Best Engineering Practices shall be utilized in determining the optimal
placement.
d. All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment for PRSES shall be labeled
and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
e. All PRSES shall not exceed 50 dB(A), as measured at the closest property line.
f. All PRSES shall be installed so as not to cause any wire or wireless
communication signal disturbance.
88
g. The owner of a roof-mounted PRSES shall provide evidence certified by a TPI
that the roof structure is capable of supporting the additional load of the
PRSES.
h. All PRSES shall be situated to eliminate concentrated glare onto abutting
structures and roadways.
i. The owner of a PRSES shall be required to remove all components if it hasn’t
produced power for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, unless
otherwise waived by the CEO or the Board.
7. Standards for CSES and ISES Permits:
a. A permit for a CSES or ISES, including all components that comprise the
system, shall be granted only in a zoning district in which such a facility is
allowed (per §11-8.9.D - Table of Uses), and only upon proof of right, title, or
interest, such as ownership, easement, lease, or purchase option for the location
being considered.
b. A site location map shall be provided which shows the boundaries of the
proposed facility, property boundary lines, contiguous properties under the total
or partial control of the applicant, scenic resources or historic sites within one
mile of the proposed development, and any significant wildlife habitat (per
MeDEP under the Site Location of Development Act and/or the Natural
Resource Protection Act) which may be impacted.
c. There shall be written evidence in the form of letter copies that all applicable
State regulatory agencies with jurisdiction over the project have been notified of
the pending application and the location of all system components covered by
the application.
d. All CSES and ISES panel arrays and/or modules shall be setback from abutting
property boundaries by a distance of seventy-five (75) feet. In no case may the
setback be less than the required setback distance in the zoning district,
shoreland area, or floodplain where the system is to be installed. Best
Engineering Practices shall be utilized in determining the optimal placement
within the above requirements.
e. All CSES and ISES, whether ground or building mounted, shall comply with the
structural height restrictions in the applicable zoning district.
.
f. The application shall include a description of the proposed CSES or ISES facility
to include all non-proprietary manufacturer’s specifications for the solar panels,
components, controls, and other equipment, sound emission levels, normal and
emergency operational shutdown procedures, the number and individual ratings
of panels in the array and/or modules, and the aggregate generating capacity of
the total system. A description of all associated facilities shall also be included.
89
g. To the greatest practical extent, CSES and ISES shall possess a manufactured
finish appropriate to and compatible with the surroundings, with reflective
characteristics that minimize negative visual impacts. The Board may require
photos of the existing proposed site from various locations and similar photos
from the same locations with the system superimposed to aid in evaluating the
visual impact, and will take into consideration the limitations of available
manufactured finishes.
h. All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment for CSES and ISES shall
be fenced and labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access. The solar
array and/or modules shall be designed and installed to prevent access by the
public, and access to same shall be through a locked gate.
i. To the greatest practical extent, all electrical wires and utility connections for
CSES and ISES shall be installed underground, except for transformers and
controls. The Board will take into consideration prohibitive costs and site
limitations in making their determination.
j. Exterior lighting for CSES and ISES shall be limited to that required for safety
and operational purposes, and shall meet the performance standards for same in
§11-8.11.F.
k. All signs, other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s identification, appropriate
warning signs, or owner identification on a solar panel array and/or modules,
building, or other structure associated with a CSES and ISES shall be prohibited.
No CSES or ISES shall have any signage, or writing or pictures that may be
construed as advertising placed on it at any time.
l. The CSES or ISES applicant shall certify that they will comply with the utility
notification requirements contained in Maine law and accompanying
regulations through the Maine Public Utility Commission, unless the applicant
intends, and so states on the application, that the system will not be connected
to the electricity grid.
m. All CSES and ISES shall not exceed 60 dB(A), as measured at the property
line.
n. The installation of a CSES or ISES shall be appropriate to the surroundings and
shall be located according to Best Engineering Practices. The application shall
include site line, photographic and, if applicable, screening information to aid the
Board in evaluation of the environmental and visual impact of the construction
and operation of the system. The system site shall also be enclosed within an
eight (8) foot tall fence with locking gate.
o. All CSES and ISES shall be installed so as not to cause any wire or wireless
communication signal disturbance.
p. Ground-mounted CSES and ISES shall be screened from view by any abutting
residential property, using vegetation, topography, or fencing.
q. The owner of a roof-mounted CSES or ISES shall provide evidence certified by a
TPI that the roof structure is capable of supporting the additional load of system.
90
r. All CSES and ISES shall be situated to eliminate concentrated glare onto
abutting structures and roadways.
s. Decommissioning of the entire facility will begin if twelve (12) consecutive
months of no generation occurs at the facility.
In order to facilitate and ensure appropriate removal of the energy generation
equipment of a CSES or ISES when it reaches the end of its useful life, or if the
applicant ceases operation of the facility, applicants are required to file a
decommissioning plan which details the means by which decommissioning will
be accomplished. This plan must include a description of implementing the
decommissioning, a description of the work required, a cost estimate for
decommissioning, a schedule for contributions to its decommissioning fund, and
a demonstration of financial assurance.
In the event of a force majeure or other event which results in the absence of
electrical generation for twelve months, by the end of the twelfth (12) month of
non-operation the applicant must demonstrate to the Town that the project will
be substantially operational and producing electricity within twenty-four (24)
months of the force majeure or other event. If such a demonstration is not made
to the Town's satisfaction, the decommissioning must be initiated eighteen
months after the force majeure or other event. The Town considers a force
majeure to mean fire, earthquake, flood, tornado, or other acts of God and
natural disasters, and war, civil strife or other similar violence.
The applicant will provide financial assurance for the decommissioning costs in
the form of a performance bond or a surety bond, for the total cost of
decommissioning. The applicant will have the financial assurance mechanism in
place prior to construction and will re-evaluate the decommissioning cost and
financial assurance at the end of years five, ten and fifteen. Every five (5) years
after the start of construction, updated proof of acceptable financial assurance
must be submitted to the Town for review. Proof of acceptable financial
assurance will be required prior to the start of commercial operation.
8. Permit Fees: Application for a PRSES shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty
($50.00) dollars. An application for a CSES or ISES permit shall be accompanied
by a fee of five-hundred ($500.00) dollars.
9. Expiration of Approval: All PRSES, CSES, and ISES approvals shall expire
within one (1) year of the date of issuance unless work thereunder is commenced.
Normally, if work is not completed within two (2) years from the date of issuance, a
new application must be made (See 11.). The CEO shall make determinations
regarding commencement and completion. All CSES and ISES approvals shall
expire upon decommissioning (See 7.s).
91
10. Extension of Approval: PRSES, CSES, and ISES approvals may be extended for
one (1) year from the date of issuance by the CEO for projects not
commencing within one (1) year of initial Board approval. Written extension
requests must be submitted to the CEO at least forty-five (45) days before the one
(1) year expiration. Proposal approvals which are granted a one (1) year extension
from the date of issuance shall also have their completion date extended by one
(1) year.
Before extending an approval, the CEO must determine that extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant exist. Extenuating
circumstances may include but are not limited to: procurement of financing; legal
issues; availability of materials; availability of qualified contractors; and adverse
weather conditions.
11. Extension of Completion Date: The CEO may extend the completion date of a
commence approved project by one (1) year beyond the allotted two (2) years.
In determining this extension the CEO shall consider factors such as, but not
limited to: financial hardship; legal difficulties; site condition problems; contract
delay; disruption in supply of labor and/or materials; or personal issues.
12. Exemptions: All solar energy systems constructed prior to the effective date of
these performance standards (November 22, 2016) shall not be required to meet
the terms and conditions of same. Any physical modification that expands a
PRSES, CSES, or ISES, whether or not existing prior to the effective date of these
performance standards, shall require approval. Routine maintenance or
replacements do not require a permit.
13. Definitions:
Commercial Solar Energy Systems (CSES): An area of land or other area used
by a business for a solar collection system principally used to capture solar energy,
convert it to electrical energy or thermal power, and supply electrical or thermal
power, primarily or solely for on-site commercial use, and consisting of one or
more free-standing, ground or roof mounted, solar arrays or modules, or solar
related equipment, intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility
rated nameplate capacity of up to 250 kW.
Industrial Solar Energy Systems (ISES): An area of land or other area used
by a property owner and/or corporate entity for a solar collection system principally
used to capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy or thermal power, and
supply electrical or thermal power, primarily or solely for off-site utility grid use,
and consisting of one or more free-standing, ground-mounted, solar arrays or
modules, or solar related equipment, intended to primarily reduce off-site
consumption of utility power and/or fuels. ISES can be up to eight hundred (800)
acres in surface area, with no limit on the surface area or the rated nameplate
capacity of an ISES.
92
Private Residential Solar Energy Systems (PRSES): An area of land or other
area used for a solar collection system principally used to capture solar energy,
convert it to electrical energy or thermal power, and supply electrical or thermal
power, primarily or solely for on-site residential use, and consisting of one or more
free-standing, ground or roof mounted, solar arrays or modules, or solar related
equipment, intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power and/or
fuels. PRSES can be up to two thousand (2,000) square feet in surface area, with a
rated nameplate capacity of up to 20kW.
L. Odor Nuisance Control & Abatement
1. Purpose. The Town finds that because most odorous pollutants have a complex
chemical composition and may elicit a broad spectrum of responses by the receptors,
special methods must be employed in their measurement and characterization. Although
analytical data are more precise and may be useful in identifying a source, it is the human
response or the sensory data that is most critical in determining the necessary degree of
odor control. Analytical data may be used to specify permissible emission levels from a
source, but sensory data must be employed to assess the impact in the surrounding
community. The latter is the Town's primary concern.
2. Administration and Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Farmington shall initially and primarily administer and enforce this Performance Standard
until such time any violation is forwarded to the Town's Attorney to force compliance.
3. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision
and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions.
4. Farm Odors. Nothing in this performance standard shall be construed to limit any
protection afforded to odor generating farming practices under either State or Town Right-
To-Farm law and ordinance, as long as said farming practices are in compliance with said
Right-To-Farm law and ordinance.
5. Objectionable Odor Determination. An odor will be deemed objectionable and a
public nuisance when any of the following occurs:
a. It creates a public nuisance at common law; or
b. The erection, continuance or use of any building or place for the exercise of
trade, employment or manufacture which, by noxious exhalations or offensive
smells, become injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of
individuals or the public; or
c. All members of a panel consisting of the Code/Planning Department and four (4)
residents of the Town, appointed by the Board of Selectmen to assist the
Code/Planning Department in investigating complaints and who are not
aggrieved by the source, determine following concurrent personal observation,
that the odor at the property line of the source based on Town Tax Maps or
93
elsewhere in the Town is objectionable, and/or negatively impacts public health
and/or welfare, and/or interferes with enjoyment of life and/or property use of
affected parties, taking into account its nature, and/or concentration, and/or
location, and/or volume, and/or level, and/or character, and/or degree, and/or
duration, and are able to identify the source.
6. Observation Procedures. Odor observation shall be undertaken to arrive at a
determination that an objectionable odor exists at or beyond the property line, or at or near
places where people live or work.
7. Compliance. No odor source, land use, facility, or activity shall be exempt from
complying with the odor management standards contained in this Performance Standard
because of grandfathering or because of being an existing use, facility, or activity at the
time the standards were enacted. The odor standards apply to all existing and future odor
sources, land uses, facilities, and activities in the Town, except as otherwise provided
herein.
8. Enforcement. In the event that the Code/Planning Department receives complaints
that smells or odors are detectable beyond the property line, the following process shall be
used to correct the odor problem:
a. Within seven (7) days of receiving a complaint, the Code/Planning Department
shall investigate the property to assess the situation and discuss odor
compliance with the business operator, including but not limited to asking the
business operator what is being done to mitigate odors. If the Code/Planning
Department detects odor beyond the property lines and/or the operator indicates
that its own odor management provisions are not being followed, the
Code/Planning Department shall provide verbal notice of violation to the
operator and instructions to comply with odor management provisions and
require the operator to notify the Code/Planning Department of conformance
within ten (10) days.
b. If complaints persist and/or the Code/Planning Department continues to observe
an odor issue, the Code/Planning Department shall assemble the panel
authorized as described above to investigate the complaints. If the
Code/Planning Department and the panel observe odor issues after the ten (10)
day period as described above, the Code/Planning Department shall notify the
operator of violation in writing and require notification of conformance within ten
(10) days.
c. If complaints persist and/or the Code/Planning Department and the panel
continue to observe odor issues after the ten (10) day period described above,
the Code/Planning Department shall provide a second written notice of violation,
and require the operator to submit a written report from a mechanical engineer
with recommendations for modification/improvement of the ventilation system
within forty-five (45) days and installation of recommendations and notice of
compliance within sixty (60) days.
94
d. If the operator has not submitted the required report within forty-five (45) days, or
if the operator has not submitted evidence of compliance within sixty (60) days
described above, the Code/Planning Department shall provide a third written
notice of violation.
e. If the operator has not submitted required report within sixty (60) days described
above or if the operator has not submitted evidence of compliance within
seventy-five (75) days, the Code /Planning Department shall forward the matter
to the Town's Attorney, in order to obtain a court order forcing compliance by the
operator, including temporary cessation of the business operations and the
imposition of fines and/or penalties.
11- 8.12. Appeals:
Administrative appeals and variance applications submitted under this Ordinance shall be
subject to the standards and procedures established by the Town of the Farmington Board
of Appeals Ordinance.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Board may
appeal to the Board of Appeals by filing a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Board’s notification.
11 – 8.13. Amendments:
A. Initiation of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
1. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board of Selectmen has so
voted; or
2. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the
number of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial elections.
B. Hearings:
Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment in accordance
with 30-A M.R.S. §4352 (9). Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised
twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The date of the first
publication must be at least fourteen (14) days before the hearing and the second
notification must be at least seven (7) days before the hearing. Notice of the hearing must
be posted in the municipal office building at least fourteen (14) days before the hearing.
Notice must be also sent to the owner(s) of the property to be rezoned and to the owners
of all property abutting the property to be rezoned at the owners’ last known address.
Additional notification is required if the area to be rezoned is in the Wellhead Protection
Zone or is to be re-zoned as resource protection (Shoreland Zoning).
95
C. Source Water Protection Area:
If the area to be re-zoned is in the Wellhead Protection area, the public drinking water
supplier shall be notified by regular mail.
D. Resource Protection Area (Shoreland Zoning):
If the area to be re-zoned is resource protection, the municipality shall provide written
notification to landowners whose property is being considered by the municipality for
placement in a resource protection zone. Notification to landowners must be made by
first-class mail to the last known addresses of the persons against whom property tax on
each parcel is assessed fourteen (14) days before the Board of Selectmen votes to
establish a public hearing on adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance or map that
places the landowners’ property in the resource protection zone.
Once a landowner’s property has been placed in a resource protection zone, individual
notice is not required to be sent to the landowner when the zoning ordinance or map is
later amended in a way that does not affect the inclusion of the landowner’s property in the
resource protection zone.
The municipal officers shall prepare and file with the municipal clerk a sworn, notarized
certificate indicating those persons to whom notice was mailed and at what addresses, and
when, by whom and from what location notice was mailed.
E. Adoption of Amendment:
An amendment of this Ordinance shall be adopted by a majority vote of a Town Meeting.
11 – 8.14. Enforcement:
A. Nuisances:
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
B. Code Enforcement Officer:
1. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of this
Ordinance is being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible
for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or
structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and
abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be submitted to the
municipal officers and be maintained as a permanent record.
2. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to insure
compliance with all applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all complaints of alleged
violations of the Ordinance.
96
3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential
transactions of the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or
denied, variances granted or denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits,
appeals, court actions, violations investigated, violations found and fees collected.
C. Legal Actions:
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or
nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon receiving written notification from the
CEO, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or
equitable, including injunctions of violations and the impositions of penalties and/or fines in
order to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Municipal officers or their authorized agent are hereby authorized to enter into
administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
Ordinance and recovering fines without Court action.
D. Penalties/Fines:
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner’s agent or a
contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance, or upon
failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall be penalized in accordance with title
30-A M.R.S. §4452. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or
part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits,
participates in, or maintains such violation may be found guilty of a separate offense
and be subject to the penalties herein provided.
97